TRotable  asritifib  grtate 


Adelaide  Bartlett 


NOTABLE  BRITISH  TRIALS  SERIES. 

Qenma  HODGE. 

Dr.  Pritaliard.  Edited  by  William  Bougbead. 

The  Stauntons.  Edited  by  J.  B,  Atlay. 

Franz  Muller.  Edited  by  H.  B.  Irving. 

The  Annesley  Caee.  Edited  by  Andrew  l^ng. 

Lord  Lovat*  Edited  by  David  E*.  Haokay. 
Captain  Porteoiu.  Edited  by  W.  Bougbead. 
William  Palmer.  Edited  by  Geo.  H.  Knott. 

Mrs.  Maybrick.  Edited  by  H.  B.  Irving. 

Dr.  Lamaon.  Edited  by  H.  L.  Adam. 

Mary  Blandy.  Edited  by  William  Bougbead. 

City  of  Glasgow  Bank.  Edited  by  W.  Wallace. 
Deacon  Brodle.  Edited  by  William  Bougbead. 
James  Stewart.  Edited  by  David  N.  Maekay.  , 

A.  J.  Monion.  Edited  by  J.  W.  More. 

Oscar  Slater.  Edited  by  William  Bougbead. 

R M.  Chantrelleu  Edited  by  A.  D.  Smith. 
Douglas  Canfc.  Edited  by  A.  Franois  Steuart. 
MrfcM*Laehlan.  Edited  by  William  Bougbead. 
Eugene  Aram.  Edited  by  Eric  B.  Wateon. 

J.  A.  Dickman.  Ed.  by  S.  0.  Bowan-Hamilton. 

The  Seddons.  Edited  by  Filson  Young. 

Sir  Roger  Csisement.  Edited  by  G.  H.  Knott. 

The  Wainwrightsi.  Edited  byH.  B.  Irving. 

H.  H.  Crippen.  Edited  by  Filson  Young. 

Thiirtell  and  Hunt.  Ed.  by  Eric  B.  Watson. 
Burke  and  Hare.  Edited  by  W.  Bougbead. 
Steinie  Morrison.  Ed.  by  H.  Fletcher  Moulton. 

G.  J.  Smith.  Edited  by  Erie  B.  Watson. 

Mary  Queen  of  Scots.  Edited  by  A.  F.  Steuart. 

Neill  Cream.  Edited  by  W.  Teignmoutb  Shore. 

By  waters  and  Thompson.  Ed.  by  Filson  Young. 

Adolf  Beck.  Edited  by  Erie  B.  Watson. 

Henry  Fauntleroy.  Ed.  by  Horace  Bleaokley. 

Kate  Webster.  Edited  by  EUiott  O’Donnell. 

Ronald  True.  Edited  by  Donald  Carswell. 

Abraham  Thornton.  Ed.  by  Sir  J.  Hall,  Bt. 
Katharine  Nairn.  Edited  by  W.  Bougbead. 

Chad^s  Peace.  Ed.  by  W.  Teignmoutb  Shore. 

H.  R.  Armstrong.  Edited  by  Filson  Young. 
Madeleine  Smith.  Ed.  by  F.  Tennyson  Jesse. 
Adelaide  Bartlett.  Ed.  by  Sir  John  Hall,  Bt. 

IN  PREPARATION. 

Duchess  of  Kingston.  Edited  by  L.  Melville. 

J.  B.  Rush.  Ed.  by  W.  Teignmoutb  Shore. 

Qneen  Caroline.  £j4it6d  by  S.  M.  Ellis. 

J.  P.  Vaquier.  Ed.  b^^B.  H.  Blundell  and  B.  E.  Beaton. 
Dr-  Dodd.  Edited  by  E.  B.  Watson  and  W.  T.  Sboxe. 
S«  H.  DongaL  Edited  by  F.  Tennyson  Jesse. 

G.  Chapman.  Edited  by  H.  L.  Adam. 

Charles  1.  Edited  by  J.  G.  Mnddimao. 

Wm.  Hodss  et  Co..  lJdf«  Eldinbarsh  and  IjuJqb, 


Mr.  Edward  CiarKe,  Q.C.,  M.F. 


Trial  of 


Adelaide  Bartlett 


EDITED  BY 

Sir  John  Hall,  Bart. 


ILLUSTRATED 


AUSTRALIA 

BUTTERWORTH  fit  CO. 
<AUST.>.  LTa 

17D  KINO  STREET 
SYDNEY,  N.S.W. 


NEW  ZEALAND 

BUTTERWORTH  & CO. 
(AUST.),  LTD. 

188  LAMBTON  QUAY 
WELUNOTON 


INDIA 

BUTTERWORTH  & Ca 
(INDLA^,  LTD. 

6 HASTINGS  STREET 
CALCUTTA 


MADK  AND  PRIMTXD  IN  OBXAT  BRITAIN 
Vt 

WILUAK  BODOB  AND  COMPANY,  LTD. 
GLASGOW  AND  BDXNBVRGR 
1927 


TO 

SIR  EDWARD  CLARKE 

THIS  GBEAT  ADVOCATE 

WHOSE  DEFENCE  OF  MKS.  TUETLETT  WILL  BE  FOK  EVER  MEMORABLE 


PREFACE. 


Stbanqia  stories  have  been  unfolded  at  the  Old  Bailey,  but 
no  stranger  one  has  been  heard  than  that  of  Mrs.  Bartlett. 
Apart  from  the  dramatic  incidents  of  the  trial  and  the  curious 
medical  questions  which  came  under  discussion,  **  the  whole 
story/'  to  quote  from  the  Times  leading  article,  “ whether 
on  the  theory  of  guilt  or  innocence,  is  marvellous." 

My  task  as  editor  has  been  lightened  by  the  fact  that  a 
verbatim  report  of  the  trial  with  a preface  by  Sir  Edward 
Clarke  was  published  in  1886.  In  addition,  I had  the 
inestimable  advantage  of  several  personal  interviews  with 
Sir  Edward,  who  kindly  allowed  me  to  see  his  case-book  and 
other  documents  bearing  on  the  trial.  For  this  and  for  his 
great  courtesy  on  all  occasions,  when  1 have  invoked  his 
help,  I beg  to  tender  him  my  best  thanks.  I desire  also  to 
take  this  opportunity  of  expressing  my  gratitude  to  Mrs. 
Norton  for  sending  me  a photograph  of  her  father,  Sir  Alfred 
Wills,  a copy  of  which  appears  in  this  volume. 

JoBH  Hall. 


Auguatf  19S7. 


CONTENTS. 


PAGE 

Infcroduotion, 1 

Leading  Dates  in  Bartlett  Trial, 76 

The  Trial— 

First  Day— Monday,  12th  April,  1886. 

Application  b5'  Mr,  Lockwood  on  behalf  of  Kev.  O.  Dyson,  - - - - 78 

Attorney-General’s  Opening  Speech, 79 


EMence  for  the  Prosec^itmi, 


William  Henry  Broadbent,  - 91 

Edwin  Bartlett,  - - 91,99 

Herbert  Eustace,  < . . 98 

Arthur  Brook,  ...  - 98 


Edward  Baxter, 

Frederick  Horace  Doggett, 
Caroline  Doggett, 


115 

118 

128 


Second  Day— Tuesday,  13th  April,  1886. 

Emdonce  for  tho  Prosecution  (continued). 

Alice  Fulcher,  ■ • - 128  [ William  Clapton, 

Ann  Boulter,  - - - ■ 133  I Rev.  George  Dyson,  - 

Third  Day— Wednesday,  14th  April,  1886. 


Eddcnce  for  the  ProHcvJtiofn  (irniinued). 


John  Bawtree  Humble,  - - 173 

Thomas  Samuel  Penrose,  - - 173 

J oseph  Richard  Phillips  Mellin,  173 
Alice  Jane  Selby  Matthews,  - 173 
George  Frederick  Matthews,  - 177 


Annie  Walker,  - 
Thomas  Low  Nichols, 
Thomas  Roberts, 

Dr.  Thomas  Henry  Green, 
Dr.  Alfred  Leach, 


Fourth  Day— Thursday,  15tk  April,  1886. 

Evidence  for  the  Prosecution  {cordinved). 

Dr.  Alfred  Leach  (oross-examina-  | Dr.  Montague  Murray, 
tion  continued),  - - *219  Tom  Ralph, 

Dr.  John  Gardner  Dudley,  251,  259  I Dr.  Thomas  Stevenson, 

Fifth  Day— Friday,  16th  April,  1886. 


- 134 

- 135 


180,  366 

- 184 

- 187 

- 189 

- 193 


Emdsnee  for  the  Prosecution  (condnded). 


Dr.  Stevenson  (recalled),  - 281,290 

Charles  Meymott  Tidy,  - - 284 

Mary  Ann  Furlong,  - - - 289 

Henry  Marshall,  - - - 289 


Caroline  Doggett  (recalled), 
Alice  Fulcher  (recalled),  - 
Edmond  Blake,  - 


Mr.  Edward  Clarke’s  Closing  Speech  for  the  Defence,  .... 


Sixth  Day— Saturday,  17th  April,  1886. 
Attomey-General’B  Closing  Speech  for  the  Crown, 

Mr.  Justice  Wills*  Charge  to  the  Jury,  .... 
tnie  Terdxot, 


290 

291 

292 


344 

366 

402 


LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS. 


Mr.  Edward  Clarke,  Q.G.,  M.P., 

Mrs.  Adelaide  Bartlett, 

Sir  Charles  Bussell,  Q.C.,  M.P., 

Old  Bailey  Court— Mr.  Bartlett  being  cross-examined  by  Mr 
Edward  Clarke,  Q.C., 

The  Bev.  George  l>y8on, 

Mr.  H.  B.  Poland, 

Letter  from  Adelaide  Bartlett  to  Mr.  Edward  Clarke,  Q.C., 
Mr.  Justice  Wills, 


Frontkpieee 
Facing  petge  64 
» SO 


112 

144 

286 

292 

368 


ADELAIDE  BARTLETT. 


INTRODUCTION. 


I. 

There  is  a peculiar  fascination  about  a case  of  poisoning.  It  is 
generally  mysterious,  the  evidence  is  always  circumstantial,  and, 
if  a woman  be  concerned  in  it,  there  is  almost  invariably  a love 
story  in  the  background.  All  these  elements  were  present  at  the 
trial  of  Mrs.  Bartlett,  and,  in  addiiion,  there  were  curious  prob- 
lems of  medical  jurisprudence  and  the  question  of  the  strange 
relations  alleged  to  have  existed  between  the  different  parties. 

The  history  of  the  affair  opens  on  9th  April,  1875,  with  the 
marriage  at  Croydon  of  Adelaide  Blanche  de  la  Tremoille  and 
Thomas  Edwin  Bartlett.  The  bride  was  born  at  Orleans  in  1855, 
and  was  therefore  in  her  twentieth  year.  She  was  the  natural 
daughter  of  an  Englishman  of  good  position.  The  name  of  her 
mother  has  never  been  disclosed,  nor  is  anything  known  about  her 
early  life.  Her  familiarity  with  the  Englisli  language  suggests, 
however,  that  she  was  brought  to  this  country  as  a child;  but  all 
that  can  be  said  with  certainty  about  the  matter  is  that,  at  the 
beginning  of  1875,  she  was  living  at  Kingston-on-Thames,  in  the 
same  house  as  Charles  Bartlett,  who  introduced  her  to  his  brother, 
her  prospective  hxisband.  According  to  her  own  story,  she  only 
saw  him  once  before  her  marriage,  which  was  arranged  by  her 
father.  No  money  seems  to  ha%’e  been  settled  upon  her,  but  it  is 
supposed  that  her  husband  received  a considerable  sum,  which 
he  employed  to  great  advantage  in  his  business.^ 

The  bridegroom,  EdVin  Bartlett,  to  give  him  the  name  by 
which  his>  family  and  friends  addressed  him,  was  a prosperous 
grocer  and  provision  dealer,  about  thirty  years  of  age.  So  suc- 
cessful was  he  that  at  the  time  of  his  death,  eleven  years  later, 
he  and  his  partner,  Mr.  Baxter,  were  the  owners  of  no  less  than 
six  shops  in  the  Herne  Hill  and  Dulwich  districts.  It  was  after- 
wards said  of  him  that  he  was  a man  of  peculiar  views  about 
matrimony.  But  at  this  stage  of  the  narrative  it  is  only  neces- 
sary to  mention  one  of  his  <^aracteristic8.  Like  many  successful 

Jfagazinet  December,  1920.  Leaves  from  a lawyer’s  Case 
Book,”  by  Sir  Edward  Olwke.  ^ 

B 


1 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


men  whose  education  has  been  no  more  tiian  rudiiuemary,  he 
had  a great  respect  for  learning,^  and  no  sooner  was  ho  inarrioti 
than  he  took  immediate  steps  to  remedy  the  defects  of  ins  wife's 
education.  Almost  from  the  church-door  she  was  sont  oil  to  a 
boarding  school  at  Stoke  Newington,  where  she  roniainod  fiu*  two 
years,  during  all  of  which  time  she  only  lived  witli  her  husband 
in  the  holidays.  There  is  no  reason  to  suppose,  however,  thii!  she 
resented  this  arrangement  and  was  not  a consenting  party  to  it. 
Be  that  as  it  may,  after  a third  year  spent  at  a i'onvont  in  Bel- 
gium, her  education  was  considered  to  be  sufficiently  advanced  to 
admit  of  her  return  to  England.  In  1878,  accor<lingly,  she  t<«>k 
up  her  permanent  abode  with  her  husband,  in  the  finst  inatanee 
in  Station  Road,  Herne  Hill,  in  rooms  situated  over  one  of  liis 
principal  shops. 

In  her  new  home  Mrs.  Bartlett  appears  to  have  livetl  on  the 
most  affectionate  terms  with  her  husband.  He  was,  lunvever,  too 
absorbed  in  business  to  have  much  time  to  devote  to  her  amnso- 
ment.  With  her  neighbours  she  seems  to  have  had  no  social  inters 
course,  nor  does  she  appear  to  have  kept  up  friendly  relations  with 
any  of  her  former  mistresses  or  sclioolfellows.  Her  work,  her 
music,  and  her  dogs,  of  which  she  was  very  fond,  sufficed  apparently 
for  her  entertainment.  Had  she  and  her  husband  been  the  only 
occupants  of  their  home  she  would,  as  far  as  can  be  judged,  have 
led  a contented  existence.  Unfortunately,  very  soon  after  her 
arrival  in  Station  Road,  her  mother-in-law  died,  and  her  husband 
thereupon  suggested  that  his  father  should  come  to  live  with  them. 
Old  Mr.  Bartlett  was  a builder  who  had  not  been  very  surcossfuK 
and  was,  in  conseguence,  largely  dependent  upon  his  son,  whose 
invitation  he  accepted,  notwithstanding  that  he  dislike<I  his  daugh- 
ter-in-law and  disapproved  of  the  marriage.  Entertaining  these 
sentiments,  he  could  hardly  fail  to  bring  an  element  of  discord 
into  the  peaceful  atmosphere  of  Station\Roa(i.  And  so  it  proved 
After  several  minor  disputes  old  Mr.  Bartlett  made  some  very 
^rious  allegations  against  his  daughter-in-law  and  his  son. 

or  not  there  was  any  truth  in  these  charges, 
®wtlett  stood  by  his  wife  and  insisted  upon  his  fa^er 
wiAdrawing  them.  The  old  man,  having  no  desire  to  quarrel 
TOth  his  son,  agreed  to  sign  an  apology  drawn  up  by  a solicitor, 
in  which  he  acknowledged  that  his  statements  were  unfounded,  and 
expressed  his  regret  that  he  had  made  them.  A reconciliation 

“He 


Introduction. 


followed,  but  it  was  upon  the  surface  only.  Henceforward  old  Mr. 
Bartlett  and  his  daughter-in-law  were  to  all  outward  appearances 
on  friendly  and  even  afiectionate  terms,  but,  as  will  be  seen,  they 
continued  in  their  hearts  to  regard  each  other  with  as  much  dislike 
as  ever. 

After  .this  incident  nothing  worthy  of  record  seems  to  have 
occurred  until  the  autumn  of  1881,  when  Mrs.  Bartlett,  for  the 
first  time,  was  expecting  to  be  a mother.  About  a month  before 
the  event,  a nurse,  Annie  Walker  by  name,  was  called  in  and 
installed  in  Station  Road.  The  circumstances  which  led  to  the 
selection  of  this  woman  must  be  noted,  because  they  afterwards 
assumed  some  importance.  The  Bartletts  possessed  and  appear 
to  have  closely  studied  a book  entitled  “ Esoteric  Anthropology; 
or,  the  Mysteries  of  Man.”  It  dealt  with  the  subject  of  birth 
control,  and  professed  to  be  as  “ pure  in  morals  ” as  it  was 
” true  in  science.”  Thus  abstention  was  prescribed  as  the  only 
proper  and  efiectual  way  of  avoiding  the  consequences  of  the 
sexual  act.  But,  having  laid  down  this  principle,  it  went  on  to 
explain,  for  the  benefit  presumably  of  those  who  were  disinclined 
to  exercise  so  much  restraint,  how  the  consequences  of  this  same 
act  could  be  averted.  Now,  when  she  found  herself  in  the  con- 
dition which  has  been  mentioned,  Mrs.  Bartlett's  thoughts  seem 
to  have  turned  towards  Dr,  Nichols,  the  author  of  this  work. 
She  was  aware  that  he  lived  in  Fopstone  Road,  Earl's  Court,  and 
was  an  American  doctor  who  had  no  degree  entitling  him  to  prac- 
tise in  this  country.  But  she  knew  also  that,  quite  independently 
of  him,  his  wife,  Mrs.  Nichols,  was  in  the  habit  of  seeing  patients 
and  giving  consultations.  Accordingly,  she  either  went  to  see  this 
lady,  who  died  some  two  years  later,  or  communicated  with  her 
by  letter,  and  it  was  on  her  advice  that  Annie  Walker  was  en- 
gaged. 

Mrs.  Bartlett  was  ndl  attended  by  a doctor.  When  Annie 
Walker,  who  seems  to  have  been  an  experienced  and  skilful  nurse, 
apoke  to  Mr.  Bartlett  on  the  subject,  he  merely  inquired  whether 
she  was  apprehensive  on  his  wife’s  account,  and,  on  learning  that 
it  was  the  life  of  the  child,  not  that  of  the  mother,  which  would 
be  endangered,  begged  her  **  to  take  the  case  through,”  as  he 
would  **  rather  not  have  any  man  interfering  with  her.”  The 
nurse’s  fears  proved  well  founded.  After  a most  painful  con- 
fmement  Mrs.  Bartlett  was  delivered  of  a dead  child,  the  doctor 
whom,  at  the  last  moment,  Annie  Walker  insisted  on  calling  in 
arriving  too  late  to  save  it. 

For  another  three  weeks,  until  she  was  once  more  up  and 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


about,  the  nurse  remained  with  Mrs.  Bartlett.  The  two 
undoubtedly  became  much  attached  to  each  other,  and,  when 
her  professional  attendance  was  no  longer  necessary,  Annie  Walker 
continued  from  time  to  time  to  visit  her  former  patient.  On 
one  occasion,  indeed,  she  seems  to  have  stayed  with  her  for 
several  days.  Both  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Bartlett  treated  her  wifi)  fhe 
utmost  confidence,  and  never  hesitated  to  discuss  with  her  their 


most  private  afiairs.  Later  on,  in  consequence,  when  all  these 
matters  were  investigated,  she  was  able  to  give  much  valuable 
information  about  their  relations  to  each  other  and  generally 
about  their  mode  of  life.  According  to  her,  they  were  a united 
and  afiectionate  couple.  Nevertheless,  Mrs.  Bartlett  did  once 
speak  to  her  with  regret  about  her  husband *s  failure  to  appreciate 
either  her  musical  talents  or  her  work,  although,  in  Annie  Walker^s 


opinion,  " she  worked  beautifully.**  She  also  on  several  occa- 
sions complained  of  Mr.  Bartlett's  testamentary  dispositions.  He 
had  left  everything  to  her,  but  only  on  the  condition  that  she 
should  never  re-marry.  She  would  often  revert  to  this  matter, 
and,  to  the  best  of  the  nurse's  recollection,  had  once  mentioned 
the  subject  in  her  husband's  presence. 

In  1883,  a little  more  than  a year  after  these  events,  the 
Bartletts  left  Station  Boad  and  went  to  live  over  another  of 
Mr.  Bartlett's  shops  in  Lordship  Lane,  East  Dulwich.  Here  Mrs. 
Bartlett  became  very  friendly  with  a neighbour,  a Mrs.  Matthews, 
the  wife  of  a silk  salesman  in  the  city,  who  was  doubtless  a 
business  acquaintance  of  Mr.  Bartlett.  During  the  whole  of  her 
^rried  life  this  lady  and  the  nurse,  Annie  Walker,  seem  to  have 
been  the  only  persons  of  her  own  sex  with  whom  Mrs.  Bartlett 
can  be  said  to  have  been  on  intimate  terms.  After  remaining  for 
ateut  Welve  months  in  Lordship  Lane,  the  Bartletts  again  changed 
their  place  of  domicile,  this  time  to  The  Cottage,  Merton,  some  two 
miles  from  Wimbledon,  At  Lordship  Z^ane  and  at  Merton  Mrs. 
Bartlett  to  hare  led  very  mutJi  ilie  .am.  Ir^nd  of  Hfo 

Min  i^ad.  But  there  was  one  important 

mem  to  %eir  new  home.  Neither  at  Lordship  Lane  nw  at  Mer» 
W was  the  acoommodation  suflSoient,  he  afterwards  esnlainad 

gentlauan  ever  aftermrde  Imd  Apert, 
MBtenM  hnoself  with  oooasional  vieita  to  hi* 

He  “tna'in  ■toie  hatnt«  however,  of  eeeiBg,  him  aumrlT  otw 
M tow  or  .eaotfaer.  of  his  shops.  ^ 

rtwained  at  Merton  neMl  the  antoms  ot  1885, 
that,'  him(«r<e*,,a  'MAft'kad  mOwti  into  iheir  lives  ^ 


Introduction. 


was  destined  tragically  to  afiect  their  future  existence.  One  Sun- 
day, at  the  beginning  of  their  last  year's  stay  at  Merton,  they 
attended  divine  worship  at  a Wesleyan  chapel  in  the  village 
street.  The  Rev.  George  Dyson,  a young  man  about  twenty-seven 
years  of  age,  with  “ closely  trimmed  whiskers  and  a heavy  black 
moustache,"®  conducted  the  service.  There  was  nothing  very 
striking  either  about  his  appearance  or  his  address,  and  neither 
Mr.  nor  Mrs.  Bartlett  was  particularly  attracted  by  him.  A few 
days  later  he  paid  them  a formal  call,  and  was  received  by  Mrs. 
Bartlett,  who,  when  he  took  his  leave,  does  not  appear  to  have 
expressed  any  wish  to  see  him  again.  The  Bartletts,  however, 
continued  to  attend  his  chapel,  and,  in  June,  1885,  some  five 
months  later,  he  repeated  his  visit.  On  this  occasion  both  husband 
and  wife  were  at  home,  and  entertained  the  reverend  gentleman 
at  tea.  He  was  about  to  go  to  Dublin  for  a few  days  to  take  his 
degree  at  Trinity  College,  and  talked  about  his  studies.  Mr. 
Bartlett,  whose  profound  respect  for  a classical  education  has 
already  been  mentioned,  was  greatly  interested,  and,  when  Mr. 
Dyson  went  away,  he  pressed  him  warmly  to  return  at  no  distant 
date.  The  young  man  complied,  and  a considerable  intimacy 
soon  sprang  up  between  them.  The  Rev.  George  was  certainly 
not  possessed  of  deep  learning  or  of  wide  mental  attainments,  but 
he  was  probably  a more-cultivated  and  better-educated  man  than 
anybody  with  whom  Mr.  Bartlett  had  hitherto  associated  on  terms 
of  equality.  That  he  was  impressed  l:^  him  and  derived  a keen 
pleasure  from  his  oompanionEbip  may  be  gathered  from  the  tact 
that  he  suggested,  before  long,  that  his  wife  should  resume  her 
studies  under  his  able  tuition.  Mr.  Dyson  readily  undertook  the 
task,  and  henceforward  came  nearly  every  day  to  The  Cottage 
to  **  coach  " his  friend's  wife  in  Latin,  history,  geography,  and 
mathematics. 

Mrs.  Bartlett’s  lonely*  days  were  over.  Instead  of  long  hours 
in  which  she  had  to  depend  for  amusement  upon  her  own  resources, 
her  afternoons  and,  sometimes,  even  her  mornings  were  passed 
in  Ur.  Dyson’s  company.  With  the  exception  of  the  Matthews,  who 
stayed  for  a wedt  at  The  Cottage  in  July,  there  were  no  visitors 
tq  intrude  upon  their  privacy*  Frcnoa  deven  o’clock,  whenVfitibe*' 
daii^  servant  finidied  hw  work  and  went  home,  they  had  thqj^ 
bouse  cmpletety  to  tbeanselves.  About  six  Mr.  Bartlett  general!]^ 
retarded  from  business,  and,  if  Mr*  Dyson  had  not  yet  gone,  ha 
would  iaiM  upon  his  remaining  and  devoting  anciher  hour  or 

f JtWdlr  Wh  Febroary,  1886* 


5 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 

two  to  his  ontortaiiiiiDiont.  Thus  ux&ttors  wont  on  until  the  onil 
of  August,  when  the  Bartletts’  tenancy  of  The  Cottage  expiroii. 
Before  selecting  a new  residence  they  proposed  to  spend  a inonth 
at  Dover.  But  by  this  time  Mr.  Dyson  had  become  so  nonmury 
to  their  happiness  that  they  felt  that  no  holiday  would  bo  worthy 
of  the  name  without  him.  Mr.  Dyson  was  a man  of  small  moans, 
being  wholly  dependent  upon  his  stipend  of  £100  a yoai*.  A 
journey  to  Dover  was,  therefore,  to  him  a serious  matter.  Mr. 
Bartlett,  however,  would  not  allow  any  consideration  of  that 
kind  to  stand  in  the  way,  and  offered  to  supply  him  with  a f\v<\  - 
class  season  ticket.^  Mr.  Dyson's  clerical  <luiies,  unfortunately, 
prevented  him  from  taking  full  advantage  of  his  friend's 
generosity,  but,  while  declining  a season  ticket^  he  promised  to 
run  down  and  see  them  whenever  he  could.  And  he  was  as  giw>d 
as  his  word.  On  two  dijSerent  occasions  during  the  month  of 
September  he  stayed  with  them  at  Dover,  the  cost  of  his  return 
ticket  being  defrayed  by  Mr.  Bartlett. 

Although  the  Bartletts  were  in  the  habit  of  alluding  to  the 
month  which  they  spent  at  Dover  as  a holiday,  it  was  in  point 
of  fact  a period  of  strenuous  activity  for  Mr.  Bartlett.  Nearly 
every  day  he  went  up  to  business,  not  infrequently  catching  the 
boat  train  at  three  in  the  morning  and  sometimes  not  returning 
until  ten  o'clock  at  night.  And  on  one  of  the  first  days  on  which 
he  thus  went  up  to  London  he  gave  Mr.  Dyson  a proof  of  the 
confidence  which  he  reposed  in  him,  although  his  acquaintance 
with  him  had  lasted  for  little  more  than  two  months.  On  the 
afternoon  of  3rd  September,  while  at  one  of  his  shops  in  Hermi 
Hill,  he  requested  two  of  his  assistants  to  witness  his  signature. 
The  document  which  he  asked  them  to  attest  was  a will  leaving 
everything  he  possessed  to  his  wife  unconditionally,  and  appoint- 
ing his  solicitor,  Mr.  Wood,  and  his^  friend,  the  Rev.  George 
Dyson,  his  executors.  And,  having  made  these  dispositions,  he 
made  no  secret  of  them  to  his  wife  and  Mr.  Dyson,  both  of  whom, 
in  consequence,  became  aware  that  his  new  will  contained  n*» 
objectionable  stipulation  that  she  must  not  re-marry. 

Having  seemingly  determined  to  live  in  the  heart  of  London, 
the  Bartletts,  on  leaving  Dover,  went  to  a hotel  in  the  Strand, 
in  order  to  se*  for  lodgings.  These  they  found  in  Claverton 
Street,  and  thither  they  removed  on  3rd  October.  Claverton 
Street  runs  from  Belgrave  Road  to  Grosvenor  Road,  on  the  river 
embankment.  It  begins  under  the  name  of  Denbigh  Street,  but, 


^Inqnest,  11th  februaiy,  1886. 
6 


Introduction 


after  crossing  Lupus  Street,  it  widens  out  and  becomes  Claverton 
Street.  It  is  a street  like  many  others  in  this  part  of  London. 
The  houses  are  three  storeys  high,  and  each  has  a portico  sup- 
ported by  Doric  pillars,  which  forms  a balcony  for  the  first-floor 
windows.  And  it  was  the  first,  or  drawing-room,  floor  of  No. 
85  which  the  Bartletts  proposed  to  occupy.  It  consisted  of  only 
two  rooms,  divided  from  each  other  by  folding  doors — one  in  front 
looking  on  to  the  street  and  one  at  the  back  which  was  to  serve  as 
their  bedroom.  In  discussing  their  arrangements  with  Mrs. 
Doggett,  the  landlady,  Mr.  Bartlett,  bearing  in  mind  that  Mr. 
Dyson  would  doubtless  be  a frequent  visitor,  was  careful  to  warn 
her  that  a gentleman  would  dine  with  them  once  a week.  **  It 
is  only  a clergyman,”  interjected  Mrs.  Bartlett.  But  whether 
this  remark  had  reference  to  their  guest’s  appetite  or  was  in- 
tended to  guarantee  his  respectability  can  only  be  surmised.  In 
view  of  what  happened  afterwards,  it  may  perhaps  be  considered 
ominous  that  Mr.  Doggett,  the  landlord,  held  the  post  of  Registrar 
of  Deaths  for  the  district. 

Life  at  Claverton  Street  followed  the  usual  routine.  Every 
morning,  soon  after  eight,  Mr.  Bartlett  started  ofl  to  business, 
returning  as  a rule  at  six,  at  which  hour  he  and  his  wife  generally 
dined.  Long  before  that,  however,  Mr,  Dyson,  who  had  been 
thoughtfully  provided  with  a season  ticket  from  Putney  to  Water- 
loo, generally  appeared  at  the  house.  By  this  time  all  three  of 
them  had  discarded  in  speaking  to  one  another  the  ceremonious 
Mr.”  and  ” Mrs.”  Whether  her  husband  were  present  or  not, 
Mrs.  Bartlett  was  ” Adelaide  ” to  Mr.  Dyson,  and  he  was 
” George  ” to  her.  It  may  be  that  in  these  days  there  would  be 
nothing  extraordinary  about  such  familiarity,  but,  forty  years 
ago,  especially  in  the  rank  of  life  to  which  these  people  belonged, 
it  was  most  unusual.  When  Mr.  Dyson  arrived  in  the  morning, 
as  he  sometimes  did,  he«and  Mrs.  Bartlett  always  had  luncheon 
together,  and  far  more*  often  than  the  ” once  a week  ” men- 
tioned by  Mr.  Bartlett  to  the  landlady  he  ate  his  dinner  at  Claver- 
ton Street.  That  he  made  himself  thoroughly  at  home  may  be 
gathered  from  the  fact  that,  on  arriving,  he  generally  discarded 
his  clerical  attire  and  put  on  an  old  jacket  and  a pair  of  slippers 
which  the  Bartletts  kept  for  his  use  in  their  sitting-room.  If  the 
real  purpose  of  his  long  visits  was  the  supervision  of  Mrs.  Bart- 
lett’s studies,  it  is  strange  that  he  never  brought  any  books  with 
him  to  Claverton  Street.  And  Alice  Fulcher,  the  maidservant, 
who  supplied  that  information,  could  recollect  other  matters  whidh 
suggest  yet  more  strongly  that  he  and  Mrs.  Bartlett  devoted  very 

7 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 

little  time  to  “Latin,  history,  geography,  and  matheinaticK.’ 
One  day,  after  Mr.  Dyson’s  departure,  she  noticed  that  Hit* 
window  curtains  had  been  pinned  together,  and,  on  another  occa- 
sion, when  she  entered  the  room,  she  found  him  seate<l  in  a low 
chair,  while  Mrs.  Bartlett  reclined  upon  the  floor  at  his  feet 
with  her  head  upon  his  knees. 

Although  he  often  suffered  from  his  teeth,  Mr.  Bartlett, 
throughout  his  married  life,  enjoyed  excellent  health.  In  Novem- 
ber, 1880,  while  at  Station  Road,  he  was  examined  anti  accepted 
by  the  British  Equitable  as  a'  first-class  life.  Once  only,  owing 
to  overwork,  he  was  compelled  to  take  a i*est,  but  a sea  voyago 
to  Scotland  soon  put  him  right,  and,  at  the  end  of  a fortnight, 
he  was  back  again  at  business.  On  8th  December,  however,  when 
he  had  been  living  in  Claverton  Street  for  about  two  mouths,  he 
felt  so  out  of  sorts  that  he  abandoned  work  for  the  day  and  re- 
turned home.  He  had  arranged  the  following  morning  to  go  with 
his  wife  and  Mr.  Dyson  to  the  St.  Bernard  Dog  Show,  and,  when 
at  half-past  nine  that  gentleman  arrived,  he  still  adhered  to 
his  intention  of  accompanying  them.  But  in  the  evening,  after  a 
long  day  spent  at  the  show,  he  complained  of  fatigue,  and  the 
next  day  was  so  clearly  very  ill  that  Mrs.  Bartlett  went  out  to 
fetch  a doctor.  Dr.  Leach,  whom  she  saw,  was  quite  unknown 
to  them  both,  and  was  only  selected  because  he  lived  in  Charlwood 
Street,  less  than  a quarter  of  a mile  away. 

Dr.  Leach  found  his  patient  suffering  from  a severe  pain  in 
his  left  side,  from  sickness,  diarrhoea,  and  hsemorrhage  of  the 
bowels.  His  pulse  was  weak,  and  his  condition  one  of  extreme 
nervousness  and  prostration.  He  complained  of  sleeplessness,  and 
said  that  he  had  overworked  himself.  On  looking  at  his  mouth 
Dr.  Leach  observed  a blue  line  round  the  edge  of  the  gums, 
which  pointed  unmistakably  to  mercury.  Having  diagnosed  the 
case  as  one  of  mercurialism  or  sub-acuth^  gastritis,  he  prescribed 
a lotion  for  the  mouth  and  a stomach  and  sedative  mixture,  and 
recommended  that  the  patient  should  be  kept  very  quiet  and  see  no 
one  connected  with  his  business.  In  the  evening  he  called  again, 
and  for  the  next  two  or  three  days  came  in  twice  a day  to  see 
him.  Being  still  at  a loss  to  account  for  the  symptoms  of  mer« 
curial  poisoning  which  he  had  observed  at  his  first  visit,  he  took 
Hie  opportunity,  when  Mrs.  Bartlett  was  out  of  the  room,  of 
suggesting  to  him  that  he  must  have  taken  mercury.  But  this 
he  denied,  and  the  only  light  which  he  was  ever  able  to  throw 
upon  the  matter  was  that,  some  few  days  previously,  he  had  swal- 
lowed a pill  of  unknown  strength.  Dr.  Leach  could  discover  no 
8 


Introduction. 


signs  of  the  disease  which  is  generally  associated  with  the  taking 
of  mercury,  and,  in  default  of  a better,  was  inclined  to  accept  his 
patient's  explanation  as  correct.  Probably,  he  reasoned,  the  man 
had  what  he  described  as  “an  idiosyncrasy  for  the  drug.*’  His 
physical  symptoms  soon  yielded  to  treatment,  but  the  mental  de- 
pression and  the  sleeplessness  proved  far  more  difficult  to  over- 
come. Bromides  only  made  him  more  restless,  and,  on  I3th 
December,  Dr.  Leach  was  forced  to  inject  morphia.  But  even  this 
failed  of  its  object,  and,  on  15th  December,  he  came  to  the  con- 
clusion that  his  patient’s  teeth,  which  were  once  again  painful, 
were  the  cause  of  the  trouble.  He  arranged,  accordingly,  for  the 
attendance  of  Mr.  Roberts,  a dentist,  practising  in  Charlwood 
Street.  Some  ten  or  eleven  years  earlier,  Mr.  Bartlett  had  been 
very  badly  treated  by  another  dentist,  who  had  sawn  ofi  his  teeth 
and  supplied  him  with  a plate  without  extracting  the  “ subjacent 
stumps.”®  It  is  not  surprising,  therefore,  that  Mr.  Roberts  found 
them  loose,  decayed,  and,  in  the  words  of  Dr.  Leach,  “in  a 
horrible  condition.”  He  now  lost  no  time  in  doing  what  should 
have  been  done  long  ago.  On  16th  December  he  removed  two, 
on  the  following  day  eleven,  and,  on  21st  December,  yet  another 
four  of  these  stumps. 

After  Dr.  Leach’s  first  visit  Mrs.  Bartlett  converted  the 
sitting-room  into  a sick-room  by  moving  into  it  from  the  back 
room  the  small  be<l  in  which  her  husband  had  hitherto  slept. 
Throughout  his  illness  she  watched  over  him  with  unremitting 
attention,  and  performed,  without  assistance,  the  most  disagreeable 
duties  of  a nurse.  At  night  she  was  content  to  obtain  what  rest 
she  could  either  in  an  armchair  by  her  husband’s  bedside  or 
upon  a sofa  in  his  room.  Never  once  could  Dr.  Leach  persuade 
her  to  go  to  her  own  bed  in  the  back  room.  Visitors  when  they 
came  were  received  by  her  in  a small  room  on  the  ground 
floor,  known  in  the  houSh  as  the  “ back  smoking-room  ” or  the 
“ ante-room,”  which  the  Doggetts  placed  at  her  disposal.  Here 
she  saw  Mr.  Dyson,  who  called  as  regularly  as  ever,  but,  after 
talking  to  her,  he  generally  went  upstairs  and  sat  for  a time 
with  the  sick  man,  whose  partner,  Mr.  Baxter,  also  came  every 
Sunday  to  see  him.  Old  Mr.  Bartlett,  directly  he  heard  of  his 
condition,  hurried  round  to  Claverton  Street,  On  this  first  occa- 
sion he  was  admitted  to  the  sick-room,  but  after  that  his  daughter- 
in-law  generally  refused  to  allow  him  to  go  upstairs.  Her  hus- 
band was  too  ill,  she  assured  him,  to  receive  visitors,  and  during 


% 


^Lancet,  22nd  May,  1886. 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


the  whole  of  his  son’s  illness  the  father  was  only  perniittod  to  mh? 
him  three  times.  His  daughter-in-law,  however,  wrote  hiiir 
several  short  notes.  These  were  afterwards  produce<{  in  Court, 
and  can  be  more  conveniently  dealt  with  later.  For  the  inomont 
suffice  it  to  say  that  in  one  of  them  she  intimated  very  plainly 
that  she  had  neither  forgiven  nor  forgotten  the  quarrel  at  Slatt«>n 
Road.  The  old  man  greatly  resented  his  exclusion  from  his  son's 
room,  and  on  one  of  his  visits,  when  he  was  talking  to  lus 
daughter-in-law  in  the  ground-floor  room,  ho  profoKsctl  t(»  In* 
disappointed  with  his  progress,  and  <^ffered  to  send  in  an«>lhor 
doctor.  She,  however,  declined  to  entertain  the  suggestion  on 
the  score  of  the  expense  it  would  involve,  a plea  which  the  old  man 
scouted  as  ridiculous. 

Nevertheless,  old  Mr.  Bartlett’s  words  were  not  without  effect. 
It  is  plain  from  a very  remarkable  conversation  which  took  place 
with  Dr.  Leach  that  she  must  have  talked  over  his  father's  sug- 
gestion with  her  husband.  “ Doctor,”  said  Mrs.  Bartlett  io  Ur, 
Leach  in  the  course  of  his  visit  on  19th  December,  **  will  you 
excuse  me  for  what  I am  about  to  say,”  and,  after  some  com- 
plimentary remarks  about  his  skilful  treatment  of  his  patient, 
she  proceeded  to  tell  him  that  her  husband’s  relations  and  friends 
were  desirous  of  sending  in  a doctor  of  their  own  selection. 

These  people,”  she  continued,  were  most  unfriendly  to  her,” 
“ We  intend,”  exclaimed  Mr.  Bartlett  from  his  bed,  “ to  manage 
our  own  affairs  in  future,  and  not  to  be  interfered  with  by 
my  friends  or  relations.  I am  sorry  to  say  that  they  are  not  kin<l 
to  my  wife.”  Dr.  Leach  begged  them  to  call  in  whoin  they 
pleased;  he  had  no  objection,  he  assured  them,  to  any  number  of 
consultations.  “No,”  replied  Mr.  Bartlett,  “ I will  not  have  a 
consultation  in  the  ordinary  sense  of  the  term.  I will  not  see  any 
one  they  send.  I will  see  any  gentleman  you  choose  to  bring,  I 
am  getting  better,  and  I will  not  submit^  to  any  other  treatment, 
I will  see  any  gentleman  once.  I do  this  for  the  protection  of  my 
wife.”  “ Doctor,”  added  Mrs,  Bartlett,  “ Mr.  Bartlett’s  friends 
will  accuse  me  of  poisoning  him  if  he  does  not  get  out  soon.” 
Before  Dr.  Leach  left  the  house  it  was  arranged  that  he  should 
invite  the  .attendance  of  a neighbouring  practitioner,  Dr.  Dudley, 
of  71  Belgrave  Road. 

That  same  day,  19th  December,  Dr.  Dudley,  in  conjunction 
with  Dr.  Leach,  made  a thorough  examination  of  Mr.  Bartlett. 
He  complained  very  much  of  sleeplessness,  and  appeared  to  be 
depressed  and  lacking  in  energy.  Dr,  Dudley,  however,  saw  no 
reason  to.  suggest  any  alteration  of  his  treatment,  of  which  he 


Introduction. 


expressed  his  complete  approval.  In  his  opinion  there  was  very 
little  the  matter  with  him.  He  was,  he  assured  him,  a perfectly 
sound  man,  and  the  best  advice  he  could  give  him  was  to  rouse 
himself  and  go  out  for  a walk  or  a drive  every  day.  Mrs.  Bart- 
lett was  present  throughout  the  interview,  and  replied  to  certain 
questions  about  her  husband's  previous  health  and  habits. 
Already,  before  this.  Dr.  Leach  had  urged  him  to  show  some 
energy,  shake  off  his  lethargy,  and  go  out  of  the  house.  But 
he  either  replied  that  “ it  would  kill  him  " or  begged  to  be 
allowed  “ to  lie  still  and  feel  happy."  So  obstinate  was  he  on  the 
point  of  remaining  indoors  that  Dr.  Leach  was  almost  inclined 
to  fear  that  he  might  have  “ overlooked  something  serious  in 
him."  The  only  suggestion  to  which  he  responded  was  that,  after 
Christmas,  he  should  go  to  Torquay.  To  give  him  confidence  Dr. 
Leach  promised  to  accompany  him  and  place  him  under  the  care  of 
Dr.  Dalby.  By  this  arrangement  he  hoped  that  he  would  consent 
to  go  alone.  He  was  now.  Dr.  Leach  considered,  a “ hysterical 
patient,"  and  it  was  very  necessary  to  induce  him  to  leave  his  wife, 
who  petted  him  too  much."  He  only  wished  it  had  been  in  his 
power  to  order  him  off  on  a sea  voyage,  ‘‘  with  no  one  to  nurse 
him," 

Christmas  that  year  fell  on  a Friday,  and  on  Monday,  21st 
December,  Mr.  Dyson  went  down  to  Poole  on  a visit  to  his  father, 
who,  like  his  son,  Avas  a Wesleyan  minister.  On  Saturday,  the 
26th,  however,  he  returned  to  London,  and  spent  the  afternoon 
in  Claverton  Street.  Mr.  Bartlett  seemed  ''  brighter,"  and  was 
apparently  in  good  spirits.  The  next  day,  Sunday,  the  27th, 
he  came  again,  but  only  reached  Claverton  Street  about  nine  in 
the  evening.  As  he  approached  the  door  he  met  Mrs.  Bartlett, 
who  was  going  out  to  post  a letter,  and,  turning  back,  accom- 
panied her.  As  they  walked  along  she  told  him  that  she  wanted 
to  obtain  some  chloroform,  in  order  to  soothe  her  husband  and 
make  him  sleep.  He  suffered  from  an  internal  complaint  which 
produced  violent  paroxysms,  and  when  in  that  state  it  was  only 
chloroform  that  quieted  him.  It  would  have  to  be  sprinkled 
on  a handkerchief,  and,  being  volatile,  she  would  need  a con- 
siderable amount,  about  as  much  as  would  be  contained  in  an 
ordinary  medicine  bottle.  Hitherto  the  nurse,  Annie  Walker, 
had  supplied  her  with  it,  but  she  was  now  abroad  in  America, 
and  she  therefore  proposed  to  ask  him  to  procure  some  for  her. 
Mr,  Dyson  very  naturally  suggested  that  she  should  apply  to  Dr. 
Leach.  She  demurred  to  that,  however,  saying  that,  not  know- 
ing die  was  skilled  in  the  use  of  chloroform,  he  would  be  afraid 

U 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


to  entrust  any  to  her.  Mr.  Dyson  seemed  satisfied  and  ox|treKsed 
his  readiness  to  help  her,  whereupon  she  haxuled  him  a sovoroxj^u 
to  pay  for  the  purchase  of  the  drug.  Both  then  ivturnod  to 
Claverton  Street,  and  both  went  into  the  house  together,  fieftu'o 
departing  that  evening,  Mr.  Dyson  had  a talk  with  Mr.  Bartlett, 
who  was  once  more  very  depressed,  but  he  omitted  to  say  anything 
about  the  commission  which  Mrs.  Bartlett  had  given  him  tt» 
execute. 

That  same  night,  as  soon  as  he  reached  his  lodgings  at  Put- 
ney, Mr.  Dyson  appears  to  have  written  to  a friend,  a medical 
student,  asking  him  to  send  him  some  chloroform.  To  that  letter 
he  never  received  an  answer,  either  because  it  wa»  wrongly 
addressed  or  because  his  friend  was  not  disposed  to  comply 
with  his  request.  The  next  morning,  however,  thinking  posKihly 
that  he  would  do  well  to  have  two  strings  to  his  1k>w,  ho  set  alsmt 
procuring  the  drug  himself.  In  the  course  of  this  Monday,  28fh 
December,  he  went  to  three  chemists*  shops — one  at  Putney  and 
two  at  Wimbledon — ^and  asked  for  chloroform.  At  two  of  thorn  ho 
bought  a 1-ounce  bottle,  and  at  a third  two  bottles  containing 
the  same  amount,  making  about  4 ounces  altogether.  All  the 
bottles  which  he  thus  procured  were  labelled  “ Chloroform- 
Poison,**  and,  on  returning  home,  he  removed  one  of  these  labels 
and  stuck  it  on  to  a 6-ounce  medicine  bottle  which  he  obtained 
from  his  landlady.  Into  this  larger  bottle  he  poured  the  contents 
of  the  four  small  bottles  which  he  bought  that  morning.  To  each 
of  the  chemists  whom  he  visited  he  seems  to  have  intimated  that  he 
required  chloroform  for  the  purpose  of  taking  out  grease  spots. 
But,  although  he  saw  fit  to  practise  this  piece  of  deception,  his 
proceedings  in  other  respects  were  open  and  straightforward.  One 
of  the  shops  was  within  fifty  yards  of  his  chapel,  and  the  other 
two  were  kept  by  men  who  were  members  of  his  congregation. 

The  next  day,  Tuesday,  the  29th,  Mr.  Dyson  tijok  the  chloro- 
form with  him  to  Claverton  Street,  but  he  did  not  at  once  pass  it 
on  to  Mrs.  Bartlett.  A visitor,  he  afterwards  explained,  was 
preseaat,  and  it  was  only  later  on,  when  he  and  Mrs.  Bartlett  went 
out  for  a walk  by  the  river,  that  he  actually  placed  the  bottle  in 
her  hands.  Mr.  Bartlett's  recovery  had  been  somewhat  retarded  by 
an  unpleasant  complication  which  made  its  appearance  in  Christ- 
mas week.  It  had  obliged  Dr.  Leach  to  administer  certain  powders, 
followed  by  strong  purgatives,  which  for  several  days  failed  to 
produce  the  desired  effect.  It  was  this  which  had  caused  the 
renemd  depression  which  Mr.  Dyson  had  observed  in  him  on 
Sunday.  But  after  a drive  in  a hansom  on  Monday,  the  88th, 


Introduction. 


he  felt  better,  and  on  the  following  day  Dr.  Leach  was  able  to 
tell  him  that  he  should  henceforward  discontinue  his  daily  visits. 
But,  unfortunately,  his  teeth  once  more  became  troublesome,  and 
Dr.  Leach  perceived  signs  of  incipient  necrosis  of  the  jaw.  There 
was  every  hope,  however,  that  the  prompt  extraction  of  one  of  his 
few  remaining  teeth  would  prevent  the  disease  from  spreading. 
Not  wishing  to  alarm  him,  the  doctor  arranged  privately  with 
Mrs.  Bartlett  that  he  should  visit  the  dentist  on  the  following 
Thursday. 

On  Thursday,  31st  December,  Mr.  Bartlett,  who  was  seem- 
ingly by  now  aware  of  what  was  in  store  for  him,  had,  about  noon, 
half  a dozen  oysters.  A light  meal  of  that  kind  should  surely 
have  BuflSced  for  a man  who  was  to  have  a tooth  extracted  under 
gas  in  the  afternoon.  But  at  three  his  dinner  was  placed  before 
him,  consisting  of  jugged  hare,  of  which  he  partook  heartily. 
Shortly  afterwards,  Mr,  Dyson  paid  him  his  usual  visit.  In  view 
of  his  excellent  appetite  it  is  surprising  to  hear  that  that  gentle- 
man found  him  **  nervous  ’’  and  suffering  great  pain  from  his 
teeth.  At  five  Dr.  Leach,  who  was  to  accompany  his  patient  to 
the  dentist,  arrived,  and  Mr.  Dyson  took  his  departure.  A cab 
was  called,  and  the  two  Bartletts  and  the  doctor  set  out  for  Mr. 
Roberts'  house  in  Charlwood  Street.  In  spite  of  the  decidedly 
prosaic  character  of  their  expedition,  Mrs.  Bartlett  was  in  a some- 
what romantic  frame  of  mind.  Addressing  Dr.  Leach,  she  said 
that  so  many  of  their  friends  had  lately  been  married  that  she 
and  her  husband  were  saying  that  morning  “ we  wished  almost 
we  were  unmarried  that  we  might  have  the  pleasure  of  marrying 
each  other  again.”  “ That  is  very  flattering  to  you,  Mr.  Bart- 
lett,” observed  Dr.  Leach.  Mr.  Bartlett  was  closely  muffled  up, 
and  his  reply  was  inaudible,  but,  to  the  best  of  Dr.  Leach's  re-j 
collection,  he  said,  before  they  reached  their  destination,  some- 
thing to  the  effect  that  ”Ve  suit  one  another  very  well;  we  agree 
in  our  views.”  Hitherto  Mr.  Roberts,  when  removing  Mr.  Bart- 
lett’s loose  teeth,  had  applied  a local  ansesthetic,  but  on  this 
occasion  Dr.  Leach  was  to  administer  gas.  The  operation  was 
quickly  and  successfully  performed,  and  was  attended  by  no  un- 
toward incident.  The  rather  long  time — about  four  minutes— 
which  elapsed  before  the  patient  became  unconscious  was  the 
only  feature  of  the  business  which  was  in  the  smallest  degree 
unusual. 

Mr.  and  Mrs.  Bartlett  returned  to  Claverton  Street  in  a 
hansom.  Hot  long  after  their  arrival  Mrs.  Doggett  came  up 
stairs  to  inquire  how  Mr.  Bartlett  had  stood  his  visit  to  the  dentist. 

It 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


He  seemed,  she  afterwards  related,  in  good  spirits,  saying  that 
he  thought  the  worst  was  over,  and  that  he  would  now  get 
better."  It  was  his  intention,  he  gave  her  to  understand,  to  go 
to  Torquay  for  change  of  air.  Under  the  lead  of  Mrs.  Bartlett, 
the  subject  of  anaesthetics  was  then  discussed.  Had  Mrs.  Doggett, 
she  asked,  ever  been  under  chloroform,  and  was  not  the  sen- 
sation of  taking  it  rather  " nice  and  pleasant  Mrs.  Doggett 
had  taken  chloroform  ten  years  before,  but  at  that  distance  <»f 
time  her  recollection  of  whether  it  was  nice  and  pleasant  ” 
was  rather  vague.  She  was  in  the  habit,  said  Mrs.  Bartlett,  of 
administering  sleeping  drops  to  her  husband ; ten  was  a strong 
dose,  but  she  did  not  hesitate  to  give  him  twelve,"  This  soema 
to  have  brought  the  conversation  to  an  end,  but,  before  Mrs. 
Doggett  went  away,  Mr.  Bartlett  told  her  how  greatly  he  ha<l 
enjoyed  his  jugged  hare;  " he  would  gladly  eat  three  such  dinners 
a day."  At  nine  o'clock  this  remarkable  invalid  had  for  supper 
half  a dozen  oysters,  bread  and  butter,  some  mango-chutney,  cake 
and  tea,  all  of  which  ho  ate  with  great  relish.  Not  content  with 
that,  while  Alice  Fulcher  was  clearing  the  table,  he  ordered  a 
large  haddock  for  his  breakfast,  adding  that  **  he  should  get  up 
an  hour  earlier  at  the  thought  of  having  it."  About  half-past 
ten  the  girl  brought  up  the  coals  for  the  night.  Mr.  Bartlett 
was  by  that  time  in  bed,  and  Mrs.  Bartlett,  holding  up  her  finger 
to  intimate  that  she  did  not  wish  to  be  disturbed  again,  directofi 
her  to  place  a basin  for  his  beef  tea  on  the  landing  outside. 

Downstairs  the  Doggetts  were  seeing  the  New  Year  in,  and  it 
was  not  until  past  midnight  that  they  went  to  bed.  At  four  Mr. 
Doggett  was  aroused  by  a sound  of  knocking,  and,  going  to  the 
door,  found  Mrs.  Bartlett,  who  told  him  that  she  thought  her 
husband  was  dead.  Prior  to  this  she  had  awakened  Alice  Fulcher 
and  sent  her  out  for  Dr.  Loach.  As  soon  as  he  had  clothed  him- 
self in  a dressing-gown,  Mr.  Doggett  went  down  to  the  first  floor. 
Mr.  Bartlett  was  in  bed  lying  upon  his  “back,  with  his  left  hand 
reposing  upon  his  breast.  He  was  quite  cold,  as  Mr.  Doggett 
ascertained,  and  had  probably  been  dead  for  two  or  three  hours. 

I had  fallen  ofi  to  sleep,”  said  Mrs.  Bartlett,  **  with  my  hand 
round  his  foot,  and  I awoke  with  a pain  in  my  hand  and  found 
him  lying  on  his  face.  I put  him  in  the  position  in  which  you 
saw  him  and  tried  to  pour  brandy  down  his  throat."  This  was 
toe  only  explanation  which  she  had  to  ofier.  Before  that,  on 
entering  the  room,  Mr.  Doggett  noticed  a peculiar  amelL 
which  he  ascribed  to  chloric  ether.  The  fire,  he  observed,  was 
burning  brightly,  and  appeared  to  have  been  attended  to  recently. 


Introduction. 


On  the  mantelpiece,  within  reach  of  the  bed,  was  a tumbler 
half-full  of  brandy,  which  also  had  about  it  a smell  of  ether  or 
paregoric.  His  investigations  went  no  further,  for  at  half-past 
four  Dr.  Leach  arrived. 

At  a glance  the  doctor  perceived  that  his  patient  was  dead. 
Mrs.  Bartlett,  on  hearing  the  fatal  verdict,  “ burst  out  crying 
bitterly,''  but  when  she  inquired  the  cause  of  death  Dr.  Leach 
could  give  her  no  definite  answer.  It  might  be  that  he  had 
ruptured  some  small  vessel,  or  there  might  be  an  aneurism  which 
had  been  overlooked.  For  her  part  Mrs.  Bartlett  could  only 
repeat  what  she  had  already  told  Mr.  Doggett,  with  the  addition, 
however,  that  before  she  found  her  husband  dead  she  had  heard 
him  snoring  in  a peculiar  manner.  The  whole  affair  was  so  in- 
explicable that  Dr.  Leach  began  to  wonder  whether  the  deceased 
might  not  have  taken  some  rapidly  acting  poison,  such  as  prussic 
acid.  But  Mrs.  Bartlett,  when  he  suggested  that  possibility,  was 
positive  that  he  could  not  have  obtained  anything  of  the  kind 
without  her  knowledge.  Nevertheless,  assisted  by  Mr.  Doggett, 
he  made  a thorough  search  of  the  room.  They  found  nothing, 
however,  which  arrested  their  attention,  except  a nearly  empty 
bottle  of  chlorodyne.  Being  aware  that  even  as  small  an  amount 
as  one  drachm  of  this  medicine  had  been  known  to  have  a fatal 
effect.  Dr.  Leach  attached  considerable  importance  to  this  dis- 
covery, notwithstanding  that  Mrs.  Bartlett  assured  him  that  her 
husband  was  not  in  the  habit  of  taking  it  internally,  and  only 
used  it  for  rubbing  on  his  gums  or  for  rinsing  out  his  mouth. 
Before  leaving  the  house  the  doctor  was  obliged  to  tell  her  that 
he  could  not  give  a death  certificate.  She  seemed  disturbed,  and 
asked,  ''  Will  there  have  to  be  an  inquest?"  Dr.  Leach  was  not 
prepared  to  say  as  much  as  that,  but  he  assured  her  that  it  was 
absolutely  necessary  that  a post-mortem  examination  should  be 
held.  He  did  not  propo^  to  perform  it  himself,  and  already  in 
his  mind  had  fixed  upon  an  eminent  pathologist,  Dr.  Green,  as 
the  most  suitable  person  to  conduct  it.  To  that  Mrs.  Bartlett 
offered  no  objection,  and  appeared  genuinely  distressed  when, 
later  on  in  the  morning,  she  learnt  that  Dr.  Green  could  not  attend 
until  the  following  afternoon.  Indeed,  whenever  the  matter  was 
mentioned,  she  expressed  the  utmost  anxiety  that  the  examina- 
tion should  take  place  as  soon  as  possible,  and,  to  quote  the  words 
of  Dr.  Leach,  **  chafed  at  the  delay." 

Some  two  hours  after  Dr.  Leach's  departure,  Mrs.  Bartlett 
telegraphed  to  Mr.  Bartlett,  senior,  her  deceased  husband's  part- 
ner, Mr«  Baxter,  and  her  friend,  Mrs.  Matthews,  to  inform  them 

15 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


of  what  had  happened,  and  to  ask  them  to  come  round  to  Clavcrton 
Street.  Mr.  Baxter  and  Mrs.  Matthews  shortly  afterwards  arrived. 
Mr.  Bartlett  had  gone  out  before  the  telegram  was  iielivered  at 
his  address,  but  Mr.  Baxter,  knowing  that  he  was  engagod  upon 
some  work  in  Berkeley  Square,  went  to  find  him,  an<l  ju'escmiy 
returned  with  him  in  a hansom.  He  was  greatly  distressed,  and 
from  the  moment  that  Mr.  Baxter  imparted  the  news  to  Intti 
seems  to  have  made  up  his  mind  that  his  son  had  Iwen  the  virtim 
of  foul  play.  On  entering  the  room  in  which  he  lay  dead  ho 
went  up  to  him,  and,  after  kissing  his  forehead,  smelt  his  lips 
to  see  whether  he  could  detect  the  presence  of  prus.sic  acid. 
turning  to  Dr.  Leach,  who  was  once  more  back  in  tiie  hoiists 
he  exclaimed,  “Doctor,  we  must  have  a post-inoriom ; this  can- 
not pass.”  Dr.  Leach  agreed,  and  told  him  that  the  matfor  was 
already  engaging  his  attention.  The  necessary  arrangements  were 
then  discussed,  Mr.  Bartlett  giving  it  plainly  to  be  undi»rstood 
that  he  wished  the  inquiry  to  be  left  to  medical  men  who  had  not 
been  concerned  in  the  case.  That,  again,  met  with  Dr,  Leacirs 
approval,  and  it  was  finally  decided  to  ask  Dr.  Green,  of  (^haring 
Gross  Hospital,  his  assistant  physician,  Dr.  Murray,  and  Dr, 
Dudley  to  perform  the  examination,  and  to  invite  Dr.  Cheney,  nf 
Mandeville  Pla^,  to  attend  on  behalf  of  Mr.  Bartlett.  *Mr«. 
Matthews  remained  with  Mrs.  Bartlett  until  the  evening,  and 
accompanied  her  when  she  went  out  to  pui-chase  mourning.  Prior 
to  that  Mrs.  Bartlett  wrote  to  Mr.  Dyson  and  to  Mr.  Wood,  the 
solicitor. 

The  next  morning,  2nd  January,  Mr.  Dyson  presented  hiinself 
at  Claverton  Street  about  half-past  eleven,  and  stayed  to  hear  the 
result  of  the  post-mortem.  It  was  to  take  place  at  two  o'clm^k 
in  the  first-floor  back  bedroom,  and  thither  the  ditetora  were  con- 
ducted as  soon  as  they  arrived.  While  they  were  engaged  upstairs 
Mrs.  Bartlett,  Mr.  Dyson,  and  Mr.  Woed  sat  together  in  the  little 
room  on  the  ground  floor.  Old  Mr.  BarCIett  declined  to  Join  them, 
preferring  to^  spend  the  time  in  the  street  outside.  There  ho 
remained  until  about  four  o'clock,  when  he  saw  Dr,  Green  come 
out  of  the  house  and  drive  away.  Shortly  afterwards  Dr.  Leach, 
whose  part  in  the  proceedings  had  been  confined  to  taking  notes, 
came  down  and  invited  every  one  to  go  upstairs  to  the  front 
room,  where  the  doctors  awaited  them.  Then,  having  been  re- 
quested by  his  colleagues  to  act  as  their  spokesman,  he  oom- 
munioated  to  all  presesnt  the  following  declaration  These 
gentlemen  wish  me  to  state  that  we  have  carefully  examined  the 
body  of  the  deceased,  and  we  are  unable  to  discover  any  patho- 


Introduction. 


logical  lethal  cause — ^that  is^  any  natural  or  obvious  cause — of 
death.  The  contents  of  the  stomach  are  suspicious,  and  we  have 
preserved  them.’'  It  was  plain  that  the  doctors,  with  the  possible 
exception  of  Dr.  Leach,  took  a very  grave  view  of  the  case.  " He 
has  no  business  to  be  lying  there,  a strong  man  like  that,”  said 
Dr.  Dudley,  placing  his  hand  upon  old  Mr.  Bartlett’s  shoulder. 
The  rooms,  it  was  announced,  were  to  be  locked  up  and  sealed 
and  handed  over  to  the  coroner,  and  in  the  meantime  nothing 
must  be  removed  from  them.  One  of  the  doctors  said  that  Mrs. 
Bartlett  must  not  take  away  her  bag,  and  another  that  she  must 
leave  her  cloak  behind  her.  But  to  this  Mr.  Bartlett,  who  had 
seemingly  been  making  some  quiet  investigations  on  his  own 
account,  demurred,  saying,  Yes,  Adelaide  may  take  her  cloak ; 
there  are  no  pockets  in  it.  I will  be  answerable  for  it.”  It  had 
been  arranged  that  she  should  seek  the  hospitality  of  the  Matthews, 
and  presently,  bereft  of  her  handbag  and  escorted  by  Mr.  Dyson, 
she  left  the  house.  Old  Mr.  Bartlett  bade  her  “ Good-bye,”  and 
kissed  her,  a mark  of  afiection  which  he  might  well  have  dis- 
pensed with,  seeing  the  nature  of  his  suspicions. 

Neither  Mrs,  Bartlett’s  nor  Mr.  Dyson’s  knowledge  of  what 
the  doctors  had  discovered  was  confined  to  the  bald  announcement 
which  Dr.  Leach  had  been  charged  to  make  to  them.  When  that 
gentleman  came  downstairs  to  summon  them  to  the  first  floor  he 
had  seen  fit  to  enter  into  certain  explanations.  Thus  he  confided 
to  them  that  the  doctors  on  opening  the  body  had  noticed  a pun- 
gent smell  which  Dr.  Green  attributed  to  the  presence  of  chloro- 
form in  tlxe  stomach.  Dr.  Leach,  however,  thought  it  very  pro- 
bable that  he  was  mistaken,  and  that  the  smell  was  due  to  chloro- 
dyne,  not  to  chloroform.  But  to  Mr,  Dyson  the  mere  mention 
of  the  word  chloroform  in  connection  with  the  death  of  Mr.  Bart- 
lett came  as  a most  unplea,^ant  reminder  of  his  purchases  on  the 
previous  Monday.  No  sooner,  therefore,  was  he  alone  with  Mrs. 
Bartlett  than  he  inquired  anxiously  about  the  bottle  which  he 
had  given  her.  I have  not  used  it,”  was  her  reply.  I have 
not  had  occasion  to  use  it.  The  bottle  is  just  as  you  gave  it  me.” 
Mr.  Dyson  was  not  satisfied,  and  returned  to  the  subject  so  per- 
sistently that  she  soon  began  to  display  some  annoyance.  She 
reminded  him  that  it  was  a very  critical  time  ” with  her,  and 
she  hoped,  therefore,  that  he  would  " dismiss  from  his  mind  ” the 
fact  that  he  had  bought  chloroform.  She  “ must  not  be  worried 
about  it.”  Mr.  Dyson,  after  expressing  his  intention  of  calling 
on  Dr.  Leach  and  asking  for  further  particulars,  allowed  the  mat- 
ter to  drop  for  the  moment.  On  arriving  at  the  Matthews  he 
c 1*7 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


was  introduced  to  Mrs.  Matthews,  after  which  he  at  once  returned 
to  his  lodgings  at  Putney.  That  his  reflections  that  evening  were 
of  a disquieting  character  may  be  inferred  from  his  subsequent 
conduct.  On  the  morrow,  Sunday,  3rd  January,  when  he  went 
out  to  preach  at  Tooting,  he  took  with  him  the  four  small  Indtles 
which  had  originally  contained  the  chloroform  ami  threw  Ihcm  into 
the  gorse  bushes  as  he  walked  across  Wandsworth  ComumiK 

The  next  morning  Mr.  Dyson  went  into  L<mdon  and  paid  a 
visit  to  Dr.  Leach,  who  read  over  to  him  some  of  tlie  notes  which 


he  had  taken  at  the  post-mortem.  AH  he  heard  only  tended  to 
confirm  his  worst  apprehensions.  Dr,  Green,  he  learnt,  was  of 
opinion  that  death  was  due  to  the  contents  of  the  stornacli,  the 
lining  of  which  was  unnaturally  red  and  inflamed.  Both  the 
stomach  and  the  intestines  emitted  a smell  of  chloroform,  and,  in 
add  to  Mr.  Dyson’s  disquiet,  no  mention  was  made  of  any  traces 
of  the  mysterious  internal  disease  from  which  Mrs.  Bartlett  de- 


clared that  her  husband  was  suffering.  On  parting  from  Dr. 
Leach  he  determined  to  seek  her  out  forthwith  and  hear  what 
explanation  she  had  to  offer.  Having  taken  the  train  from  Vic- 
toria to  Peckham  Bye,  he  found  on  reaching  Priern  Hoad  that 
Mrs.  Bartlett  was  out,  but  on  Mrs.  Matthews’  invitation  he  went 
into  the  house  and  waited.  Before  long  she  returned,  luui  Mrs. 
Matthews  left  them  alone  together.  That  lady,  however,  soon 
heard  sounds  which  led  her  to  re-enter  the  room.  Mrs,  Bartlett 
appeared  to  be  very  angry,  and  in  her  indignation  was  stainping 
upon  the  floor.  In  answer  to  her  friend’s  inquiry  about  the  cause 
of  the  trouble,  she  explained  that  **  Mr.  Dyson  was  bothering  her 
about  a piece  of  paper.”  Presently  Mrs.  Matthews  again  left 
them  alone,  but  only  to  return  very  shortly.  As  she  went  in  she 
heard  Mr.  Dyson  say,  ” You  did  tell  me  that  Edwin  was  going 
to^ie  soon,”  and,  on  Mrs.  Bartlett  jienying  that  she  had  said 
an^hing  of  the  kind,  he  bowed  his  head  on  the  piano  and  said, 
Odi,,  my  God  I Mrs.  Matthews  suggested  that  he  should  go, 
and  be  went,  exclaiming  as  he  reached  the  door,  I am  a ruined 
^Nevertheless,  same  evening  he  returned  to  Friern 
J^d,  and  again  Bartlett  alone.  She  asked  hiihv  in 

^repce^  the  inquest  which  was  to  be  held;  on 

^ursday,  nothing  about  the  chloroform;  But  he  refused , 

make  a clean  breast^ 


Introduction. 


Road,  and  found  both  ladies  on  the  point  of  starting  for  London, 
where  Mrs.  Bartlett  was  to  see  Dr.  Leach,  who,  in  view  of  the 
approaching  inquest,  wished  to  be  placed  in  possession  of  any 
facts  which  would  enable  him  to  make  a clear  statement  before 
the  coroner.*'  It  was  snowing  hard,  but  Mr.  Dyson  procured  a 
cab,  in  which  all  three  drove  to  Peckham  Rye  Station  and  there 
took  the  train  to  Victoria.  From  Victoria  the  ladies  went  on  to 
Charlwood  Street,  leaving  Mr.  Dyson  to  buy  some  cord  which 
Mrs,  Bartlett  required  for  her  boxes.  Later  on  all  of  them  were 
to  meet  at  Dr,  Leach's.  But  when  Mr.  Dyson  arrived  he  learnt 
that  the  ladies  had  missed  the  doctor  and  had  gone  on  to  Claverton 
Street.  By  this  time,  however.  Dr.  Leach  had  returned,  and, 
coming  out,  handed  him  a key,  with  instructions  to  give  it  to 
Mrs.  Bartlett  and  to  tell  her  that  the  coroner  “ had  done  with 
the  rooms."  Nevertheless,  at  Claverton  Street  he  was  refused 
admittance,  but  Mrs.  Bartlett  came  out  into  the  street  and  took 
the  key  from  him.  After  that  they  all  returned  to  Dr.  Leach's, 
where  Mrs.  Bartlett  was  shown  into  the  consulting  room.  Finding 
himself  alone  with  Mrs.  Matthews  in  the  doctor's  waiting  room, 
Mr.  Dyson  took  the  opportunity  of  questioning  her  about  the 
matter  which  was  troubling  him  so  greatly.  Was  it  true,  he 
asked,  that  Mr.  Bartlett  had  had  several  severe  attacks  of  illness? 
She  remembered,  replied  Mrs.  Matthews,  that  he  had  once  been 
laid  up  for  a fortnight,  but,  with  that  exception,  she  had  no  re- 
collection that  he  had  ever  been  ill.  Mr.  Dyson  then  confided 
to  her  how  he  had  bought  the  chloroform  and  how  he  was  resolved 
to  acknowledge  what  he  had  done  to  the  coroner.  Before  that, 
suggested  Mrs,  Matthews,  he  would  do  well  to  talk  the  matter 
over  with  her  husband,  and  with  that  their  conversation  appears 
to  have  ended.®  Mrs.  Bartlett,  having  concluded  her  business, 
presently  came  out  of  the  doctor's  room  and  returned  to  Claverton 
Street  to  collect  her  boxes,  while  Mr.  Dyson  accompanied  Mrs. 
Matthews  back  to  Dulwich.  Mr.  Matthews  had  not  yet  reached 
home  when  they  arrived,  but  Mr.  Dyson  went  out  to  meet  him, 
and  in  the  road  between  Peckham  Rye  Station  and  the  house 
poured  out  his  troubles  as  they  walked  along  together.  He  was 
in  a state  of  great  agitation;  in  fact,  Mr.  Matthews,  when  he 
afterwards  described  the  interview  in  the  Coroner's  Court,  applied 
the  word  panic-stricken  " to  his  condition.  He  had  been 
duped,"  he  said,  “ by  a wicked  woman."  Her  husband  had 
deliberately  thrown  her  into  his  company,  and  he  had  in  conse- 


* Inquest,  Ilth  February,  1886. 


19 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


quence  found  himself  “ attacked  upon  his  weakest  side.”  He 
then  explained  how  he  had  been  induced  to  procure  the  chloro- 
form, and  how  he  proposed  to  make  a statement  to  tliat  effect 
at  the  inquest.  Mr.  Matthews,  however,  pointed  out  that  it  was 
not  yet  certain  that  chloroform  was  the  cause  of  Mr.  Bartlett’s 
death,  and  in  these  circumstances  he  recommended  him  to  keep 
silence  and  await  the  report  of  the  Home  Office  analyst.^ 

On  the  following  day,  Thursday,  7th  January,  1886,  Mr. 
Braxton-Hicks,  the  deputy-coroner,  b^an  his  inquiry  at  tho 
parochial  boardroom  in  Buckingham  Palace  Road.  On  this  first 
day  the  proceedings  attracted  no  public  attention,  and  were  of 
brief  duration.  Old  Mr.  Bartlett  deposed  that,  until  ho  was  taken 
ill,  shortly  before  Christmas,  his  son  always  enjoyed  e.xcetlent 
health.  Hie  daughter-in-law  objected  to  his  visits,  because  she 
said  that  they  tired  her  husband.  The  suddenness  of  his  son’s 


death  caused  him  to  insist  upon  the  post-mortem  examination 
being  carried  out  by  an  independent  medical  man.  At  this  stage 
the  coroner  announced  that  he  should  adjourn  the  proceedings 
until  4th  February,  by  which  time  Dr.  Stevenson,*  the  Govern- 
ment analyrt,  would  have  delivered  his  report.  After  the  Court 
roro  Mr.  Dyson  and  Mrs.  Bartlett  had  a meal  together  in  the 
private  room  of  an  adjacent  confectioner’s  shop.  Their  talk  was 
confined  exclusively  to  the  post-mortem,  the  inquest,  and  kindred 
matters.  Mrs.  Bartlett  told  him  that  he  ” was  distressing  himself 
unnecessarily,”  to  which  Mr.  Dyson  replied  that  he  had  ” reason 
to  be  alarmed.”  In  the  course  of  the  discussion  which  followed 
^6  uttered  these  words,  he  afterwards  related,  “ if  I did  not 

incriminate  myself  she  would  not  incriminate  me.” 

Two  days  later,  on  the  evening  of  9th  January,  Mr.  Dyson 
had  a final  interview  with  Mrs.  Bartlett  in  Friern  Road,  in  the 
presence  of  both  the  Matthews.  The  (jhloroform  was  the  principal 
subject  of  discussion.  Mr.  Dyson,  who  displayed  considerable 
emotion,^  ^mplained  that  his  career  was  at  an  end,  and  that  he 
wouW.  ^ forced  to  resign  his  ministry.  Turning  to  Mrs.  Bartlett, 
he  said,  supposing  it  Were  proved— that  you — — ” “ Do  not 
mince,  matters,”  interrupted  Mrs.  Bartlett  indignantly,  " sav 
that  I it  to  him.”  ” He  was  puaded,”  said : Miv  DyeoiJ 


conversation  of  these  intei  Ont  of  the 
oonrse,  inadmissiWe  as  evidenoe  aMisat  her  at 

? Howpi^;  senior  soJentifio  analyst  to  the  'AotSctfR^ ; aWBwr 
and  editor  of  vanons  books  on  foreasio  medidae.  ^ ,“  7“*^  ' ansnor 

' . aft'  ■ . ... 


Introduction. 


“ he  was  anxious  to  know  what  really  had  become  of  it.*^  This 
question  seems  for  the  first  time  to  have  elicited  from  Mrs.  Bartlett 
a definite  statement  on  the  subject.  She  poured  the  chloroform, 
she  now  asserted,  out  of  the  railway  carriage  window  on  the  even- 
ing of  Wednesday,  6th  January,  and  threw  the  bottle  itself  into 
Peckham  Rye  Pond.  Mr.  Dyson  departed  in  due  course,  and  after 
this  Saturday  evening,  9th  January,  held  no  further  communica- 
tion either  by  word  of  mouth  or  by  letter  with  Mrs.  Bartlett. 

Mrs.  Bartlett  did  not  prolong  her  stay  with  the  Matthews 
beyond  the  following  Monday,  11th  January,  on  which  day  she 
moved  into  lodgings  in  Weymouth  Street,  Portland  Place.  She 
went  away,  declared  Mrs.  Matthews  at  the  inquest,^  because  she 
insisted  on  paying  for  her  board  and  lodging  and  they  refused 
to  consent  to  this  arrangement.  Whether  that  were  the  real 
reason  of  her  departure  may  well  be  doubted.  When  she  gave 
that  explanation  of  her  friend's  departure,  Mrs.  Matthews  ad- 
mitted that  she  had  said  to  her  husband  that  she  did  not 
feel  comfortable  about  Mrs.  Bartlett  because  she  told  lies."  Never- 
theless, whatever  the  truth  may  be,  they  maintained  friendly  re- 
lations and  continued  to  see  one  another  from  time  to  time. 
Mrs.  Bartlett,  while  awaiting  the  analyst's  report  in  her  lonely 
lodgings  in  Weymouth  Street,  also  kept  in  touch  with  Dr.  Leach, 
whom  she  consulted  about  her  own  state  of  health.  Thus  it  was 
that,  on  26th  January,  she  learnt  from  him  that  Dr.  Stevenson 
had  sent  in  his  report  to  the  Home  Office.  I have  good  news 
for  you,  Mrs.  Bartlett,"  said  the  doctor  when  she  entered  his 
consulting  room,  and  he  then  went  on  to  say  that  he  understood 
that  Dr.  Stevenson  had  found  that  chloroform  was  the  cause 
of  death.  " That,"  he  explained,  **  should  set  your  mind  at 
rest.  Had  it  been  one  of  those  secret  poisons  which  could  be 
administered  without  the  patient  knowing  it,  you  would  most 
certainly  have  been  accused  of  poisoning  him  by  some  people." 
But  to  his  surprise  Mrs.  Bartlett  displayed  no  satisfaction.  On 
the  contrary,  she  declared  that  she  wished  that  anything  but 
chloroform  had  been  found,  and,  in  reply  to  his  questions,  told 
a remarkable  story  which  was  in  substance  to  this  efiect. 

Mr.  Bartlett  had  strange  ideas.  One  of  them  was  that  a 
man  should  have  two  wives,  one  for  companion^ip  and  the  other 
for  what  he  termed  " use."  It  was  with  the  intention  that  she 
should  act  in  the  former  capacity  that  he  married  her  when  she 
was  an  ignorant  girl  of  sixteen.  The  compact  between  them,  to 


^I5th  Febmaiy,  1886. 


21 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


which  she  gave  her  consent  without  understanding  anything  al>t>ui 
the  conditions  of  the  married  state,  was  that  they  should  l)e 
affectionate  and  loving  friends,  but  nothing  more.  On  those 
terms  they  lived  together  happily  for  six  years,  her  father-in-law 
being  responsible  for  the  only  quarrel  which  arose  between  them. 
But  at  the  end  of  that  time  her  longing  to  be  a mother  bad  berm. *10 
so  intense  that  the  rule  which  they  had  hitherto  strictly  observed 
was  broken  on  one  occasion  only.  Unfortunately,  the  t*hild  was 
born  dead,  and  she  in  consequence  was  <lishoarteiied.  'riicir 
platonic  relationship  was  resumed,  and  was  adhered  to  ever  after- 
wards. Her  husband  likeil  to  surround  her  with  male  frioinis, 
and  was  pleased  by  the  attentions  which  they  paid  her.  Thus  !ier 
position  was  often  trying  and  difficult.  Then  they  mado  the 
acquaintance  of  Mr.  Dyson,  into  whose  company  her  husbinnl 
threw  her  deliberately,  as  though  anxious  to  promote  betwet'U 
them  an  affection  which  was  more  than  platonic,  but  not  criitii- 
nal.’’  He  told  them  to  kiss,  and  gave  her,  or  affianced  her,  to 
his  friend.  Nevertheless,  after  making  her  over  to  another  man 
in  this  fashion,  he  began  during  the  later  silages  of  his  illness  to 
show  signs  of  a desire  to  assert  his  marital  rights.  She  oti- 
deavoured  to  make  him  realise  the  impropriety  of  his  condtict. 

Edwin,''  she  said,  you  know  you  have  given  me  to  Mr. 
Dyson,  and  it  is  not  right  that  you  should  now  do  what  during 
all  these  years  of  our  married  life  you  have  not  done.'*  It  w'as 
a duty  which  she  owed  to  her  womanhood  and  to  the  man 
to  whom  she  was  practically  affianced  " to  protest  strongly  against 
his  behaviour.  He  agreed  with  all  she  said,  but,  as  he  grew  l)eiier, 
he  became  so  urgent  that  she  procured  chloroform,  intending  to 
sprinkle  some  upon  a handkerchief  and  wave  it  in  his  face  whenever 
he  diould  be  too  pressing.  She  did  not,  however,  ever  attempt 
to  put  her  plan  into  execution.  I never  kept  a secret  from 
Edwin,"  she  explained,  " and  the  presence  of  that  chloroform 
in  my  drawer  troubled  my  mind.  On  "the  last  day  of  the  year, 
when  he  was  in  bed,  1 brought  the  bottle  to  him  and  gave  it  to 
him.  He  was  not  angry;  he  looked  at  it  and  placed  it  on  the 
corner  of  the  mantelpiece  close  to  his  bed."  She  concluded  her 
story  by  repeating  how,  having  gone  to  sleep  with  her  hand  upon 
his  foot,  she  had  been  awakened  by  a cramp  in  her  arm,  and  found 
her  husband  lying  dead  upon  his  face. 

Beyond  assuring  her  that  chloroform  used  in  the  manner 
which  she  described  would  not  have  had  the  effect  which  die 
apparently  expected  from  it,  Dr.  Leach  made  little  comment  upon 
tiiis  extraordinary  statement.  He  did,  however,  ask  her  how  she 


Introduction. 


obtained  the  chloroform,  but,  as  she  seemed  reluctant  to  tell  him, 
he  did  not  press  the  matter.  He  also  inquired  what  became  of 
the  bottle.  She  was  positive  that  it  remained  upon  the  mantel- 
piece throughout  the  night  and  the  early  morning.  About  eight 
o’clock,  however,  she  look  it  away  and  placed  it  in  one  of  her 
drawers  in  the  back  room,  and  there  she  left  it  until  the  after- 
noon of  AVednesday,  6th  January,  when,  having  received  per- 
mission to  remove  her  effects,  she  carried  it  away  with  her,  and, 
after  emptying  it  out  of  the  railway  carriage  window,  thiew  it 
into  a pond. 

By  4 th  February,  1886,  public  interest  in  what  the  news- 
papers now  termed  “ The  Pimlico  Mystery  ” was  thoroughly 
aroused,  and  it  was  in  a crowded  room  that  Mr.  Braxton- 
Hicks  resumed  his  inquiry.  The  two  persons  principally  con- 
cerned were  both  legally  represented,  Mrs.  Bartlett  by  Mr.  E. 
Beal,  barrister-at-law,  and  Mr.  Dyson  by  Mr.  Lickfold,  of  the 
firm  of  Lewis  & Lewis,  of  Ely  Place.  Mr.  Dennis,  a Croydon 
solicitor,  ati ended  on  behalf  of  Mr.  Bartlett  and  the  relatives  of 
the  deceased,  and  Detective-Inspector  Marshall,  who  had  charge 
of  the  case,  watched  the  proceedings  for  the  CommisHioner  of 
Police,  In  reply  to  a question  by  the  coroner,  Mr.  Beal  an- 
nounced that,  until  Dr,  Stevenson  had  been  heard,  he  could  not 
advise  Mrs.  Bartlett  to  give  evidence.  But  the  coroner  refused 
to  consent  to  that  arrangement,  and  again  called  upon  Mrs.  Bartlett 
to  tender  herself  as  a witness.  Mr.  Beal,  however,  maintained  his 
objection.  It  were  idle  to  pretend,  he  explained,  that  she  was  not 
under  a considerable  amount  of  suspicion,  and  questions  of  an 
incriminating  character  might  not  improbably  be  put  to  her  in 
the  course  of  lier  examination.  He  could  not,  replied  Mr,  Braxton- 
Hicks,  compel  her  to  come  forward,  but  her  counsel  should  under- 
stand that  the  jury  would  draw  an  unfavourable  inference  from 
her  refusal.  Dr,  Steven^u  was  then  called,  and  ascribed  the 
cause  of  death  to  chloroform,  a fatal  amount  of  which  he  had 
found  in  the  stomach  of  the  deceased.  Dr.  Leach  spoke  of  his 
attendance  at  Claverton  Street  and  of  the  treatment  which  he  had 
prescribed  for  Mr,  Bartlett,  but  when  it  came  to  repeating  the 
story  which  Mrs.  Bartlett  had  told  him,  on  26th  January,  he 
begged  to  be  given  time  to  consult  his  recollections.  After  some 
discussion,  it  was  arranged  that  he  should  at  his  leisure  write 
out  an  account  of  what  Mrs.  Bartlett  had  said  and  have  it 
ready  for  the  next  sitting  of  the  Court,  on  11th  February.  As 
soon  as  that  had  been  settled  Inspector  Marshall  gave  the  coroner 
a copy  of  Squire’s  “ Companion  to  the  British  Pharmacopoeia,” 


Adelaide  Bartlett, 


which  had  been  found  .among  Mrs.  Bartlett's  effects  at  Claverton 
Street,  On  receiving  it,  Mr.  Braxton-Hicks  drew  the  attention  of 
the  jury  to  the  significant  fact  that  it  appeared  to  open  naturally 
at  the  very  page  on  which  the  drug  chloroform  was  described. 

On  11th  February,  Dr.  Leach's  statement  was  read,  and 
Mr.  Dyson  gave  evidence.  So  effectually  did  he  carry  out  his 
often-repeated  intention  of  making  a clean  breast  of  it  " that, 
when  he  had  finished,  the  foreman  of  the  jury  announced  that 
they  were  all  of  opinion  that  Mrs.  Bartlett  should  no  longer  be 
left  at  liberty.  Mr.  Braxton-Hicks  concurred  and  gave  Inspector 
Marshall  the  necessary  warrant,  which  that  officer  proceeded  to 
execute  with  as  little  fuss  as  possible.  Mrs.  Bartlett,  who  was 
present  in  Court,  made  no  observation  when  the  inspector  took 
her  aside,  and,  having  cautioned  her,  explained  the  nature  of 
his  instructions.  She  was  at  once  conveyed  to  Bochester  How 
police  station,  and,  on  the  following  day,  was  charged  before  Mr. 
Partridge  at  Westminster  Police  Court  with  causing  the  death  of 
her  husband  by  poisoning  him  with  chloroform.  Formal  evidence 
of  arrest  was  given,  after  which  she  was  remanded. 

The  same  fate  speedily  overtook  Mr.  Dyson,  On  18th  Feb- 
ruary the  coroner's  jury  returned  a verdict  of  “ wilful  murder  " 
against  Mrs.  Bartlett,  and  found  that  the  Rev,  George  Dyson 
had  been  an  accessory  before  the  fact.  He  was  at  once  arrested, 
and  in  due  course  took  his  place  in  the  dock  at  Westminster 
Police  Court  alongside  Mrs.  Bartlett.  It  was  noticed  that  they 
met  as  complete  strangers,  and  that  neither  addressed  a word  to 
the  other.  The  proceedings  before  Mr.  Partridge  lasted  until 
Saturday,  20th  March,  when  both  prisoners  were  committed  for 
trial  at  the  Central  Criminal  Court. 


II. 


The  trial  of  Adelaide  Bartlett  and  of  the  Rev.  George  Dyson 
was  opened  before  Mr.  Justice  Wills^  at  the  Old  Bailey  on  Monday, 
12th  April,  1886,  In  view  of  the  enormous  interest  which  the 
case  evoked,  special  arrangements  had  been  made  for  the  seat- 
ing of  spectators.  Close  to  the  dock  and  blocking  up  one  of  the 
principal  entrances  to  the  Court  a kind  of  stand  or  hustings 
had  been  erected,  in  which  many  persons,  the  majority  of  whom 


* Wills,  Bifflit  Honourable  Sir  Alfred 
1884  ; one  of  the  f^ders  of  the  Alpine  ()lub,  of  wmen 
president;  editor  of  « Wills  on  Circumstantial  Evidence. 
24 


of  High  Oonrt, 
was  the  third 


Introduction 


were  women,  found  accommodation.  Mrs.  Bartlett,  who  appeared 
perfectly  composed,  was  dressed  in  black,  but  she  no  longer  wore 
the  heavy  widow’s  mourning  in  which  she  had  been  attired  at 
the  Police  Court.  Among  the  counsel  engaged  were  some  of  the 
most  distinguished  members  of  the  bar.  The  Attorney-General, 
Sir  Charles  Russell,^  afterwards  Lord  Russell  of  Killowen  and 
Lord  Chief  Justice  of  England,  led  for  the  Crown,  assisted  by  Mr., 
now  Sir,  Harry  Poland,  Mr.  R.  S.  Wright,®  and  Mr.  Moloney, 
Of  these  Mr.  Poland,  when  he  retired  in  1895,  had  been  pro- 
minently concerned  in  almost  all  the  great  trials  of  his  time, 
and  Mr.  Wright,  not  long  afterwards,  was  knighted  and  appointed 
a judge  of  the  High  Court.  Mr.,  afterwards  Sir,  Francis  Lock- 
wood,^  Q-C.,  and  Mr.,  afterwards  Sir,  Charles  Mathews,®  ap- 
peared for  Mr.  Dyson.  For  the  defence  of  his  client,  Mrs. 
Bartlett,  Mr.  Wood  had  retained  Mr.,  afterwards  Sir,  Edward 
Clarke,  Q.C.,  M.P.,  Mr.  Mead,  now  a metropolitan  magistrate, 
and  Mr.  E.  Beal.  Nine  years  before  Mr.  Clarke  had  earned  for 
himself  a great  reputation  by  his  defence  of  Patrick  Staunton 
in  the  Penge  murder  case  and  of  Chief  Inspector  Clarke  in  the 
trial  of  the  detectives.  It  was  his  skilful  handling  of  the  medical 
evidence  which  saved  the  Stauntons  from  the  gallows,  and  when 
he  undertook  to  defend  Mrs.  Bartlett  he  perceived  at  once  that 
in  her  case  also  the  issue  would  probably  be  decided  by  the 
testimony  of  the  experts.  Accordingly,  for  a fortnight  before 
the  trial,  he  declined  all  other  briefs  and  put  aside  his  Parlia- 
mentary work,  while  in  the  reading  room  of  the  British  Museum 
and  in  his  own  library  he  devoted  himself  exclusively  to  the  study 
of  everything  of  importance  which  had  been  written  on  the  subject 
of  chloroform.® 

As  soon  as  his  lordship  had  taken  his  seat  upon  the  bench, 
Mr.  Lockwood  rose  and  made  application  that  the  prisoners  should 
be  tried  separately,  a request  with  which  Mr.  Clarke  expressed  his 
complete  concurrence.  All  discussion  of  the  matter  was,  how- 
ever, rendered  unnecessary  by  the  intervention  of  the  Attorney- 


^ Russell,  Charles,  Baron  Russell  of  Killowen  (I832-X900) ; Attorney  General, 
1885  and  1892;  raised  to  peerage,  1894,  and  appointed  Lord  Chief  Jus^oe. 

■ Wright,  Robert  Samuel  (1839-1904) ; judge  of  High  Court  and  knighted, 
1891. 

* Lockwood,  Francis  (1847-1897) ; Solicitor-General,  1894 ; caricaturist  and 
contributor  to  PuncA;  knighted,  1894. 

® Mathews,  Charles  Willie  (1850-1920);  called  to  the  bar,  1872;  senior 
prosecuting  counsel  to  the  Treasury,  1888 ; knighted,  1907 ; Director  of  Public 
Frosecutious,  1908. 

•Sir  Edward  Clarke,  “The  Story  of  My  Life,”  p.  249. 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


General.  To  the  surprise  of  the  general  public,  he  ileclartnl  I hat 
he  and  his  learned  friends  hud  decideil  ihul  iliere  was  no  ti» 
be  submitted  to  the  jury  upon  which  they  couhi  ask  (lieui  U\  convict 
Mr.  Dyson.  Both  prisoners  were  then  arraigiicil,  and  both  liaving 
pleaded  “ not  guilty,’*  the  Attorney-General  annouucod  that  he 
proposed  to  offer  no  evidence  against  Mr.  Dyson.  His  htrdship 
thereupon  directed  the  jury  to  iiiul  him  not  guilty,”  and  when 
that  formality  had  been  complied  with  he  rleclare<i  that  he  was 
discharged  from  custo<ly.  While  Mr.  Dyson  left  iho  dovk  liio 
Attorney-General  began  to  address  tlie  jury. 

After  pointing  out  that  the  decision  not  to  proceed  against 
Mr.  Dyson  was  a distinct  advantage  to  the  prisoner,  inasmuch 
as  it  would  enable  her  counsel  to  cross-examine  that  gentleman 
upon  his  statements,  Mr.  Attorney  proceedetl  to  descrila*  in 
some  detail  the  marrie<l  life  of  the  BariloHs,  down  to  the  time 
when  Mr.  Dyson  crossed  their  path.  Their  acquaintance  with 
him  grew  apace  and  developed  into  a close  intimacy.  And  that 
brought  them  to  an  important  date,  3rd  September,  IS85.  ihi 
that  day  the  deceased  made  a will  leaving  everything  to  \m  wife 
and  appointing  Mr.  Dyson  one  of  his  executors.  Doth  (he 
prisoner  and  Mr.  Dyson  were  aware  of  the  contents  of  tins  will. 
At  the  lodgings  in  Claverton  Street,  to  which  the  BarllcHs  tfiovotl 
in  October,  Mr.  Dyson  continued  to  visit  them  as  regularly  m 
ever.  It  was  only  fair  to  say,  however,  that  nothing  oci'urrcd  lo 
suggest  the  existence  of  any  quarrel  between  husband  and  wife. 
“ So  far  as  ordinary  observers  could  see  and  judge,  they  seem  to 
have  lived  together  on  fairly  good  terms,*’  But,  on  (he  oilier 
hand,  there  could  be  no  doubt  that  the  prisoner 's  relations  with 
her  father-in-law  were  “ a little  strained,”  The  illness  from  wliich 
the  deceased  l^an  to  suffer,  about  10th  December,  was  not  a 
serious  complaint,  but  it  was  complicated  by  nervous  depression, 
sleeplessness,  and  the  bad  condition  of  the  teeth.  Never! heless, 
on  28th  December,  when  he  went  out  for  a drive,  he  was  almost 
well  and  was  talking  about  going  to  the  seaside  for  change  of  air. 
The  next  point  to  be  considered,  anti  it  was  a highly  important 
one,  was  the  purchase  of  the  chloroform.  Seeing  that  Mr.  Dyson 
had  been  declared  guiltless,  it  was  impossible  for  Mr,  Attorney 
to  allude  to  his  proceedings  as  suspicious.  He  spoke  of  him  tliere- 
fore  as  yielding  meekly  to  the  prisoner’s  request,’*  while  draw- 
ing attention  to  the  many  false  statements  by  which  she  had 
sought  to  explain  her  desire  to  possess  the  drug.  There  were  no 
grounds,  said  Mr.  Attorney,  for  suggesting  that  her  husband 
suffered  from  any  internal  ailment,  and  it  was  untrue  that  Annie 
26 


Introduction. 


Walker  had  ever  supplied  her  with  chloroform  or  that  she  was 
in  America.  It  was  equally  untrue  that  Dr.  Nichols  had  ever 
said  that  the  deceased  would  not  live  another  twelve  mouths. 
Mr.  Attorney  then  passed  on  to  the  events  of  31st  December — ^the 
visit  to  the  dentist,  the  meals  of  which  the  deceased  partook  so 
heartily,  and  the  conversation  about  chloroform  between  the 
prisoner  and  Mrs.  Doggett. 

Having  carried  the  story  down  to  the  death  of  Mr.  Bartlett, 
the  Attorney-General  related  how,  in  the  early  hours  of  the 
morning,  on  1st  January,  Mrs.  Bartlett  aroused  the  house,  lie 
recounted  how  Mr.  Doggett,  on  entering  the  chamber  of  death, 
noticed  a smell  of  chloric  ether,  and  how  he  discovered  that  the 
same  smell  pervaded  a tumbler  of  biandy  standing  upon  the 
mantelpiece  close  to  the  bed.  Mr.  Doggett  also  observed  that 
the  fire  was  burning  brightly  and  appeared  to  have  been  attended 
to  recently.  Dr.  Leach  was  quite  unalde  to  explain  his  patient’s 
sudden  death.  He  saw  no  Iwttle  of  chloroform,  but  he  did  find 
a small  bottle  which  had  contained  chlorodyne.  So  perplexed  was 
he  that  he  asked  the  prisoner  whether  it  were  possible  that  the 
deceased  could  have  obtained  poison,  but  she  replied  that  **  he 
had  no  poison,  and  could  not  have  got  it,  or  had  it,  without  her 
knowledge.”  With  regard  to  the  post-mortem  examination,  the 
doctors,  said  Mr.  Attorney,  found  nothing  in  the  vital  organs — 
the  heart,  the  lungs,  or  the  liver — ^lo  account  for  death.  What 
did  strike  them,  directly  they  opened  the  stomach,  was  the  over- 
powering smell  of  chloroform  which  issued  from  it.  After  the 
post-mortem  several  interviews  took  place  between  the  prisoner, 
Mr.  Dyson,  the  Matthews,  and  Dr.  Leach,  at  which  some  very 
curious  statements  were  made,  but  he  would  say  nothing  about 
them  at  pi'esent,  preferring  that  the  jury  should  hear  what  oc- 
curred from  the  witnesses  themselves.  One  exception,  however, 
he  must  make.  He  cou^ff  not  pass  over  in  silence  the  interview 
between  the  prisoner  and  Dr.  lieach  on  26th  January,  and  he 
proceeded  to  place  before  them  in  an  abbreviated  form  the  strange 
story  which  on  that  day  she  confided  to  the  doctor-  The  practical 
result  of  that  statement,  Mr.  Attorney  pointed  out,  was  an  ad-* 
mission  that  at  the  time  of  her  husband’s  death  she  had  in 
her  possession  a large  quantity  of  chloroform.  The  prisoner,  con- 
tinued Mr.  Attorney,  was  present  at  the  inquest,  but  did  not 
come  forward  to  give  evidence  or  to  offer  any  explanation.  The 
jury,  however,  would  not,  he  hoped,  draw  an  unfavourable  in- 
ference from  her  abstention. 

After  giving  this  short  outline  of  the  case  the  Attorney- 

27 


Adelaide  Bartlett, 


General  concluded  by  propounding  the  theory  of  the  prosecution. 
When  they  had  heard  the  evidence  he  did  not  suppose  that  they 
would  find  any  difficulty  in  arriving  at  the  conclusion  that  the 
deceased  died  from  chloroform  which  found  its  way  into  his 
stomach.  The  question  they  had  to  decide  was,  Uow  did  it 
get  there  There  were  three  possibilities  to  be  considered.  The 
deceased  might  have  taken  it  himself  with  suicidal  intent,  but 
after  they  had  heard  the  facts  they  would  **  find  nothing  in  the 
circumstances  of  the  case  to  support  or  even  lend  an  air  of 
plausibility  to  that  suggestion.’^  Alternatively,  he  might  ha\*e 
swallowed  it  by  accident.  But  chloroform  was  a drug  which  no 
man  could  take  inadvertently.  Even  should  he  not  find  out  his 
mistake  before  he  raised  the  glass  to  his  lips,  he  must  inevitably 
discover  it  as  soon  as  the  liquid  entered  his  mouth.  The  sensa- 
tion of  burning  which  must  inevitably  ensue  would  be  so  intense 
that,  however  great  his  self-conti*ol  might  be,  he  would  be  unable 
to  repress  cries  or  groans  of  anguish  which  could  not  fail  to  be 
heard.  There  remained,  therefore,  only  the  third  possibility, 
that  it  was  administered  by  another  person.  But  the  same  objec- 
tion would  hold  good.  Swallowing  it  under  these  conditions  would 
cause  the  same  pain  and  be  followed  by  the  same  outcry.  In 
the  opinion  of  the  medical  men,  there  was  one  way,  and  one 
way  only,  in  which  the  difficulty  could  be  overcome.  The  internal 
administration  must  be  preceded  by  an  external  application  pro- 
ducing stupor  or  semi-stupor.  Inasmuch  as  no  one  that  night 
heard  any  unusual  sounds,  the  operation  of  conveying  chloroform 
into  the  stomach  of  the  deceased  must  have  been  performed  when 
he  was  either  wholly  or  partially  unconscious. 

As  soon  as  Dr.  Broadbent  had  been  called  to  prove  that  Dr, 
Green  was  seriously  ill  and  in  no  condition  to  attend  the  Court, 
old  Mr.  Bartlett  entered  the  witneas;-box.  Replying  to  Mr, 
Poland,  he  related  the  circumstances  of  •the  deceased’s  marriage, 
and  gave  some  details  about  the  life  at  Herne  Hill,  Lordship 
Lane,  and  Merton,  His  son's  business  was  in  a most  flourishing 
condition.  He  understood  that  the  prisoner  suffered  greatly  in 
her  confinement.  So  far  as  the  witness  knew,  she  resumed,  on 
her  recovery,  ordinary  marital  relations  with  her  husband.  His 
son  always  enjoyed  excellent  health,  and  worked  hard.  When 
he  fell  ill  in  Claverton  Street  the  witness  went  to  the  house  on 
six  or  seven  occasions,  but  was  only  allowed  to  see  him  three 
times.  He  was  told  that  he  was  suffering  from  verdigris  poisoning. 
He  was  not  informed  of  the  name  of  the  doctor  attending  him, 
only  that  he  was  “ a doctor  up  the  street.”  At  this  stage  eight 


Introduction. 


letters  were  put  in  which  the  prisoner  had  written  to  the  witness 
during  her  husband’s  illness.  Some  began  ‘‘  Dear  Mr.  Bartlett,” 
and  others  ” Dear  Father.”  Most  of  them  were  to  the  effect  that 
her  husband  was  too  ill  to  see  anybody,  but  the  last  one,  dated 
**  Sunday  night,”  had  reference  to  a visit  which  the  witness 
proposed  to  pay  to  his  son  on  Monday,  28th  December.  It  ran 
as  follows : — 

Dear  Mr.  Bartlett, — hear  that  you  are  a little  disturbed  because 
Edwin  has  been  too  ill  to  see  you.  I wish,  if  possible,  to  be  friends  with 
you,  but  you  must  place  yourself  on  the  same  footing  as  other  persons— 
that  is  to  say,  you  are  welcome  here  when  1 invite  you,  and  at  no  other 
time.  You  seem  to  forget  that  I have  not  been  in  bed  for  thirteen  days, 
and  consequently  am  too  tired  to  speak  to  visitors.  I am  sorry  to  speak 
so  plainly,  but  1 wish  you  to  understand  that  1 have  neither  forgotten  nor 
forgiven  the  past.  Edwin  will  be  pleased  to  see  you  Monday  evening  any 
time  after  six. 

Witness  went  to  Claverton  Street  on  Monday,  28th  December, 
and  sat  with  the  deceased  for  over  two  hours.  It  was  the  last 
occasion  on  which  he  saw  him  alive.  The  deceased  appeared  to  be 
in  better  spirits,  and  talked  of  returning  to  business.  Something 
was  also  said  about  his  going  to  Poole  or  Bournemouth  to  re- 
cuperate. Some  time  previous  to  that,  the  witness  had  suggested 
to  the  prisoner  the  advisability  of  calling  in  another  doctor. 
She  said,  ” Wo  cannot  afford  it,”  and  he  replied,  ” Nonsense, 
Adelaide.”  But  in  the  course  of  his  visit,  on  28th  December,  she 
told  him  that  another  doctor,  whose  name  she  did  not  mention, 
had  seen  her  husband.  The  reference  in  her  letter  to  a past 
which  she  could  not  forgive  was  an  allusion  to  an  unpleasantness 
in  which  one  of  his  other  sons  had  been  concerned.  When  he 
went  to  Claverton  Street,  after  hearing  of  his  son’s  death,  he 
sniffed  at  his  lips,  thinking  that  he  might  have  died  from  prussic 
acid,  but  he  could  detect  no  smell  of  that  kind.  The  witness 
then  went  on  to  describe  the  conversation  with  Dr.  Leach  about 
the  holding  of  the  post-mortem,  and  repeated  the  account  which 
the  prisoner  gave  of  the  circumstances  in  which  she  found  that  her 
husband  was  dead.  After  describing  what  had  happened,  she 
remarked  that  ” he  was  a very  kind  and  generous  man.”  On 
2nd  January  the  witness  only  entered  the  house  to  learn  the 
result  of  the  post-mortem,  when  he  saw  Dr.  Green  come  out.  The 
doctors  said  that  they  had  been  unable  to  discover  tHe  cause  of 
death.  They  would  not  allow  the  prisoner  to  remain  in  the  house. 
The  witness  said  Good-bye  ” to  her  and  kissed  her.  At  this 
stage  a clerk,  from  the  Probate  OflSce  produced  .a  document  pur- 


Adelaide  Bartlett 


porting  to  be  the  deceased’s  will,  and  Mr.  Poland  inquired  of 
the  witness  whether  the  signature  was  that  of  his  son,  **  To 
the  best  of  my  belief  it  is  not,”  he  replied.  In  answer  to  the 
learned  judge,  however,  he  presently  admitted  that  it  was  ikis 
son’s  habit  constantly  to  change  his  handwriting.  But,  in  the 
meantime,  Herbert  Eustace  and  Arthur  Brook,  grocer’s  assistants 
in  the  employment  of  Baxter  & Bartlett,  deposed  to  witnessing 
the  deceased’s  signature  to  the  document,  which  was  road  by  tlio 
clerk  of  the  Court : — 

Horne  Hill, 
September  3rd,  1885. 

I,  Edwin  Bartlett,  will  and  bequeath  all  my  property  and  everything 
1 am  possessed  of  to  my  wife,  Adelaide,  for  her  sole  use,  and  appoint  George 
Dyson,  B.A.,  Wesleyan  minister,  and  Edward  Wood,  Esq.,  of  66  Gresham 
Street,  to  be  my  executors. 

(Signed)  Edwin  Baatlett. 

Witnesses  to  my  signature— 

Herbert  Eustace  and  Arthur  Brook. 

Under  cross-examination  by  Mr.  Clarke  the  witness  said  that 
he  did  not  ” much  approve  ” of  his  son’s  marriage,  but  he  did 
**  not  disapprove  of  it.”  He  was  not  asked  to  the  marriage, 
” because  they  knew  I was  busy.”  He  believed  that  he  enjoyed 
the  complete  confidence  both  of  his  son  and  of  his  daughter-in-law. 
He  signed  ” an  apology  for  things  he  had  said  about  her,”  but  he 
” knew  it  to  he  false.”  What  he  said  at  the  lime  was  true.  Mr. 
Clarke  thereupon  produced  a paper  and  read  as  follows: — 

December  31,  1878. 

Having  made  statements  reflecting  on  the  character  of  Mrs.  Adelaide 
Bartlett,  the  wife  of  my  son,  Edwin  Bartlett,  junior,  which  statements  1 
have  discovered  to  be  unfounded  and  untrue,  I hereby  withdraw  all  such 
statements  and  express  my  regret  for  having  made  them.  1 also  apologise 
to  the  said  Mrs.  Adelaide  Bartlett  and  Mr.^^dwin  Bartlett,  junior,  and 
acknowledge  that  all  such  statements  are  unfounded  and  untrue.  I authorise 
Mr.  Edwin  Bartlett,  junior,  to  make  what  use  he  pleases  of  this  apology. 

That  -was  the  apology,  said  the  witneas,  which  he  signed, 
kaowing  it  to  be  false.”  He  signed  it  simply  to  make  peace 
with  his  son.  After  the  witness  ceased  to  live  with  him,  his  son 
did  not  make  him  an  allowance,  but  he  intended  to  begin  m^lring 
him  one  on  Ist  January.  Witness  had  always  had  from  him  what 
money  he  wanted.  “ He  was  the  kindest  of  sons.”  He  had 
examined  his  son’s  will  at  Somerset  House,  and  had  entered  a 
raveat  against  it.  He  never  knew  his  son  to  have  “ any  adid 
ideas' ” ' about  married  life  differing  from  those  of  other  people. 

30 


Introduction 


His  son  was  in  the  habit  of  chaffing  and  joking  about  such 
matters;  he  was  always  a very  merry  man."  He  used  to  say 
" one  ought  to  have  two  wives,  one  to  take  out  and  one  to  do 
the  work."  The  witness  had  never  heard  of  Dr.  Nichols,  nor 
had  he  seen  his  book.  His  son  never  spoke  to  him  about  mes- 
merism. He  was  nothing  but  business,  always  in  business." 
When  he  first  saw  his  son,  after  he  was  taken  ill  in  Claverton 
Street,  he  seemed  as  " though  he  were  under  a narcotic."  He 
gave  the  witness  throughout  the  impression  that  he  was  " dull 
and  dazed."  He  complained  much  of  sleeplessness,  and  said  the 
doctor  was  injecting  morphia  into  him.  All  through  his  illness 
he  appeared  to  be  in  low  spirits.  Witness  had  seen  him  crying. 
On  Saturday,  2nd  January,  as  witness  was  going  upstairs  to 
hear  the  result  of  the  post-mortem,  the  prisoner  placed  her  arm 
round  his  neck  and  said,  " Dear  father,  do  not  fret,  it  shall 
make  no  odds  to  you.  I will  see  you  never  want.  It  shall  be 
just  the  same  as  if  Ddwin  were  alive."  Later  on,  when  the  doctors 
objected  to  the  prisoner  taking  away  her  bag  and  cloak,  the  wit- 
ness said  that  he  would  be  answerable  for  the  cloak.  At  the 
inquest  he  did  not  say  that  he  gave  her  the  cloak  " after  feeling 
in  the  pockets,"  but  he  might  have  said  after  feeling  for  the 
pockets."  In  his  re-examination  witness  was  asked  to  explain 
the  nature  of  the  charge  for  the  making  of  which  he  had  had  to 
apologise.  **  It  was  something  very  bad,"  he  replied,  and  on 
Mr.  Poland  explaining  that  he  must  be  more  explicit,  he  said, 
“Well,  Adelaide  ran  away,  and  was  away  for  some  week  or  more, 
and  Edwin  and  me  thought  she  had  gone  along — ^we  almost  knew 
she  had  gone — ^with  Fred  Bartlett,  the  brother,  and  we  were  after 
her."  Fred,  the  witness  went  on  to  say,  fled  to  America  directly 
it  was  found  out." 

Mr.  Edwards  Baxter,,  who  was  examined  by  Mr.  Moloney, 
deposed  that  he  had  been  in  partnership  with  the  deceased  for 
thirteen  years,  during  all  of  which  time  he  had  only  been  away 
from  business,  on  account  of  ill-health,  for  one  fortnight.  So 
far  as  the  witness  knew,  the  deceased  and  the  prisoner  lived 
together  as  man  and  wife  in  the  ordinary  way.  When  the  de- 
ceased was  taken  ill  at  Claverton  Street,  the  witness  went  to  see 
him  on  Sunday,  13th  December.  He  appeared  to  be  very  ill. 
He  also  called  and  saw  him  on  Sunday,  20th  December,  and 
Sunday,  27th  December.  The  last  occasion  on  which  he  saw 
Him  was  on  Wednesday,  30th  December-  He  seemed  quite  cheerful 
— ^very  much  better.  He  talked  of  going  to  the  seaside,  and 
hoped  to  be  back  at  business  in  a fortnight."  In  reply  to  Mr. 

31 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Clarke,  the  ^vitness  stated  that  during  the  deceased’s  illness  h< 
received,  almost  every  moi-ning,  a note  fronii  the  prisoner  about 
his  state  of  health.  The  deceased,  when  he  saw  him,  complainetl 
of  sleeplessness,  and  the  witness  was  aware  that  the  doctor  had 
given  him  sleeping  draughts.  The  deceased  never  said  anything 
to  him  about  mesmerism,  nor  had  the  witness  any  reason  to 
suppose  that  he  held  peculiar  views  about  matrimony. 

Replying  to  Mr.  Poland,  Mr.  Doggett  related  how  he  iiad 
let  the  first-floor  rooms  of  his  house  to  the  deceased,  and  how, 
to  the  best  of  his  belief,  he  and  the  prisoner  lived  in  them  as 
man  and  wife.  The  witness  was  then  taken  through  the  events  of 
1st  January.  On  entering  the  room  in  which  the  deceased  lay 
dead  he  noticed  at  once  a strong  smell  of  chloric  ether.  He 
emiffed  at  a tumbler  on  the  mantelpiece,  the  contents  of  which 
were  “ evidently  brandy  with  some  other  drug  in  it ; it  smelt 
like  ether  or  paregoric.”  The  witness  was  present  when  Dr. 
Leacih  examined  the  body,  and  heard  him  declare,  before  the 
prisoner,  that  he  could  find  nothing  to  account  for  the  death. 
He  assisted  the  doctor  to  search  the  room.  Ho  did  not  notice 
how  the  prisoner  was  dressed.  ” The  fire,”  said  the  witness, 
“ had  been  tended  within  a short  time  of  my  going  into  the 
room.”  As  an  experiment  he  had  once  lain  upon  his  back  upon 
the  deceased’s  bed,  and  found  that  he  could  just  reach  the  iimntel- 
piooe  with  his  hand.  “ Anybody  leaning  upon  the  bed  could 
easily  reach  it.  It  would  be  rather  more  difficult  sitting  up.” 

Mi'S.  Doggett,  who  followed  her  husband  into  the  witness- 
box,  spoke  to  the  arrangements  made  with  the  Bartletts  when 
they  arrived  at  Claverton  Street.  The  deceased  informed  her 
that  a gentleman  would  dine  with  them  once  a week,  but  as  a 
fact  there  was  seldom  a week  in  which  Mr.  Dyson  did  not  dine  with 
them  more  frequently.  That  gentlenmn  came  at  all  hours,  and 
sometimes  stayed  all  day.  The  deceased  usually  left  the  house 
soon  after  eight  in  the  morning,  and  he  and  the  prisoner  generally 
dined  about  six.  Mr.  Dyson  often  had  luncheon  with  the  prisoner. 
An  old  serge  jacket  and  slippers  were  kept  for  his  use.  The  witness 
then  went  on  to  describe  the  meals  which  had  been  served  up  to 
the  deceased  on  the  last  day  of  his  life,  and  to  repeat  the  con- 
versation which,  that  evening,  she  had  with  ttie  prisoner  about 
chloroform.  The  next  morning,  when  the  house  was  aroused  by 
the  news  that  Mr.  Bartlett  was  dead,  she  asked  the  prisoner 
whetiier  she  ^d  given  him  any  of  the  drops  about  which  she  had 
spoken  overnight,  but  she  answered,  ” I have  given  him  nothin®.” 
The  fire,  said  the  witness,  was  humin^  brightly.  Iiater  on  in 
32 


Introduction 


the  morning,  the  prisoner  remarked  to  Her,  How  strange  it 
was  that  Mr.  Bartlett  had  not  long  ago  made  his  will.”  In 
cross-examination  she  explained  that  the  prisoner  told  her  that 
all  her  own  money  was  in  the  business,  and  that  she  would  have 
lost  it  had  her  husband  not  made  a will.  But  it  was  in  vain 
that  Mr.  Clarke  put  it  to  her  that  if  the  fire  had  been  ‘‘  packed  ” 
at  night  and  stirred  up  with  a poker  in  the  morning  it  might 
have  presented  the  bright  appearance  which  had  arrested  her 
attention.  She  persisted  in  saying  that  it  had  been  attended  to 
during  the  night;  “ it  had  not  burnt  hollow  at  all.”  Nor  would 
she  agree  to  the  learned  counsers  suggestion  that  the  talk  about 
the  chloroform  originated  in  some  remark  the  deceased  made 
about  the  gas  which  had  been  administered  to  him  two  hours 
earlier.  Not  a word,  the  witness  was  positive,  was  said  about 
gas.  The  deceased  talked  about  his  tooth,  but  never  said  that 
**  he  had  taken  anything.”  On  former  occasions  he  mentioned  that 
his  gums  had  been  frozen,  but  that  evening  he  said  nothing  about 
the  conditions  under  which  his  tooth  had  been  extracted. 

Alice  Fulcher,  the  Doggetts’  servant,  the  first  witness  to  be 
called  on  the  second  day,  deposed  to  waiting  upon  the  Bartletts 
during  the  whole  time  that  they  were  in  Claverton  Street.  She 
confirmed  her  mistress’s  account  of  the  length  and  frequency  of 
Mr.  Dyson’s  visits,  and  made  mention  of  the  old  coat  and  slip- 
pers which  were  kept  for  his  convenience.  In  addition,  she  de- 
scribed the  two  incidents  which  have  been  alluded  to  on  a former 
page — ^how  she  found  the  window  curtains  pinned  together  and 
how  she  saw  Mrs.  Bartlett  sitting  on  the  floor  with  her  head 
on  Mr.  Dyson’s  knees.  With  regard  to  that,  she  stated  that  they 
neither  moved  nor  said  anything  when  she  entered  the  room. 
Never  on  any  occasion  had  she  found  the  door  locked.  Passing 
on  to  the  events  of  31st  December,  she  spoke  of  the  oysters,  the 
jugged  hare,  and  the  other,  delicacies  of  which  the  deceased  partook, 
and  described  the  relish  with  which  he  ordered  a large  haddock 
for  his  breakfast.  About  twenty-five  minutes  to  eleven  the  wit- 
ness went  up  to  the  Bartletts’  room  for  the  last  time  to  take  in 
the  coals.  The  prisoner  told  her  not  to  disturb  them  again,  and  to 
leave  the  basin  for  her  husband’s  beef  tea  on  the  table  on  the  land- 
ing outside.  Throughout  the  deceased’s  illness  it  had  been  the 
witness’s  practice  to  take  in  the  basin  the  last  thing.”  When 
the  prisoner  aroused  her  at  four  o’clock  in  the  morning  to  tell 
her  that  her  husband  was  dead,  the  witness  noticed  that  she  was 
not  wearing  fhe  dress  which  she  had  on  overnight.  Beplying  to 
Mr.  Clarke,  she  said  that  while  the  deceased  was  ill  the  prisoner 
n 83 


Adelaide  Bartlett 


always  slept  upon  a sofa  or  a chair  in  the  front  room.  But 
she  often  went  at  a late  hour  into  the  back  room  to  wash,  pre- 
sumably before  settling  for  the  night.  She  could  not  recollect 
whether  the  basin  in  the  bedroom  was  thus  used  on  the  night  of 
31st  December.  The  deceased  was  in  bed  when  the  witness  took  in 
the  coals,  and  the  prisoner,  seeing  that  she  had  not  brought  up  a 
basin  for  the  beef  tea,  told  her  to  put  it  on  the  landing  outside. 
It  was  not  ‘‘  a sort  of  loose  Jacket  which  the  prisoner  was 
wearing  when  she  awakened  the  witness  at  four  in  the  morning 
and  asked  her  to  go  for  the  doctor;  it  was  an  ordinary  light 
walking  dress,  only  differing  in  colour  from  the  one  she  was  wear- 
ing the  night  before. 

Ann  Boulter,  a charwoman,  employed  by  the  undertakers  to 
lay  out  the  deceased’s  body,  gave  some  particulars  of  a conversa- 
tion which  she  had  with  the  prisoner  while  engaged  on  that  duty. 
To  the  witness’s  inquiry  as  to  whether  her  husband  had  died  in 
a fit,  she  replied,  No,  poor  dear,  he  suffered  very  much  with  his 
head,  also  his  teeth  for  some  time.”  The  prisoner  further  re- 
marked that  it  was  ” funny”  or  “ curious  ” that  he  should  have 
made  his  will  only  a day  or  two  before  his  death.  The  witness 
agreed  that  it  was  ” odd,”  and  asked  whether  it  was  in  her 
favour.”  To  that  her  reply  was  ” Tes.”  In  cross-examination, 
the  witness  adhered  to  her  statement  that  the  words  which  the 
prisoner  used  were  ” a day  or  two  previous  to  his  death,”  not, 
as  Mr.  Clarke  suggested,  ” two  or  three  months.” 

After  Dr.  W.  Clapton,  medical  officer  to  the  British  Equitable 
Insurance  Company,  had  deposed  to  examining  the  deceased  on 
16th  November,  1880,  and  passing  him  as  a first-class  life,  Mr, 
Dyson  was  called.  Under  examination  by  Mr.  Poland,  the  witness 
recounted  how  he  made  the  acquaintance  of  the  Bartletts  at  Merton, 
how  Mr.  Bartlett  invited  him  to  superintend  his  wife’s  studies, 
and  how  he  soon  became  their  intimate  friend.  He  told  the  story 
of  his  visits  to  Dover,  and  related  how  the  deceased  insisted  upon 
paying  his  railway  fare.  So  far  as  he  knew,  the  Bartletts  all 
that  time  were  living  together  on  the  ordinary  terms  of  husband 
and  wife.  During  the  deceased’s  stay  at  Dover,  the  witness 
received  this  letter  from  him:— 

Dov6r> 

Dear  George,— Permit  me  to  say  that  I feel  great  pleasure  in  thus 
addressing  you  for  the  first  time.  To  me  it  is  a privilege  to  think  that  I 
am  allowed  to  fed  towa^  as  a brother,  and  I hope  our  friendship  may 
lapen^^  on  without  anytHng  to  mar  its  future  brightness.  Would 

that  I could  find  words  to  express  my  thankfulieess  to  you  the  very 
lovmg  letter  you  sent  Adelaide  to-day.  It  would  have  done  anybody  good 


Introduction 


to  see  her  overflowing  with  joy  as  she  read  it  whilst  walking  along  the 
street  and,  afterwards,  as  she  read  it  to  me.  I felt  my  heart  going  out 
to  you.  I long  to  tell  you  how  proud  1 feel  at  the  thought  I should  soon 
be  able  to  dasp  the  hand  of  the  man  who  from  his  heart  could  pen  such  noble 
thoughts.  Who  can  help  loving  you?  I felt  that  I must  say  two  words, 
Tlunk  you,*’  and  my  desire  to  do  so  is  my  excuse  for  troubling  you  with 
this.  Liking  towards  the  future  with  joyfulness, 

I am,  yours  affectionately, 

Edwin. 

To  that  the  witness  replied  as  follows : — 


18  Parkfields, 

Putney,  September  23kd,  1885. 

My  dear  Edwin, — Thank  you  very  much  for  the  brotherly  letter  you 
sent  me  yesterday.  I am  sure  1 respond  from  my  heart  to  your  wish  that 
our  friendship  may  ripen  with  the  lapse  of  time,  and  I do  so  with  confidence, 
for  I feel  that  our  friendship  is  founded  on  a firm,  abiding  basis — ^trust  and 
esteem.  I have  from  a boy  been  ever  longing  for  the  confidence  and  trust 
of  others.  1 have  never  been  so  perfectly  happy  as  when  in  possession  of 
this.  It  is  in  this  respect,  among  many  others,  that  you  have  shown 
yourself  a true  friend.  You  have  thanked  me,  and  now  I thank  you,  yet 
I ought  to  confess  that  I read  your  warm  and  generous  letter  with  a kind 
of  half-fear — a fear  lest  you  should  ever  be  disappointed  in  me  and  find  me 
a far  more  prosy,  matter-of-fact  creature  than  you  expect.  Thank  you, 
moreover,  for  the  telegram,  it  was  very  considerate  to  send  it.  I am 
looking  forward  with  much  pleasure  to  next  week.  Thus  far  I have  been 
able  to  stave  off  any  work,  and  trust  to  be  able  to  keep  it  dear.  Dear 
old  Dover,  it  will  ever  possess  a pleasant  memory  for  me  in  my  mind  and 
a warm  place  in  my  heart.  With  very  kind  regards,  believe  me, 


Yours  affectionately. 


Gbobue. 


When  the  Bartletts  moved  to  Claverton  Street  the  deceased 
presented  the  witness  with  a season  ticket  from  Putney  to 
Waterloo.  He  constantly  went  to  see  them.  On  one  of  his  first 
visits  he  remarked  to  the  ^prisoner  that  it  was  strange  that  her 
husband  should  wish  to  throw  them  so  much  together.  She  told 
him  that  the  deceased  did  not  expect  to  live  long,  and  that  his 
friends  were  not  kindly  disposed  towards  her.  He  had  great 
confidence  in,  and  affection  for,  the  witness,  and  wished  him  to  be 
her  guardian.  Either  on  that  occasion  or  a little  later  the  witness 
inquired  the  nature  of  the  ailment  which  was  ^ortening  the 
deceased’s  life.  The  prisoner  replied  that  it  was  an  internal 
complaint,”  from  which  he  had  suffered  for  about  six  years.  **  He 
was  very  sensitive  about  this  affliction,”  and  on  that  account 
” had  no  regular  doctor  to  attend  him.”  She  told  him  subse- 
quently that  this  complaint  caused  him  great  pain,  and  that  to 
soothe  him  she  was  in  the  habit  of  administering  dhloroform. 

35 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


She  had  on  the  deceased’s  behalf  sought  the  advice  of  Dr.  Nichols, 
of  Fopstone  Boad.  The  nurse,  Annie  Walker,  attended  him,  and 
brought  him  whatever  medicine  he  required.  She  also  sxipplied 
the  prisoner  with  chloroform.  The  witness  was  interested  in  Dr. 
Nichols,  and  asked  the  prisoner  some  questions  about  him.  He 
could  not  recollect  what  she  said,  but  he  did  remember  that  she 
told  him  that  Dr.  Nichols  had  expressed  the  opinion  that  her  hus- 
band “ might  die  within  twelve  months.”  As  far  as  the  witness 
could  judge,  the  deceased  appeared  to  be  in  good  health.  He, 
nevertheless,  noticed  that  he  sometimes  placed  his  hand  to  his 
side  “ convulsively.”  The  deceased  once  said  to  the  witness  that 


he  suffered  severely  from  dyspepsia. 

The  circumstances  in  which  the  witness  came  to  buy  the 
chloroform  formed  the  next  subject  of  inquiry.  The  prisoner 
talked  of  her  husband’s  internal  complaint  to  explain  her  desire 
to  obtain  some.  Annie  Walker,  who  always  procured  it  for  her, 
was,  she  said,  in  America.  The  witness  then  proceeded  to 
describe  how,  in  order  to  supply  himself  with  the  amount  which 
he  required,  he  went  to  three  different  chemists’  shops.  Having 
thus  ^ught  four  small  bottles  of  the  drug,  he  poured  the  whole 
quantity  into  a 6-ounce  medicine  bottle,  and  on  the  following 
day,  Tuesday,  29th  December,  gave  it  to  the  prisoner  as  they  were 
walking  together  by  the  river.  On  that  day  and  on  the  two  fol- 
lowing  days  he  saw  the  deceased,  who  appeared  decidedly  better, 
although  he  still  complained  of  sleeplessness.  The  last  time  the 
witness  saw  him  alive  was  on  Thursday,  the  31st.  He  was  pre- 
paring  to  go  to  the  dentist,  and  the  prisoner  said  in  his  presence 
that  tile  doctor  had  told  her  that  necrosis  of  the  jaw  was  setting 
he  received  a letter  from  her  apprising  him 
of  her  husband’s  death,  and  asking  him  to  come  to  see  her  " in 
the  middle  of  the  morning  ” of  the  following  day. 

« ^he  witness  arrived  at  Claverton  Street  about  half-past  eleven 
on  Saturday  morning,  2nd  January,  and  stayed  to  hear  the  result 

wlii"  ^en  he  first  saw  the  prisoner  she  inquired 

whether  he  did  not  think  “it  was  sudden.”  and  he  replied 

thrSffS'^  • she  had  been  awakened  in 

£tor®^!h!^  a.pam  in  her  arm  and  found  her  husband  dead.  The 

opinion  that  he  must  have  ruptured  a 
efte?  ® the  heart.  The  witness  then  related  Imw, 

^ accompanying  the  prisdaer 
^^tteews  houre  at  Dulwich,  he  asked  her  alteut  the^chloroi 

that  the  bottle  was  intaotfand 
tamated  that  she  muet  not  be  worried  about  it.”  On  Moa<ky 


Introduction 


4th  January,  he  oalled  on  Di*.  Leach,  and  in  consequence  of  what 
he  told  him  went  down  to  Dulwich  and  saw  the  prisoner.  When 
he  mentioned  the  chloroform  she  became  very  angry,  and,  stamping 
upon  the  floor,  exclaimed,  Oh,  damn  the  chloroform.*'  By 
Mrs.  Matthews'  advice  he  soon  after  left  the  house,  but  he  went 
back  in  the  evening  and  told  the  prisoner  that  he  should  make 
a clean  breast  of  it  *'  at  the  inquest.  She  sought  to  dissuade  him 
from  carrying  out  his  intention.  In  the  course  of  their  talk  he 
returned  to  her  her  husband's  gold  watch  which  she  had  given  him 
at  Glaverton  Street  on  the  previous  Saturday.  She  told  the  witness 
on  that  occasion  that  it  was  her  husband’s  wish  that  ‘‘  I should 
have  that  watch  in  memory  of  him  when  he  was  gone."  Witness 
at  the  same  time  gave  her  four  pounds,  the  balance  of  a cheque 
which  he  had  cashed  for  her  some  three  weeks  earlier.  Mr.  Dyson's 
examination-in-chief  concluded  with  his  account  of  the  strange 
words  used  by  the  prisoner  in  the  confectioner's  shop  on  7th 
January,  and  of  his  subsequent  interview  with  her  on  9th  January 
when,  after  asking  indignantly  why  he  did  not  charge  her  out- 
right with  murdering  her  husband,  she  proceeded  to  relate  how 
she  had  poured  the  chloroform  out  of  the  window  of  the  railway 
carriage.  It  was  on  Sunday,  3rd  January,  that  he  threw  away  the 
chloroform  bottles  on  Wandsworth  Common.  He  afterwards 
pointed  out  to  the  police  the  spot  at  which  he  had  disposed  of 
them.  He  had  been  under  the  impression  that  the  rules  of  his 
body  debarred  him  from  marrying  for  two  years  after  his  entry 
into  the  ministry;  but  he  was  mistaken.  One  year  was  the  pre* 
scribed  time,  and  it  was  therefore  open  to  him  to  marry  " next 
October  or  thereabouts." 

Mr.  Clarke,  as  may  be  supposed,  had  given  the  most  careful 
consideration  to  the  difficult  and  delicate  task  which  now  con- 
fronted him.  Were  he  to « drive  Mr.  Dyson  too  hard,  it  was  to 
be  feared  that  he  would  seek  to  extricate  himself  from  an  awkward 
position  by  saying  something  very  damaging  to  the  defence.  On 
the  other  hand,  it  was  out  of  the  question  to  accept  his  story  as 
true  and  allow  his  statements  to  pass  unchallenged.  The  learned 
counsel,  therefore,  decided  to  treat  him  in  a friendly  spirit  and 
associate  his  actions  as  far  as  possible  with  those  of  his  client. 
Under  these  conditions  the  witness  would  have  no  excuse  for 
further  incriminating  the  prisoner,  and,  at  the  same  time,  the 
natural  reluctance  of  the  jury  to  consign  her  to  her  doom  while 
he  passed  away  to  freedom  would  be  greatly  strengthened.^  With 

^ Sir  B.  Clarke,  The  Story  of  My  Life,"  p.  250;  OomhUl  MagassiMf 
December,  1920,  " Leaves  from  a Lawyer’s  Case  Book,"  p,  16. 


37 


Adelaide  Bardett. 


thia  in  his  mind  Mr.  Clarke  opened  his  cross-examination.  The 
first  suggestion,  the  witness  admitted,  that  she  had  administered 
chloroform  to  her  husband  came  from  the  prisoner  herself.  At 
his  last  interview  with  her,  at  the  Matthews'  house,  on  the  evening 
of  9th  January,  she  inquired  indignantly  why  he  did  not  charge 
her  outright  " with  giving  it  to  him.  There  was  no  secret  under- 
standing between  the  prisoner  and  himself  about  their  future 
marriage.  No  impropriety  of  conduct  took  place  between  them, 
but  he  had  kissed  her  both  in  and  out  of  her  husband’s  presonce. 
All  through  the  deceased's  illness  at  Claverton  Street  the  witness 
and  the  prisoner  were  anxious  for  his  welfare  and  tried  to  serve 
him."  Until  he  was  examined  before  the  coroner  he  was  under 
the  impression  that  by  the  rules  of  his  body  he  could  not  marry 
before  October,  1887.  It  was  very  probable,  therefore,  that,  at 
fiome  time  or  another,  he  did  tell  the  prisoner  that  he  could  not 
marry  for  two  years.  He  had  on  occasions  discussed  marriage  in 
general  with  the  deceased.  The  deceased  inquired  of  him  whether 
the  teaching  of  the  Bible  was  distinctly  in  favour  of  a man  having 
only  one  wife.  The  suggestion  which  he  made  was  that  there 
might  be  " a wife  for  companionship  and  one  for  service."  The 
witness  told  him  that  ho  would  find  no  sanction  for  any  arrange- 
ment of  that  kind  in  the  Bible.  In  reply  to  the  learned  judge, 
the  witness  said  that  he  was  not  certain  " whether  the  deceased 
meant  that  both  were  to  be  his  bedfellows."  But  he  rather  gathered 
that  both  were  to  be  his  wives  in  " a full  and  complete  sense." 
The  witness  regarded  it  as  a remarkable  suggestion.  He  did  not 
ascribe  it  to  moral  obliquity,  rather  to  "oddity."  "Was  it 
not  an  unwholesome  sort  of  talk?  " asked  Mr.  Justice  Wills.  " Not 
coming  from  him,  my  lord,"  replied  the  witness;  " he  was  a man 
who  had  some  strafe  ideas."  "Was  this  said  seriously," 
inquired  the  learned  judge,  " or  was  t|pie  man  speaking  in  jest!  " 

" It  was  said,"  stated  the  witness,  " tentatively,  half-playfully  the 
first  time,  but  I have  a recollection  of  his  speaking  more  seriously 
of  it  on  some  later  occasion." 

While  at  Dover  the  deceased  told  the  witness  that  " he  was 
no  longer  the  strong  man  he  once  was."  He  ascribed  his  failing 
health  to  overoork.  The  witness  could  not  swear  that  the  prisoner 
did  not  say  in  the  deceased's  presence  at  Dover  that  his  life  would 
not  be  a long  one.  He  rather  thought,  however,  that  the  incident 
took  place  in  Claverton  Street,  The  witness  and  the  deceaeed 
were  on  the  closest  terms  of  intimacy.  They  were  " as  brother 
to  brother."  The  deceased  often  talked  to  the  witness  about 

books,  but  he  never  mentioned  " Esoteric  Anthropology;  or  the 
38 


Introduction. 


Mysteries  of  Man.’’  Nor  had  he  ever  heard  him  speak  of  Dr. 
Nichols.  The  deceased,  said  the  witness,  spoke  in  a manner 
which  left  no  doubt  that  he  contemplated  Mrs.  Bartlett  and 
myself  being  ultimately  married.”  At  this  point  Mr.  Justice 
Wills  intervened  with  the  request  that  he  would  be  ” a little  more 
definite.”  He  doubted  whether  there  was  a man  in  Court  who 
had  ever  had  experience  of  so  remarkable  a statement.  ” On  one 
occasion,”  answered  the  witness,  ” when  the  deceased  was  finding 
fault  with  his  wife  for  some  trifiing  fault,  I said,  ‘ If  ever  she  comes 
under  my  care,  1 shall  have  to  teach  her  differently.’  The  de- 
ceased smiled  and  said  something  to  the  efiect  that  he  had  no 
doubt  that  I should  take  good  care  of  her.”  Both  his  lordship 
and  Mr.  Clarke,  however,  insisted  that  language  of  that  kind 
could  hardly  have  been  used  unless  there  had  been  a previous 
understanding  between  them.  There  was  the  letter,  said  the 
witness,  which  the  deceased  wrote  him  from  Dover,  and  that  he 
admitted  was  the  outcome  of  a conversation  at  Putney  which  he 
showed  great  reluctance  to  repeat.  But  on  his  lordship  exclaim- 
ing ” we  have  long  ago  overstepped  the  bounds  of  delicacy,” 
he  told  the  following  story.  While  the  deceased  was  staying  at 
Dover  he  called  upon  the  witness  at  Putney  and  informed  him  that 
he  had  made  a will  leaving  everything  to  his  wife  and  appointing 
him  an  executor.  In  return  for  this  proof  of  confidence  in  him, 
the  witness  said  that  he  was  growing  very  attached  to  Mrs.  Bart- 
lett, that  it  was  disturbing  him  in  his  work,  and  that  he  thought 
it  would  be  well  for  him  to  discontinue  his  friendship  with  her. 
The  deceased  replied,  ” Why  should  you  discontinue  it?  ” He 
assured  the  witness  that  he  had  been  ” a great  benefit  ” to  her. 
She  liked  his  preaching,  and,  showing  him  one  of  her  letters,  a 
very  devotional  letter,  which  she  had  written  from  her  convent, 
said  ” he  should  like  me  to^endeavour  to  lead  her  back  more  closely 
to  that  frame  of  mind  or  disposition  of  heart.  He  said  he  had 
confidence  in  me,  and  that  he  should  be  pleased  if  1 would  con- 
tinue as  friendly  as  1 had  been  with  them.”  Not  on  that  occasion, 
but  soon  afterwards  at  Olaverton  Street,  the  deceased  said  to  him 
in  relation  to  his  wife,  ” if  anything  happens  to  me,  you  two  may 
come  together.” 

On  his  oath,  Mrs.  Bartlett  never  told  him  that  Annie  Walker 
had  nursed  her  in  her  confinement.  What  she  did  say  was  that 
Annie  Walker  attended  her  husband.  The  name  of  Dr.  Nichols 
was  never  mentioned  in  the  presence  of  the  deceased.  The 
prisoner  warned  him  not  to  speak  to  her  husband  about  him, 
because  of  his  sensitiveness  about  his  internal  affiiction.  The 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


witness  understood  that,  without  actually  seeing  the  deceased,  Dr. 
Nichols  was  in  the  habit  of  prescribing  for  him.  When  the  de*- 
ceased  was  taken  ill  at  Claverton  Street,  the  witness  saw  Dr. 
Leach.  He  was  then  on  terms  of  “ honest  and  true  friendship  " 
with  the  deceased,  but  he  never  said  to  Dr.  Leach  that  it  “ would 
be  as  well  for  him  to  see  Dr.  Nichols.”  He  should  have  considered 


a suggestion  of  that  kind  as  ” an  impertinence.”  He  really  meant 
that.  All  through  his  illness  at  Claverton  Street  the  deceased 
complained  of  pain  and  sleeplessness.  He  was  often  very  de- 
pj-essed,  and  the  witness  had  seen  him  cry.  On  the  Sunday  before 
his  death  he  asked  the  witness  ” whether  any  one  could  be  lower 
than  he  was  without  passing  away  altogether.”  At  Merton  the 
witness  had  some  conversation  with  the  deceased  about  mesmerism. 
The  deceased  never  told  him  that  on  the  night  of  28th  December 
“ he  got  up  and  stood  for  two  hours  waving  his  hands  over  his 
sleeping  wife.”  The  witness  never  said  to  the  prisoner  that  he 
would  marry  her  on  her  husband’s  death.  There  was  no  more 
than  an  understanding  that,  at  some  time  or  another,  he  and  she 
might  come  together.”  When  the  witness  bought  the  chloro- 
form he  had  not  the  faintest  idea  that  it  would  be  used  for  an 


improper  purpose.  He  had  seen  the  prisoner  with  Squire’s  **  Com- 
panion to  the  British  Pharmacopoeia  ” in  her  hands.  He  under- 
stood that  the  chloroform  was  to  be  sprinkled  upon  a handker- 
chief. He  believed  that  it  could  be  used  without  danger  in  that 
way.  He  knew  very  little  about  chloroform,  and  had  never  seen 
it  administered.  He  did  not  say  anything  to  the  deceased  about 
the  matter,  because  he  had  been  told  that  the  disease  for  which 
the  chloroform  was  required  was  never  to  be  mentioned  to  him. 
When  he  arrived  at  Claverton  Street  with  the  chloroform  the 
Bartletts  had  a visitor.  Had  they  been  alone  it  is  possible  that 
he  might  have  given  the  prisoner  tfee  bottle  in  her  husband’s 
presence.  He  was  not  prepared  to  say  for  certain  what  he  might 
have  done.  The  Bartletts  always  called  him  ” George,”  and  he 
addressed  Mrs.  Bartlett  as  ” Adelaide.”  When  he  saw  the  prieonar 
on  Monday,  4th  January,  at  the  Matthews’,  he  did  not  tell  her 
that,  on  the  previous  day,  he  had  thrown  away  the  chloroform 
bottle  on  Wandsworth  Common.  It  did  not  occur  to  him  to 

anxiety  and  distress.” 
He  threw  the  bottles  away  in  a panic;  the  sight  of  them  was  hateful. 
His  motive  was  not  self-protection.  He  exclaimed  ” he  was  a 

happened.”  He  would  be 

Ti+fc  interview, 

although  It  did  not  occur  to  him  to  tell  the  prisoner  that  he  Sa 


Introduction 


thrown  away  the  empty  chloroform  bottles,  it  did  occur  to  him 
to  ask  her  for  a piece  of  poetry  which  he  had  addressed  to  her  a few 
weeks  earlier.  So  far  as  he  could  remember,  she  gave  it  back  to 
him,  torn  in  pieces,  on  the  following  Saturday,  9th  January. 

Incidentally  it  may  be  mentioned  that  this  poem  which  the 
witness  was  so  anxious  to  retrieve  was  never  produced  in  Court. 
The  following  verse  which  Mr.  Clarke  had  committed  to  memory, 
in  case  he  should  need  to  quote  it,  may  be  taken  as  a fair 
measure  of  its  literary  quality  as  a whole : — 

Who  IS  it  that  hath  burst  the  door, 

Unclosed  the  heart  that  shut  before, 

And  set  her  queen-like  on  its  throne, 

And  made  its  homage  all  her  own — 

My  Birdie. 

Mrs.  Bartlett,  said  the  witness,  was  not  the  only  person  who 
had  counselled  him  to  say  nothing  about  the  chloroform.  Mr. 
Matthews  suggested  that  he  should  await  the  result  of  the  analysis, 
and  he  took  his  advice.  In  his  re-examination  of  the  witness, 
Mr.  Poland,  referring  to  the  interview  at  Putney,  invited  him  to 
describe  in  greater  detail  the  eiSect  which  the  deceased  suggested 
his  preaching  had  had  upon  his  wife.  He  did  not  describe  the 
particular  way,’’  replied  the  witness,  but  thought  it  had  benefited 
her,  since  you  ask  the  question,  in  a spiritual  way.”  In  answer 
to  his  lordship,  the  witness  said  that  he  went  to  three  difierent 
shops  to  buy  the  chloroform,  because  he  did  not  expect  to  obtain 
all  he  required  at  one.  He  did  not  say  to  the  first  man,  ” I want 
four  or  five  times  that  amount,”  because  he  did  not  wish  ” to 
enter  into  a long  explanation.”  The  shopman  ” would  not  under- 
stand that  Mrs.  Bartlett  was  skilled  in  the  use  of  medicines.”  It 
was  also  to  avoid  explanations  that  he  led  the  chemists  to  suppose 
that  the  chloroform  was  ^o  be  used  for  the  removal  of  grease 
spots. 

At  the  opening  of  the  proceedings  on  the  third  day  the  three 
chemists,  John  Hamble,  Thomas  Penrose,  and  Joseph  Mellin,  were 
called  to  prove  Mr.  Dyson’s  purchase  of  chloroform  on  28th 
Deceml)er,  and,  when  their  evidence  was  concluded,  Mrs.  Matthews 
went  into  the  witness-box.  She  had  known  the  Bartletts  intimately 
for  three  and  a half  years.  In  July,  1885,  she  and  her  husband 
stayed  for  a week  with  them  at  The  Cottage,  Merton.  The  Bart- 
letts appeared  to  live  together  on  very  aSectionate  terms.  Mr. 
Bartlett’s  health  was,  so  far  as  the  witness  knew,  very  good.  On 
the  morning  of  1st  January  she  went  to  Glaverton  Street  in  con- 
sequence of  a telegram  which  she  had  received  from  the  prisoner. 

il 


Adelaide  Bartlett, 


She  saw  the  body  in  the  front  room.  The  prisoner  told  her  how 
she  had  found  her  husband  dead  in  the  early  morning.  Witness 
inquired  what  he  died  of.  She  said,  ” We  do  not  know;  there 
must  be  a post-mortem.’^  On  the  evening  of  the  following  day 
the  prisoner  came  to  stay  with  her.  The  rooms  in  Claverion  Street 
were,  she  explained,  to  be  sealed  up,  because  the  doctors  were  not 
agreed  as  to  the  cause  of  death.  The  witness  then  descrilied  the 
angry  scene  between  the  prisoner  and  Mr.  Dyson  on  4th  January, 
which  terminated  in  his  leaving  the  house  exclaiming  that  ho  was 
**  a ruined  man.”  After  that  she  related  how  on  the  following 
Wednesday,  6th  January,  she  went  up  to  London  with  the  prisoner 
and  Mr.  Dyson,  with  whom  she  had  a private  conversation  in  Dr. 
Leach’s  waiting  room.  The  witness  then  went  on  to  tell  the  story 
of  the  interview  of  9th  January,  in  the  course  of  which  the 
prisoner  indignantly  repudiated  Mr.  Dyson’s  suspicions,  and 
stated  that  she  had  poured  the  chloroform  out  of  the  railway 
carriage  window  on  6th  January.  Peckham  Rye  pond,  into  which 
the  prisoner  said  that  she  had  thrown  the  bottle,  was,  to  the  best 
of  the  witness’s  belief,  frozen  over  on  6th  January,  Some  boys 
were  certainly  sliding  at  one  end  of  it.  Either  on  9th  Jantiary, 
or  on  the  following  Monday,  11th  January,  the  witness  had  a talk 
with  the  prisoner  about  the  conversation  which  she  had  had  with 
Mr.  Dyson  at  Dr.  Leach’s.  She  asked  the  prisoner  why  she  had 
told  Mr.  Dyson  so  many  lies.  She  said  that  ” he  bothered  so. 
He  did  not  believe  her  when  she  spoke  the  truth.”  The  truth  was 
that  her  husband  did  not  expect  to  live  long.  It  was  a fact,  the 
prisoner  assured  her,  ” that  Edwin  did  think  latterly  that  he  was 
going  to  die.”  After  the  prisoner  went  to  live  in  Weymouth 
Street  she  several  times  came  to  see  the  witness.  On  one  of  these 
occasions,  on  20th  January,  she  told  the  witness  and  her  husband  that 
” she  had  asked  Dr.  Leach  about  giving  Edwin  chloroform,  and 
that  he  had  told  her  that  she  could  not  possibly  have  given  him 
chloroform,  ^ause  it  would  have  shown  in  his  brain,  if  she  had 
given^  it  to  him  by  inhalation,  and  that,  if  she  had  given  it  to  him 
to  drink,  it  would  have  burnt  his  throat  all  down,  and  his  screams 
would  have  alarmed  the  house.” 

Mr.  Matthews,  who  followed  his  wife  into  the  witness-box, 
stated  that,  up  to  his  last  illnessi,  Mr.  Bartlett’s  health  had  been 
good.  He  had  never  heard  him  express  any  peculiar  ideas.  So 
far  as  he  could  jud^,  the  Bartletts  lived  together  as  man  and 
wife.  The  witness  visited  the  deceased  once  during  his  illness  on 
16th  December,  ” He  seemed  very  prostrated.”  The  prisoner 
said  that  he  was  suffering  from  ” slight  mercurial  poisoning, 
42 


Introduction. 


also  from  verdigris.'*  She  suggested  that  he  might  have  got  it 
from  moving  things  in  the  warehouse;  he  had  been  hunting  rats." 
On  Sunday,  3rd  January,  while  the  prisoner  was  his  guest  at 
Dulwich,  the  witness  discussed  with  her  the  circumstances  of  her 
husband's  death.  He  inquired  whether  it  were  possible  that  the 
deceased  might  have  “ taken  poison  himself."  She  replied  that 
" she  did  not  think  that  there  were  any  poisons  in, the  house."  The 
doctors,  she  said,  perceived  a small  bottle  of  chlorodyne  at  the 
post-mortem  which  could,  in  Dr.  Leach's  opinion,  " be  accounted 
for  by  her  husband  having  used  chlorodyne."  The  witness  told 
her  that  he  had  heard  that  they  had  also>  noticed  a smell  of  garlic. 
Did  she  think  that  " he  could  have  got  any  arsenic  " ? Her  reply 
was  **  No."  On  returning  from  business,  on  the  evening  of  6th 
January,  the  witness  had  a long  conversation  with  Mr.  Dyson  in 
the  road  between  Peckham  Rye  Station  and  his  house.  The  witness 
then  gave  the  same  account  as  his  wife  of  the  interview  between 
Mr.  Dyson  and  the  prisoner  on  9th  January,  and  of  the  visit  which 
the  prisoner  paid  them  on  20ih  January,  when  she  told  them 
that  she  could  by  no  possibility  have  given  chloroform  to  her 
husband.  The  deceased,  the  witness  stated  in  cross-examination, 
never  talked  to  him  about  medical  matters  or  mesmerism,  nor  had 
he  ever  communicated  to  him  any  strange  ideas  about  matrimony. 
The  prisoner  some  two  years  ago  showed  him  Dr,  Nichols'  book. 
He  did  not  read  it — " It  was  scarcely  in  my  line  of  business." 
When  re-examined  he  said  that  he  knew  nothing  of  Dr.  Nichols, 
and  " had  never  seen  Mr.  Bartlett  with  his  book." 

Annie  Walker  described  how,  in  1881,  she  was  recommended 
by  Mrs.  Nichols  and  went  to  nurse  the  prisoner  in  her  confine- 
ment. She  related  how  the  deceased  was  reluctant  that  a doctor 
should  be  called  in,  and  how  the  child  was  born  dead.  During 
one  of  her  subsequent  visits,  the  prisoner  said  " that  she  never 
meant  to  have  any  more  "children."  The  witness  then  recounted 
the  conversations  in  which  the  prisoner  spoke  of  her  husband's  lack 
of  appreciation  of  her  work,  and  complained  that  he  had  stipulated 
in  his  will  that  she  must  not  re-marry.  The  witness  did  not  know 
Dr.  Nichols,  but  she  had  seen  his  book  lying  about  at  the  Bart- 
letts'.  She  had  never  talked  to  the  prisoner  about  chloroform, 
and  had  never  bought  any  for  her.  She  had  never  been  in  America, 
and  had  never  attended  Mr.  Bartlett.  In  reply  to  Mr.  Clarke, 
she  said  that  no  chloroform  was  used  at  the  prisoner's  confine- 
ment. The  prisoner  was  always  most  attentive  to  her  husband. 
**  She  would  get  up  very  early  and  see  that  he  had  his  breakfast 
before  he  staited  out."  There  was  nothing  unusual  in  a woman 

43 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 

saying  that  “ she  hopes  never  to  have  another  child.’’  In  her  re- 
examination she  stated  that,  so  far  as  she  knew,  the  Bartletts 
always  occupied  the  same  room  and  slept  in  the  same  bed.  That 
was  the  state  of  affairs  when  she  stayed  with  them  at  The  Cottage 
in  October,  1884. 

Dr.  Thomas  Low  Nichols,  the  author  of  “ Esoteric  Anthro- 
pology,” stated  that  he  was  not  entitled  to  practise  in  England. 
He  had  never  seen  the  prisoner  until  he  saw  her  at  Westminster 
Police  Court.  He  knew  nobody  of  the  name  of  Bartlett  in  this 
country.  He  had  never  said  that  anybody  “ of  the  name  of  Bart- 
lett would  die  within  twelve  months.”  In  cross-examination  Mi\ 
Clarke  elicited  that  he  kept  no  record  of  any  patients  who  visited 
him  in  England. 

Mr.  Thomas  Eoberts,  a dentist,  deposed  that  in  December, 
1886,  he  was  called  in  to  attend  to  the  deceased.  He  visited  him 
on  three  occasions,  and  removed  some  seventeen  loose  stumps.  On 
31st  December  the  deceased  came  to  the  witness’s  house  with  Dr, 
Leach.  The  doctor  administei‘ed  gas,  and  the  witness  extracted 
a tooth.  The  witness  noticed  the  bad  condition  of  the  deceased’s 
lower  jaw,  and,  pointing  it  out  to  Dr.  Leach,  said,  **  This  looks 
very  like  necrosis  setting  in.”  The  disease  was  not  deep  seated. 
It  was  only  commencing.”  Eeplying  to  Mr,  Clarke,  the  witness 
said  that  three  or  four  minutes  elapsed  before  the  gas  took  com- 
plete effect.  Two  minutes  were  generally  sufficient.  His  remark 
about  the  necrosis  was  made  in  the  hearing  of  the  deceased. 

The  deposition  of  Dr.  Green  at  the  Westminster  Police  Court 
and  his  subsequent  cross-examination  by  Mr.  Beal  and  Mr.  Lick- 
fold  were  now  put  in  and  read.  Very  briefly  they  amounted  to 
this.  The  post-mortem  on  the  deceased  was  carried  out  under 
the  witness’s  direction  on  2nd  January,  1886.  The  stomach  wa« 
removed  and  placed  with  its  contents  in  large  glass  jars.  They 
emitted  a strong  smell  of  chloroform  and  garlic.  The  whole  of 
the  stomach  was  slightly  inflamed.  The  vital  organs — the  heart, 
the  lungs,  and  the  liver — ^were  in  a healthy  condition.  The  brain, 
the  iarnyx,  the  trachea,  and  the  kidneys  were  examined,  and  no 
trace  of  disease  was  found  in  them.  The  fluidity  of  the  blood  Was 
abnormal.  In  the  jaw  traces  of  slight  necrosis  were  apparent. 
The  oonclusion  which  the  witness  formed  was  that  death 
probahly  due  to  the  contents  of  the  stomach.  He  got  a notion  of 
chloroform  ^ d stomach  was  opened.  Before  that  no  one 

■had  suggested  to  him  the  presence  of  chloroform.  The  smell  of 
chlorodyne  is  not  as  pungent  as  the  sm&  which  isened  from  tlte 


Introduction. 


deceased^s  stomach.  It  was  as  strong  as  that  of  ‘‘a  freshly 
opened  bottle  of  chloroform. 

Dr.  Leach,  who  proved  a tiresome  witness,  was  then  called. 
His  self-consciousness,  which  was  very  pronounced,  led  him  to 
qualify  his  answers  and  enter  unasked  into  explanations  of  his 
statements.  The  Attorney-General,  who  conducted  his  examina- 
tion, began  by  inquiring  into  the  medical  history  of  the  deceased’s 
illness  in  Claverton  Street.  In  reply  to  his  questions,  the  witness 
related  how  from  10th  December  until  the  day  of  his  death  he  was 
in  constant  attendance  upon  him.  He  described  the  opinion 
which  he  formed  of  his  condition,  and  the  treatment  which  he  pre- 
scribed in  consequence.  He  explained  the  circumstances  in  which 
Dr.  Dudley  was  called  in,  and  narrated  how  the  prisoner  told 
him  that  ‘‘  unless  her  husband  were  soon  to  get  better  his  friends 
would  say  that  she  was  poisoning  him.”  This  remark,  said  the 
witness,  “ extraordinary  as  it  was,  made  little  effect  on  me.  I 
hear  many  strange  things,  and  I thought  it  referred  to  the  mer- 
curialism  I had  found  on  my  first  visit.”  The  last  time  he  saw 
the  deceased  alive  was  on  31st  December,  outside  the  dentist’s 
house  in  Charlwood  Street.  By  that  time  he  had  almost  re- 
covered from  his  indisposition,  and  there  was  no  longer  any 
reason  for  the  witness  to  continue  to  visit  him  professionally.  Soon 
after  four  o’clock,  the  next  morning,  the  Doggetts’  servant  came 
round  with  the  news  that  he  was  dead.  The  witness  went  at  once 
to  Claverton  Street.  On  entering  the  room  he  perceived  that 
naturally  close  odour  of  a sleeping  room,  the  odour  of  supper 
and  of  condiments,  and  of  brandy  and  of  gas.”  The  deceased 
was  lying  upon  his  back.  His  mouth  was  open.  There  was  no 
smell  about  it,  nor  was  there  any  froth  upon  the  lips.  The 
witness  was  totally  at  a loss  to  account  for  his  death,  and  he  pro- 
ceeded to  relate  how  he  searched  the  room  and  how  he  questioned 
the  prisoner  about  the  possibility  of  his  having  obtained  poison. 
At  ihe  time  he  attached  importance  to  the  discovery  of  a bottle 
of  ohlorodyne,  but  he  had  now  entirely  given  up  the  theory  that 
it  might  have  been  the  cause  of  death,  because  the  analysis 
proved  the  absence  of  the  other  ingredients  of  chlorodyne.  I am 
sorry,”  he  added,  ” that  I ever  entertained  it.”  He  was  not 
aware  on  let  January  that  the  prisoner  had  in  her  possession  a 
large  quantity  of  chloroform.  He  only  learnt  that  twenty-six  days 
later. 

The  post-mortem  examination,  on  2nd  January,  was  per- 
formed by  Dr.  Green,  Dr.  Murray,  Dr.  Dudley,  and  Dr.  Gheyne. 
The  witness  himself  took  notes,  which  he  was  now  requested  to 

45 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


read.  These  showed  that  all  the  vital  organs  were  in  a healthy 
state,  and  that  the  only  abnormalisms  were  the  appearance 
of  the  stomach  and  the  fluidity  of  the  blood.  Subsequently,  at  the 
request  of  his  colleagues,  he  communicated  the  result  of  their 
investigations  to  the  family  and  friends  of  the  deceased.  When 
inviting  them  to  come  upstairs  to  meet  the  doctors,  he  disclosed 
certain  facts  to  the  prisoner.  He  told  her  that  the  contents  of 
the  stomach  emitted  ''  a pungent  ethereal  odour/'  and,  not  im- 
probably, added,  Dr.  Green  suggests  chloroform."  His  own 
opinion,  said  the  witness,  and  he  communicated  it  to  the  prisoner, 
was  that  the  smell  was  caused  by  chlorodyne.  The  prisoner  made 
no  observation  when  the  word  chloroform  was  mentioned.  He 


had  a long  talk  with  her  in  his  consulting  room  on  6th  January, 
the  day  before  the  inquest.  He  asked  her  to  write  out  an  account 
of  everything  which  happened  between  the  time  of  the  deceased's 
return  from  the  dentist  and  the  witness's  own  arrival,  at  half- 
past  four,  on  the  morning  of  the  following  day.  He  advised  her 
to  keep  her  notes,  as  he  supposed  that  she  would  give  evidence. 
No  reference,  to  the  best  of  the  witness's  recollection,  was  made 
" to  the  impossibility  of  his  swallowing  chloroform."  Chlorodyne 
was  mentioned,  for,  unfortunately,  explained  the  witness,  " I con- 
tinued to  harp  upon  that  subject."  Mrs.  Bartlett  visited  him  on 
6th,  14th,  18th,  and  26th  January.  On  this  last  occasion  he  con- 
gratulated her  warmly,  directly  he  saw  her,  on  the  analyst's 
report.  It  was  good  news,  indeed,  that  Dr.  Stevenson  should 
ascribe  the  cause  of  death  to  chloroform.  Had  he  attributed  it  to 


some  secret  poison,  which  " could  be  administered  without  ther 
patient  knowing  it,"  she  would  have  fallen  under  grave  suspicion. 
But  to  his  surprise,  far  from  displaying  satisfaction,  she  ex- 
pressed extreme  regret  that  chloroform  had  been  discovered,  and, 
in  answer  to  his  questions,  she  confided  to  him  the  story  of  her 
strange  compact  with  her  husband  and"  her  relations  with  Mr. 
Dyson.  She  narrated  How,  after  making  her  over  to  Mr,  Dyson, 
her  husband  had  sought  to  assert  those  marital  rights  which  he 
had  never  exercised  during  all  the  years  in  which  they  had  been 
married.  It  was  a duty  to  her  womanhood  and  to  the  man  to 
whom  she  was  practically  afiianced  " to  resist  his  advances,  and 
she,  m consequence,  obtained  some  chloroform  with  the  idea  of 
sprinkling  it  upon  a handkerchief  and  waving  it  in  his  face  But 
^ n^^oamed  out  her  intention.  The  thought  of  the  ‘iMoro. 
frS  had  nLr  had  a aecftit 

j ^ ^ December,  when  he  waa 

V han^d  over  to  him  her  whole  ropply,  after  explaiaiii^ 


Introduction. 


the  reason  which  had  led  her  to  procure  it.  He  showed  no  dis- 
pleasure, but  took  the  bottle  and  placed  it  upon  the  mantelpiece, 
close  to  his  bedside.  There  it  remained  until  about  breakfast 
time  on  1st  January,  when  she  removed  it  and  put  it  away  in  a 
drawer  in  the  back  room.  But  that  could  not  be,  declared  the 
witness.  There  was  no  chloroform  bottle  in  the  room  when  he 
searched  it  between  four  and  five  o’clock  that  morning. 

Under  cross-examination  by  Mr.  Clarke,  the  witness  stated 
that  between  10th  and  Slst  December  he  had  constantly  seen  the 
Bartletts  together.  Mrs.  Bartlett  always  appeared  to  be  tending 
her  husband  with  the  most  “ anxious  afiection.”  ''  Emphatically  ” 
he  could  not  wish  for  a better  nurse.  The  witness  asked  her  to  go 
to  bed,  but  she  always  refused.  On  one  occasion,  in  the  third 
week  of  his  attendance,  she  said,  **  What  is  the  use  of  my  going 
to  bed,  doctor?  He  will  walk  about  the  room  like  a ghost.  He 

will  not  sleep  unless  1 sit  and  hold  his  toe.”  At  this  stage  the 

learned  counsel  took  the  witness  through  the  various  phases  of 
the  deceased’s  illness.  About  2l8t  December  the  prisoner  told 

him  that  her  husband  ” still  talked  about  dying.”  She  said  so  in 
the  deceased’s  presence.  In  the  witness’s  opinion,  he  was 

practically  a hysterical  patient  at  that  time,  and  his  wife  petted 
him  too  much.”  The  deceased  told  the  witness  an  extraordinary 
tale  on  26th  December.  In  answer  to  an  inquiry  as  to  how  he  had 
slept,  he  said,  ” I could  not  sleep.  I was  nervous  and  restless.  I 
saw  my  wife  asleep  in  the  easy  chair,  so  I went  and  stood  over  her 
for  two  hours  holding  up  my  hands  like  this,  and  felt  the  vital 
force  being  drawn  from  her  to  me.  I felt  it  going  through  my 
finger  tips.  After  that  I lay  down  and  slept.”  The  prisoner 
observed,  **  That  is  a nice  story.  Imagine  him  standing  for  two 
hours  and  doing  anything.”  Prior  to  that  the  deceased  had  told 
the  witness  some  ” rigmarole  ” about  the  possibility  of  being 
under  somebody’s  influench  from  a distance.  He  said  that  “ he 
and  his  wife  had  both  been  mesmerised  by  a friend.” 

When  the  proceedings  opened  on  the  fourth  day,  Dr.  Leach  was 
recalled  and  was  further  cross-examined.  The  deceased  was  dis- 
tressed when  the  witness  told  him  that  he  should  not  visit  him 
again.  Mrs.  Bartlett  said,  ^‘Tou  had  better  come,  doctor;  he 
will  be  anxious.”  The  witness  had  never  seen  the  deceased  cry, 
but  he  had  been  told  that  he  had  fits  of  crying,  and  had  spoken 
to  him  about  them.  The  prisoner  observed  that  he  said  that  he 
cried  **  because  he  was  so  happy.”  The  witness  ascribed  that  to 
male  hysteria.”  He  would  not  call  ” the  jaw  symptoms,”  which 
manifested  themselves  on  29th  December,  really  alarming.” 

47 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 

It  was  ‘‘a  necrosis  due  to  local  causes,  and  he  had  no  great  fear 
as  to  its  ultimate  result.’’  The  prisoner  always  tried  to  cheer 
him  (the  deceased)  up  in  every  way.”  This  statement  was  made 
in  reference  to  her  remark  in  the  cab  on  the  way  to  the  dentist 
that  ” only  this  morning  Edwin  and  I ’were  saying  that  we  wished 
we  were  unmarried  that  we  might  have  the  pleasure  of  marrying 
over  again.”  On  the  morning  of  1st  January,  when  the  witness 
was  called  in  to  Claverton  Street,  the  prisoner  appeared  greatly 
distressed.  She  cried  bitterly  when  he  told  her  that  her  husband 
was  dead.  It  would  be  asking  him  to  judge  of  things  iKjyond  his 
ken  to  say  whether  her  conduct  was  perfectly  natural.  He  could 
only  give  an  opinion  for  what  it  was  worth.”  The  impression 
which  he  formed,  and  it  might  be  that  after-events  had  biased  ” 
his  mind,  was  that  ” she  seemed  not  only  grieved,  but  very  much 
alarmed,  very  much  scared.  Of  course,  I did  not  think  it  then, 
but  I do  now.”  The  prisoner  was  very  anxious  that  the  post- 
mortem should  take  place  as  soon  as  possible.  Her  words  were, 
‘‘  Spare  no  expense;  get  any  assistance  you  want.  We  are  all 
interested  in  knowing  the  cause  of  death,” 

The  witness  regarded  the  story  which  the  prisoner  told  him 
on  26th  January  as  an  absolutely  confidential  communication. 
When  he  attended  the  Coroner’s  Court,  on  4th  February,  he  did 
not  expect  to  be  called  upon  to  reveal  it.  The  prisoner  in  her 
statement  of  the  26th  said  that  “ her  first  real  suspicions  as  to 
the  cause  of  death  were  aroused  when  she  heard  it  stated  that  the 
contents  of  the  stomach  smelled  of  chloroform,  but,  hearing  that 
that  smell  might  be  due  to  the  deceased  having  swallowed  some 
chlorodyne,  she  refrained  from  making  any  suggestions  that  would 
necessarily  throw  grave  suspicion  upon  herself.”  In  the  account 
of  the  interview  of  26th  January  which  he  drew  up  for  the  coroner, 
the  witness  made  use  of  these  words  in  reference  to  the  platonic 
relations  alleged  to  have  existed  between  the  prisoner  and  her 
husband.  “ I was  personally  cognisant  of  these  facts  up  to  this 
point.  They  had  been  partly  told  me,  partly  implied,  partly 
gathered  from  observation.”  Pressed  to  say  what  he  meant  to 
convey  by  that  statement,  the  witness  explained  that  Mrs.  Bartlett 
had  consulted  him  two  or  three  times  since  her  husband’s  death, 
and  **  I had  become  aware  of  facts  that  somewhat  paved  the  way 
rto  my  she  told  me  on  the  26th.”  On  its  being 

represented  to  him  that  he  must  be  more  definite,  the  witness  said» 

; *VMr.  Bart^  very  strange  ideas.  That  goes  with- 

caused  Mm  to  be  reaniiided  by  lord- ; 
he  might^  it  as  an  axiom  that  nothing  gibes  without 


Introduction. 


saying  here.’'  At  the  same  time  he  invited  him  to  explain  the 
nature  of  these  ideas.  They  had  nothing  to  do  with  matrimony, 
replied  the  witness,  but  had  reference  to  mesmerism  and  vital 
force  and  other  matters  which  collectively  “ conveyed  to  my  mind 
the  impression  that  my  patient  was  one  of  the  most  extraordinary 
men  I ever  had  to  deal  with — ^though  a very  pleasant  and  nice 
man.”  In  answer  to  a further  question  by  the  learned  judge,  the 
witness  said,  “ With  regard  to  the  matter  about  two  wives — one 
for  use  and  one  for  companionship — that  did  not  come  from  him. 
I never  heard  him  allude  to  it.  That  came  from  her.”  When 
the  deceased  was  recovering,  and  when  the  prisoner  was  suffering 
from  the  strain  of  nursing  him,  the  witness  suggested  that  they 
should  both  go  to  bed  in  the  back  room.  He  could  not 
remember  what  the  deceased  said,  but  he  certainly  did  not  act  upon 
his  advice.  That  incident  and  the  fact  that  the  deceased  ^ept  in 
a camp  bed  tended,  in  the  witness’s  opinion,  to  confirm  the  truth 
of  the  prisoner’s  story  about  their  relations.  In  his  attendance 
upon  the  deceased  the  witness  perceived  ” great  signs  of  affection 
and  kindness  both  on  his  part  and  on  that  of  his  wife,  but,  looking 
back,  he  could  recollect  nothing  which  was  inconsistent  with  their 
alleged  compact  that  they  should  be  no  more  than  loving  friends.” 
He  was  prepared  to  believe  the  prisoner’s  story  that  six  years  ago 
this  agreement  was  broken  on  one  occasion,  in  order  that  she 
should  become  a mother.  He  had  heard  in  her  husband’s  life- 
time that  she  was  fond  of  children  and  dogs.  He  had  no  comment 
to  make  upon  her  statement  that  after  the  child  was  born  dead 
she  grew  disheartened,  and  the  two  lived  together,  but  their 
relations  were  not  those  of  matrimony,”  The  prisoner’s  allega- 
tion that  her  husband  ” liked  to  surround  her  with  male  acquaint- 
ances ” explained  a good  deal  that  had  puzzled  ” the  witness 
about  Mr.  Dyson,  He  had  heard  the  deceased  speak  of  that  gentle- 
man in  terras  of  the  greatest  admiration.”  Both  he  and  the 
prisoner  were  ” proud  of  Mr.  Dyson.” 

” By  rising  on  the  left  arm  ” it  was  quite  easy  to  reach  the 
mantelpiece  from  the  deceased’s  bed.  The  witness  had  never  heard 
of  a case  of  poisoning  with  liquid  chloroform.  Vomiting  usually 
occurs  when  chloroform  is  inhaled.  It  would  be  still  more  likely 
to  happen  if  the  administration  took  place  after  a recent  meal. 
An  indigestible  substance,  such  as  mango-chutney,  would  increase 
the  probability  of  vomiting.  The  witness  had  never  given  chloro- 
form to  a sleeping  person,  and  knew  of  no  authentic  case  in  which 
it  had  been  successfully  administered  under  those  conditions.  In 
oases  of  death  from  an  excessive  amount  of  chloroform,  the  witness 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


would  expect  to  find  at  the  post-mortem  fluidity  of  the  blood  and 
a emell  of  chloroform  in  the  brain  and  in  the  lungs.  If  death  were 
caused  by  asphyxia  through  an  overdose  by  inhalation,  he  would 
be  prepared  to  see  the  right  side  of  the  heart  and  the  lungs  engorged 
with  blood. 

Mr.  Poland,  on  whom,  in  the  absence  of  the  Attorney-General, 
devolved  the  task  of  re-examining  Dr.  Leach,  returned  to  the 
question  of  the  alleged  platonic  compact.  When  she  consulted 
him  as  a patient,  stated  the  witness,  the  prisoner  said  nothing 
about  her  relations  with  her  husband.  Nor  had  the  deceased  him- 
self ever  suggested  anything  to  lead  the  witness  to  suppose  that 
‘‘  his  married  life  was  other  than  the  ordinary  state.’*  Never- 
theless, from  “ the  general  bearing  of  the  parties,*’  the  witness 
was  now  pi'epared  to  believe  that  their  relations  were  **  asexual.” 
He  could  not  describe  it,  ‘M  might  as  well,”  he  pleaded,  try 
to  describe  the  general  expression  of  their  countenances.  I am 
sure  his  lordship  sees  it.”  But  his  lordship  would  not  admit 
that  he  was  endowed  with  the  ” delicate  discrimination  ” which 
the  witness  wished  to  ascribe  to  him.  On  the  contrary,  he  was 
a plain  man,”  and  it  seemed  to  him  that,  if  he  were  to  come 
to  any  such  conclusion  about  people  he  knew,  he  would  be  able  to 
give  some  reason  for  it.  He  had  not,  the  witness  admitted,  seen 
other  persons  about  whom  ‘‘  he  fancied  the  same  thing.”  He 
could  not  say  that  he  had  had  actual  experience  of  a man  sleeping 
year  after  year  in  the  same  bed  with  his  wife  and  all  the  time 
maintaining  platonic  relations  with  her,  but  he  had  heard  of 
things  very  much  like  it.”  From  first  to  last,  in  all  his  con- 
versations with  the  prisoner  at  Claverton  Street,  he  had  never 
encouraged  the  idea  that  her  husband  would  not  recover.  He 
always  told  her  that  was  nonsense.”  He  had  heard  the  Bartletts 
in  talking  together  speak  of  some  individual  as  “ Georgim  Sex.” 
He  knew  now— in  fact,  he  knew  before  the  deceased  died — that  Mr. 
Dyson  was  the  person  to  whom  they  alluded.  The  witness  on  the 
morning  of  1st  January  took  particular  notice  of  the  state  of  the 
fire.  He  looked  at  it  for  the  purpose  of  estimating  the  temperature 
in  which  the  corpse  had  been  lying.  It  was  not  sufficiently  large 
to  have  influenced  the  temperature  of  the  room  to  any  perceptible 
exbenii. 

to  visiting  the  deceased  in  Claverton 
^treet  on  19th  December.  He  appeared  to  be  depressed  and  lackr 
energy,  and  complained  of  overwork  and  sleeplessness.  The 
wither  ekamizied  him,  in  conjunction  vv'it^  Dr.  Leach,  and  touh4  ■ 

healthy.  : ■•He-told'  him'  that''he-^'^: 


Introduction 


sound  man,  and  advised  him  to  sit  up  and  go  out  every  day  for  a 
walk  or  a drive.  The  prisoner  was  present  throughout  the  inter- 
view. The  witness  heard  of  Mr.  Bartlett’s  death  on  1st  January, 
and  on  the  following  day  attended  the  post-mortem.  In  the  stomach 
there  was  an  erosion,  a patch,  where  the  mucous  membrane  was 
destroyed  in  the  most  dependent  part,”  by  which  the  witness  meant 
the  portion  near  the  spinal  cord,  which  would  be  the  lowest  when 
a person  was  lying  down.  Such  a patch  would  be  caused  by  an 
irritant  poison.  Liquid  chloroform  would  account  for  it.  The 
blood  was  very  fluid.  That  was  a symptom  of  poisoning  by  chloro- 
form. The  stomach  exhaled  a smell  of  chloroform  and  garlic. 
Replying  to  Mr.  Clarke,  the  witness  said  that  when  he  went  to  see 
the  deceased,  on  19th  December,  the  prisoner  appeared  to  be  very 
attentive  to,”  and  ” very  anxious  about,”  him. 

Dr.  Montague  Murray  stated  that  at  the  post-mortem  on  2nd 
January  he  performed  ” the  operative  part.”  With  the  exception 
of  the  conditions  of  the  stomach,  there  was  nothing  to  account  for 
death.  The  lower  part  of  the  gullet,  that  is  the  lower  three  inches, 
had  the  same  inflammatory  blush  as  the  lining  membrane  of  the 
stomach.  In  cross-examination  the  witness  explained  that  the  state 
of  the  gullet  showed  that  ” the  poison  was  taken  down  the  throat.” 
The  situation  of  the  red  patch  in  the  stomach  indicated  that,  for 
the  greater  part  of  the  time  during  which  life  lasted,  after  the 
poison  was  taken,  the  body  of  the  deceased  was  in  a recumbent 
position.  The  witness  had  never  heard  of  a case  in  which  liquid 
chloroform  had  been  poured  down  the  throat  of  an  insensible 
person.  If  the  insensibility  were  profound,  the  operation  should 
not  present  any  insuperable  difficulties.  It  would  be  necessary, 
however,  to  use  a tube.  If  no  mechanical  means  were  employed, 
some  of  the  liquid  would  remain  in  the  mouth  and  some  would 
trickle  down  the  gullet.  Insensibility  would  prevent  the  action  of 
swallowing.  There  might  *be  ” an  insensibility  so  profound  that 
the  person  operated  upon  might  swallow  without  resistance,  and 
yet  so  little  profound  that  the  muscular  action  would  not  be 
paralysed.”  A medical  man  would  judge  by  the  reflexes  in  other 
parts  whether  the  particular  stage  had  been  reached  at  which  the 
reflex  action  of  the  muscles  of  the  throat  would  continue  and  yet 
the  insensibility  be  sufficient  to  deaden  the  pain  of  the  burning. 
He  would  test  it  by  touching  the  eye.  If  there  were  a closure  of 
the  eyelids,  that  would  indicate  the  presence  of  reflexes  which  would 
render  the  act  of  swallowing  instinctive.  He  would  judge  of  the 
insensibility  to  pain  by  the  relaxation  of  the  muscles.  Cases  do 
occur  in  which  it  is  not  desirable  to  produce  complete  ansesthesia, 

51 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


only  sufficient  to  deaden  pain.  In  those  cases  the  physician  has  to 
judge  “'whether  the  moment  has  come  in  which  there  is  sufficient 
insensibility  to  produce  ancesthesia,  yet  not  sufficient  to  produce  the 
complete  abolition  of  the  reflex  action.’’  In  reply  to  Mr,  Justice 
Wills,  the  witness  said  that  in  operations  under  chloroform  it 
'was  sometimes  necessary  to  give  the  patient  brandy.  It  was 
difficult,  however,  to  administer  it  through  the  mouth,  and  the 
general  practice  was  to  inject  it. 

Tom  Ralph,  a metropolitan  police  constable,  who  acted  as 
coroner’s  officer  in  the  case,  deposed  to  searching  the  first-floor 
rooms  at  85  Claverton  Street  with  Inspector  Marshall  on  llth 
January.  In  one  of  the  boxes  which  he  examined  he  found  Mr. 
Dyson’s  letter,  beginning  “ Dear  Edwin,”  and  signed  “ George,” 
and  on  one  of  the  tables  a copy  of  Squire’s  “ Companion.”  In 
the  front  room  was  a box  containing  a man’s  clothes.  In  the 
right-hand  trousers  pocket  of  one  of  the  suits  were  several  of 
those  articles  which,  as  their  name  suggests,  are  popularly  sup- 
posed to  be  a French  invention. 

Dr.  Thomas  Stevenson,  professor  of  medical  jurisprxidence  at 
Guy’s  Hospital  and  senior  scientific  analyst  to  the  Home  Office, 
succeeded  the  policeman  in  the  witness-box.  In  answer  to  the 
Attorney-General,  he  related  how,  on  12th  January,  he  began  to 
analyse  certain  portions  of  the  deceased’s  body  which  had  been 
submitted  to  him.  The  characteristic  smell  of  the  contents  of  the 
stomach  was  that  of  chloroform.  There  was  also  about  them  a 
slight  odour  of  garlic,  due  to  the  mango-chutney.  He  was  able 
to  establish  the  presence  in  the  stomach  of  11^  grains  of  chloro- 
form, equivalent  to  between  8 and  9 minims.  This  amount  repre- 
sented 5 per  cent,  of  the  weight  of  the  whole  quantity  analysed. 
The  witness  also  tested  for  all  the  poisons  which  suggested  them- 
selves to  him,  but  could  find  no  other  graces  of  any  alkaloids.  He 
devoted  several  days  to  his  experiments.  He  could  discover  no 
traces  of  chlorodyne.  Speaking  of  the  appearance  of  the  stomach, 
the  witness  stated  that  the  patch  of  inflammation  was  ‘'  about  the 
part  to  which  the  liquid  would  flow  when  a person  was  lying  on 
his  ba-ck.  It  was  the  usual  simt  at  which  we  find  it  after  the 
swallowing  of  an  irritant  poison,”  It  was  at  the  point  to  which 
“ by  gravitation  the  liquid  would  find  its  way.”  The  conclusion 
which  the  witness  formed  was  that  the  deceased  must  have  swal- 
lowed a large  dose  of  chloroform,  “ such  a quantity  as  would  be 
sufficient  to  cause  death.”  A person  swallowing  chloroform  'would 
certeinly  perceive  the  pecffi  of  the  liquid  which  he 

had  absorbed  a hot,  fiery  taste,  and  would  cause  pain^  It  : 


Introduction. 


was  hardly  possible  that  any  one  could  take  it  under  the  impression 
that  it  was  some  innocuous  article  of  food  or  drink.  If  the 
chloroform  were  contained  in  an  ordinary  medicine  bottle,  there 
was  no  insuperable  diflSiculty  ” in  the  way  of  pouring  it  down 
the  throat  of  a person  in  a condition  of  insensibility.  Witness 
himself  with  a teaspoon  had  put  liquid  down  the  throat  of  a 
person  while  he  had  been  “ chloroforming  ''  him.  It  would  not 
be  a difiEicult  operation,  if  a man  were  lying  on  his  back  with  his 
mouth  open.  Up  to  a certain  point  of  insensibility  the  presence 
of  a liquid  at  the  back  of  the  throat  would  occasion  the  act  of 
swallowing.  But,  once  the  reflexes  had  disappeared,  there  could 
be  no  swallowing.  He  had  given  a rabbit  a quarter  of  an  ounce 
of  chloroform,  and  found  that  its  blood,  when  analysed,  contained 
traces  of  chloroform.  He  had  seen  one  person  suflering  from  the 
effects  of  swallowing  chloroform.  He  had  not  taken  a fatal  dose. 
It  produced  copious  vomiting  and  pain,  and  the  patient  was 
greatly  alarmed.  He  should  regard  vomiting  as  a frequent,  but 
not  an  invariable,  symptom  of  poisoning  by  chloroform.  It  was 
possible  with  chloroform  to  render  insensible  a sleeping  person. 
Witness  had  never  himself  performed  the  operation,  but  he  knew 
of  instances  in  which  it  had  been  performed  successfully.  Were 
drops  of  chloroform  to  fall  upon  the  chin  or  the  breast  they  would 
leave  no  lasting  mark.  They  would  produce  no  more  than  a 
temporary  redness. 

Under  cross-examination  the  witness  stated  that  he  could  refer 
to  no  recorded  case  of  murder  by  the  administration  of  liquid 
chloroform.  The  majority  of  deaths  from  chloroform  were  acci- 
dental. About  30  per  cent,  of  the  cases  known  to  the  witness  of 
swallowing  chloroform  proved  fatal.  He  did  not  regard  an 
odour  of  chloroform  in  the  ventricles  of  the  brain  as  an  Invariable 
symptom  in  cases  in  which  the  drug  had  been  inhaled  shortly 
before  death,  but  it  was  •one  for  which  he  vrould  certainly  look. 
If  the  patient  were  brought  to  the  verge  of  asphyxia — a state  of 
insensibility  from  the  administration  of  chloroform — and  death 
were  to  supervene  from  any  cause  whatever,  he  would  expect  to 
find  an  engorgement  of  the  right  side  of  the  heart.  He  did  not 
agree  with  either  of  the  passages,  quoted  by  the  learned  counsel 
from  Guy  and  Ferrier’s  Forensic  Medicine,*'  that  in  cases  of 
inhalation  there  was  always  an  intense  inflammation  of  the  air 
passages,  or  that  the  vapour  of  chloroform,  when  inhaled,  acted 
more  powerfully  than  when  swallowed  in  a liquid  form.  He  ad- 
mitted the  authority,  but  he  did  not  admit  the  statement.  The 
witness  had  never  given  chloroform  to  a patient  while  asleep.  He 

53 


Adelaide  Bartlett 


did  not  consider  that  an  adult  person  would  “ almost  invariably  ’’ 
wake  up,  if  it  were  attempted.  He  was  aware  that  in  Dolbeau’s 
Annales  d’Hygiine  " it  was  stated  that  great  skill  would  be 
required  to  perform  the  operation  successfully,  and  that  in  76 
per  cent,  of  the  cases  the  individuals  awoke  directly  they  were 
exposed  to  the  vapour.  He  knew  of  the  experiments  carried  out 
by  the  American  doctor,  Quimby,  and  others  which  are  men- 
tioned in  Wharton  and  Stille's  “ Medical  Jurisprudence.’’  In 
that  work  it  was  said  that,  out  of  six  persons  on  whom  the  attempt 
was  made,  all  resisted  more  or  less,  and  two  woke  up  immediately. 
The  only  English  authorities  on  the  subject  to  which  the  witness 
could  refer  were  the  Medical  Times  and  Gazette  and  Woodman 
and  Tidy’s  “ Forensic  Medicine.”  The  first  contained  a letter 
from  Dr.  Hussey,  who  witnessed  the  successful  administration  <>f 
chloroform  to  a young  man  of  seventeen  in  the  Oxford  Infirmary, 
as  far  back  as  the  year  1860,  and  the  other  spoke  of  the  practice 
in  the  Bristol  General  Hospital  of  chloroforming  children,  who 
were  to  be  operated  upon  for  hip  disease,  while  they  were  asleep. 
The  witness  agreed  that  there  were  four  stages  in  the  administra- 
tion of  the  vapour.  ” In  the  first  the  patient  becomes  excited  ; in 
the  second  he  talks  incoherently  and  sensibility  is  diminished ; 
in  the  third  he  is  unconscious,  but  the  muscles  are  rigid ; and  in 
the  fourth  they  are  completely  relaxed  and  the  patient  is  per- 
fectly insensible.”  If  liquid  chloroform  were  to  be  placed  in  the 
mouth  in  the  first,  or  even  in  the  second,  stage  it  would  cause 
pain.  In  the  third  the  jaw  becomes  rigid,  and  force  would  have 
to  be  exerted  to  open  the  mouth.  The  moment  at  which  the 
patient  would  cease  to  be  able  to  swallow  is  altogether  a question 
of  degree.  After  being  completely  anaesthetised  he  would  still 
continue  to  swallow  his  own  saliva  for  some  time.  Without  doubt, 
there  is  a point  in  the  process  of  chloroforming  when  he  would  be 
able  to  swallow,  but  yet  would  suffer  mo  pain.  The  practical 
test  to  determine  whether  the  condition  has  been  reached*  in 
which  the  patient  would  be  insensible  to  pain,  is  to  ascertain 
whether  the  reflex  of  the  eye  has  been  abolished*  Having  elicited 
that,  the  learned  counsel  put  to  the  witness  this  proposition — 
Suppose  you  had  to  deal  with  a sleeping  man,  and  it  was  your 
object  to  get  down  his  throat,  without  his  knowing  it,  a liquid 
the  administration  of  which  to  the  lips  or  throat  would  cause 
great  pain,  do  you  not  agree  that  it  would  be  a very  difGicult  and 
delicate  operation?”  “I  think,”  replied  the  witness,  “that  it 
would  be  an  operation  which  would  often  fail  and  might  often 
succeed.  I should  look  upon  it  as  a delicate  operation,  because  I 
64 


Introduction. 


should  be  afraid  of  pouring  it  down  the  windpipe.”  If  insensi- 
bility or  partial  insensibility  had  been  produced,  the  rejection 
of  the  liquid  by  the  windpipe  would  probably  be  less  active  than 
if  the  patient  were  awake.  If  chloroform  went  down  the  wind- 
pipe it  would  probably  burn  it  and  leave  traces  which  would 
be  apparent  for  some  hours  after  death.  If  the  post-mortem 
had  been  performed  on  the  very  day  on  which  the  death  took 
place  the  chances  of  determining  the  cause  of  death  would  have 
been  increased.  On  this  Mr.  Clarke  concluded  his  cross-examina- 
tion, and  the  Court  adjourned. 

On  the  following  day,  Friday,  16th  April,  the  fifth  day 
of  the  trial,  the  proceedings  began  with  the  recall  of  Dr.  Steven- 
son, who  was  re-examined  by  the  Attorney-General.  If  chloro- 
form had  been  swallowed,  the  witness  would  not  necessarily  expect 
to  find  a smell  about  the  mouth.  If  the  mouth  were  open  he  would 
be  prepared  to  find  that  the  smell  had  disappeared  in  as  short  a 
time  as  half  an  hour.  If  chloroform  were  taken  into  the  stomach 
it  would  probably  act  with  greater  effect  if  the  person  had,  before 
that,  been  rendered  insensible,  or  partially  insensible,  by  inhala- 
tion. The  period  of  rigidity  in  the  third  stage  of  the  administra- 
tion of  chloroform  would  last  only  a few  seconds  or  a minute  at 
the  most.  Referring,  in  answer  to  a question  by  the  learned 
judge,  to  the  difficulty  said  to  have  been  experienced  in  bringing 
the  deceased  under  the  influence  of  nitrous  oxide  gas  at  the  dentist's, 
the  witness  could  only  say  that,  “ if  a person  were  insensible  to 
one  anaesthetic,  he  would  probably  be  less  sensible  to  another.” 

Dr.  Tidy,  an  official  analyst  to  the  Home  Office  and  one  of 
the  authors  of  Woodman  and  Tidy’s  ” Forensic  Medicine,”  deposed 
that  of  his  own  knowledge  he  only  knew  of  one  death  from  swallowing 
liquid  chloroform.  He  believed  that  the  amount  absorbed  on  that 
occasion  was  an  ounce  and^a  half,  but  it  was  a case  of  suicide, 
and  it  was  in  consequenceb  unnecessary  to  determine  the  quantity. 
If  a fatal  dose  of  chloroform  were  swallowed,  he  would  not  be 
surprised  to  learn  that  no  smell  of  it  was  perceptible  about  the 
mouth  two  or  three  hours  afterwards,  but  at  the  post-mortem 
he  should  expect  to  find  fluidity  of  the  blood.  Chloroform 
dropped  upon  the  skin  leaves  only  a slight  redness,  which  would 
probably  pass  away  in  a quarter  of  an  hour.  Rigidity  of  the  jaw 
was  not  an  invariable  concomitant  of  the  administration  of 
chloroform.  Partial  insensibility  could  be  produced  by  the  in- 
halation of  chloroform  during  sleep.  If  an  individual  were  thus 
rendered  unconscious,  liquid  might  be  poured  down  his  throat. 
But  as  regards  administering  chloroform  to  persons  while  they 

55 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


were  asleep,  it  was  only  fair  to  say  that  he  himself  had  tried  it 
in  three  cases.  In  one,  the  case  of  a boy  between  fifteen  and  six- 
teen, he  had  been  successful,  and  in  the  other  two  he  had  failed. 
In  cross-examination  the  witness  stated  that  he  had  had  a very 
long  experience  of  chloroform.  Bigidity  of  the  jaw  might  last 
for  a few  seconds,  or  it  might  go  on  for  a considerably  longer 
period.  He  would  not  be  prepared  to  say  that  it  might  not  last 
for  five  minutes.  The  symptoms  of  the  inhalation  of  chloroform 
are  very  variable.  One  person  might  go  ofi  in  two  minutes,  while 
another  might  take  much  longer.  The  quantity  required  to 
produce  the  necessary  efiect  varies  also.  Great  judgment  and  ex- 
perience are  needed  in  its  administration.  There  is  considerable 
uncertainty  about  the  action  of  swallowing  chloroform.  Much 
depends  upon  whether  the  person  does,  or  does  not,  vomit.  “ A 
great  deal  less  is  known  about  swallowing  chloroform  than  about 
chloroform  inhaled.”  In  reply  to  a juryman,  the  witness  said 
that,  supposing  drops  of  chloroform  were  to  fall  upon  the  delicate 
parts  of  the  mouth,  the  marks  would  be  more  likely  to  remain 
than  if  dropped  upon  the  skin  of  the  hand. 

Mary  Anne  Furlong,  a married  woman,  living  at  Merton, 
stated  that  from  6th  January  until  Ist  September,  1885,  she  acted 
as  daily  servant  to  the  Bartletts  at  The  Cottage,  Merton.  She 
generally  began  her  work  at  eight  o'clock.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Bartlett 
occupied  the  same  bed.  Mrs.  Bartlett  sometimes  helped  her  to 
make  it.  Towards  the  latter  part  of  her  service  Mr.  Dyson  came 
frequently  to  the  house.  The  witness  went  home  usually  about 
eleven  o'clock  in  the  morning,  but  if  Mrs.  Bartlett  had  company 
she  would  stay  and  cook  the  dinner.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Matthews  and 
Mr.  Dyson  were  the  only  visitors.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Bartlett 
appeared  to  be  on  very  affectionate  terms  and  to  live  together  as 
man  and  wife. 

Inspector  Marshall,  of  the  Metropolitan  Police,  deposed  that 
he  searched  the  railway  line  from  Victoria  to  Peckham  Bye,  but 
could  not  find  the  bottle  which  he  expected  to  find.  He  was 
present  at  Clayerton  Street  on  11th  January  when  the  house  was 
searched.  Oh  16th  February  the  witness  went  with  Mr.  Dyson 
to  Wandsworth  Common,  and  at  a spot  which  the  last-named 
pointed  out  he  found  a bottle  labelled  ” Poison,  Not  to  be 
taken.”  He  had  twice  since  that  time  searched  the  Common,  but 
had  been  unable  to  find  the  other  bottles. 

Mrs.  Doggett,  who  was  recalled  and  examined  by  the  Attorney- 
General,  said  that  during  the  first  week  of  the  Bartlett's  stay  in 
Claverton  Street  they  occupied  one  bed.  After  that  they  slept 
56 


Introduction. 


in  different  beds  in  the  same  room — ^the  back  room.  When  Mr. 
Bartlett  was  taken  ill,  his  bed  was  carried  into  the  drawing- 
room. During  Mr.  Bartlett’s  illness  the  sofa  in  the  front  room 
was  moved  into  a position  in  front  of  the  folding  doors,  but  this 
did  not  prevent  any  one  from  using  them.  To  pass  from  one 
room  to  another  it  was  not  necessary  to  go  outside  on  to  the 
landing.  The  witness  saw  nothing  unusual  in  the  relations  of 
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Bartlett.  In  cross-examination  the  witness  stated 
that,  when  the  Bartlelts  first  came,  they  asked  for  two  beds  in  the 
bedroom.  The  witness  did  not  possess  a bed  small  enough,  and 
it  was  some  days  before  she  could  find  time  “ to  run  out  ” and 
order  one  at  the  stores,  and  another  few  days  elapsed  before  it 
was  delivered.  Alice  Fulcher,  who  was  also  recalled,  concurred 
with  her  mistress  that  the  Bartletts  only  slept  in  the  same  bed 
during  their  first  week  in  Claverton  Street,  and  that  when  Mr. 
Bartlett  was  taken  ill  his  bed  was  moved  into  the  front  room. 
After  that  Mrs.  Bartlett  slept  upon  the  sofa  in  the  same  room. 
She  had,  said  the  witness  in  reply  to  the  learned  judge,  waited 
upon  the  Bartletts  when  Mr.  Dyson  was  dining  with  them.  She 
had  heard  the  prisoner  address  him  both  as  “ George  ” and  as 
Mr.  Dyson.”  She  had  heard  her  call  him  “ George  ” before 
Mr.  Bartlett.  On  the  occasion  of  Mr.  Dyson’s  visits  the  witness 
had  seen  books  lying  about,  but  whether  they  were  open  or  shut 
she  was  not  prepared  to  say.  She  never  at  the  time  heard  it  said 
that  Mr.  Dyson  was  giving  the  prisoner  lessons.  When  opening 
the  door  to  him  she  had  never  noticed  that  he  brought  any  books 
to  the  house. 

This  concluded  the  case  for  the  Crown,  and  Mr.  Clarke,  who 
called  no  witnesses,  proceeded  at  once  to  address  the  jury.  His 
speech,  which  will  always  be  remembered  as  a brilliant  example 
of  forensic  eloquence  and  of  skilful  advocacy,  should  be  read  in 
full  in  the  report  of  tha 'trial,  for  in  this  narrative  it  is  only 
possible  to  present  a short  summary  of  the  principal  arguments 
upon  which  he  founded  his  plea  for  his  client’s  acquittal. 

They  were  asked  to  believe,  said  the  learned  counsel,  that 
this  woman,  who  had  lived  on  the  most  affectionate  terms  with 
her  husband,  who,  when  he  fell  ill,  sent  for  doctors  and  nursed  him 
with  tender  devotion,  was  on  this  New  Tear’s  night  ” suddenly 
transformed  into  a murderess.’*  Nor  was  that  all.  If  she  were 
guilty  she  must  have  committed  a crime  “ absolutely  unknown 
in  the  history  of  medical  jurisprudence.”  Never  before  has  it 
been  suggested  that  liquid  chloroform  has  been  employed  to  per- 
petrate a murder.  And  the  reason  is  obvious.  Not  only  is  it 

67 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


very  variable  in  its  effect,  but  it  cannot  be  secretly  administered 
because  of  the  intense  pain  which  must  follow  its  absorption.  The 
prosecution,  however,  has  sought  to  overcome  this  last  difficulty  by 
suggesting  that  the  drug  was  poured  down  the  deceased’s  throat 
after  he  had  been  reduced  to  a state  of  insensibility  by  inhalation. 
But  before  proceeding  to  consider  all  which  that  involves,  this 
question  may  fairly  be  asked — if  the  prisoner  had  succeeded  in  pro- 
ducing insensibility,  why  did  she  not  go  on  and  effect  her  purpose 
by  inhalation?  Why  should  she  interr\ipt  the  process  of  anaes- 
thesia, which,  if  continued,  must  result  in  death,”  in  order  to 
attempt  another  operation  which  might  destroy  the  amesthetic 
influence  ” and  arouse  in  the  deceased  the  capacity  of  sensation 
and  resistance  ” ? 

That  Mr.  Bartlett’s  death  was  caused  by  the  swallowing  of 
liquid  chloroform  was  not  open  to  dispute.  What  counsel  hoped 
to  make  clear  was  that  the  theory  of  the  prosecution  with  regard 
to  the  manner  in  which  it  was  given  to  him  was  inconsistent  with 
reasonable  probabilities.  It  was  suggested  that  while  he  was  asleep 
he  was  rendered  unconscious  by  the  inhalation  of  the  vapour.  Much 
evidence  had  been  heard  with  respect  to  the  possibility  of  administer- 
ing chloroform  under  these  conditions.  While  none  of  the 
authorities  denied  the  feasibility  of  the  operation,  all  of  them 
spoke  of  it  as  difficult  and  delicate,  if  attempted  upon  a full-grown 
man.  The  Frenchman,  Dolbeau,  laid  it  down  that  the  experiment 
failed  in  75  per  cent,  of  the  cases  in  which  it  was  tried.  Dr.  Tidy, 
a chloroformist  of  vast  experience,  stated  in  the  witness-box  that 
he  contrived  to  produce  insensibility  in  a boy  while  he  was  asleeifi, 
but  that  he  met  with  no  success  when  he  sought  to  bring  about 
the  same  result  with  two  adult  persons.  And,  supposing  that  the 
sleep  of  the  deceased,  a man  upon  whom  anajsthetics  did  not  readily 
take  effect,  had  been  converted  into  insensibility,  how  great  were 
the  difficulties  which  still  had  io  he  y^rmounted.  It  was  im- 
possible to  pour  a liquid  down  the  throat  of  an  iinconsciotis 
person  in  whom  the  power  of  swallowing  no  longer  existed.  Never- 
theless, as  Dr.  Stevenson  had  explained,  ” there  was,  or  there 
might  be,  a time  the  duration  of  which  no  man  could  measure, 
the  existence  and  the  condition  of  which  the  most  careful  doctor 
could  not  predict,”  in  which  the  patient  might  be  so  far  insensible 
as  not  to  feel  the  pain  and  yet  sufficiently  sensible  to  be  able  to 
swallow.  Is  it  believable  that  this  woman,  alone  that  night  with 
her  husband,  performed  upon  him  an  operation  which  Dr,  Steven- 
son with  all  his  skill  and  knowledge  would,  on  his  own  admission, 
have  found  great  difficulty  in  bringing  to  a successful  issue? 

58 


Introduction. 


So  much  for  the  scientific  side  of  the  case.  In  his  opening 
address,  continued  the  learned  counsel,  the  Attorney-General 
referred  to  certain  circumstances  as  throwing  suspicion  upon  the 
prisoner.  Some  of  them  were  of  a very  trivial  character,  and 
any  unfavourable  construction  which  could  be  placed  upon  them 
had,  he  ventured  to  think,  disappeared  in  the  course  of  his  cross- 
examination.  There  was  the  conversation  about  the  chloroform 
with  Mrs.  Doggett  on  the  evening  of  31st  December.  But  was 
it  a matter  for  surprise  that  there  should  be  some  talk  about 
anaesthetics  when,  only  an  hour  or  two  before,  Mr.  Bartlett  had 
been  under  gas  at  the  dentist's?  Was  it  to  be  regarded  as  sus- 
picious that  the  prisoner  should  tell  the  servant  to  place  the  basin 
for  the  beef  tea  on  the  table  on  the  landing?  It  now  appeared 
that,  on  that  particular  night,  when  the  woman  came  upstairs 
she  brought  the  coals,  but  forgot  the  basin.  What  more  natural 
in  the  circumstances  than  that  the  prisoner  should  give  her  those 
instructions,  seeing  that  her  husband  had  gone  to  bed  and  would 
not  wish  to  be  disturbed  a second  time?  The  prosecution  attached 
importance  to  the  statement  of  the  Doggetts  that,  on  the  fatal 
morning,  the  fire  appeared  to  have  been  attended  to  recently. 
Was  it  not  probable,  however,  that  it  had  been  banked  up  over- 
night, and,  if  that  were  so,  the  prisoner,  after  arousing  the 
house,  had  only  to  touch  it  with  the  poker  to  make  it  burn  up 
brightly?  Lastly,  there  was  the  matter  of  the  untrue  statements 
about  Annie  Walker  and  Dr.  Nichols  in  connection  with  the  pur- 
chase of  the  chloroform.  With  regard  to  that  the  learned  counsel 
must  observe  that  what  the  prisoner  actually  said  rested  wholly 
upon  the  unsupported  word  of  Mr.  Dyson.  He  had  certainly  no 
wish  to  impeach  the  innocence  " of  Mr.  Dyson,  but,  if  the 
making  of  false  statements  were  to  be  taken  as  evidence  of  guilt, 
it  was  strange  that  he  should  be  in  the  witness-box  and  not  in  the 
dock  beside  the  prisoner,  t No  one  could  say  whether  the  deceased 
did,  or  did  not,  see  Dr.  Nichols.  The  doctor  himself  had  stated 
that  he  knew  no  one  of  the  name  of  Bartlett.  But  he  was  not 
qualified  to  practise  in  this  country,  and  it  is  not  unlikely  that 
the  deceased  may  have  presented  himself  to  him  under  an  assumed 
name.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  prisoner  did  consult  Mrs. 
Nichols,  because  it  was  on  her  recommendation  that  she  engaged 
Annie  Walker.  It  was  also  perfectly  clear  that  at  the  time  of 
her  confinement  she  possessed  a copy  of  Dr.  Nichols'  book. 
Counsel,  however,  was  not  prepared  to  deny  that  she  gave  Mr, 
Dyson  a false  reason  for  desiring  to  obtain  the  chloroform.  But, 
if  her  account  of  her  relations  with  her  husband  were  true,  she 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


could  not,  unless  she  were  lost  to  all  sense  of  delicacy,  acknow- 
ledge to  this  man  the  purpose  for  which  she  required  it. 

The  story  of  the  platonic  compact  was  so  extraordinary  that 
no  reasonable  person  would  believe  in  its  existence,  except  upon 
the  most  conclusive  evidence.  Mr.  Dyson  was  not  the  only  witness 
who  had  spoken  to  the  deceased's  strange  views  on  the  matri- 
monial state.  Old  Mr.  Bartlett  had  very  reluctantly  admitted 
that  he  had  heard  his  son  say  that  every  man  should  have  two 
wives.  Mr.  Dyson’s  account  of  his  conversations  on  that  subject 
and  of  the  interview  at  Putney,  when  he  confessed  to  the  deceased 
that  he  was  becoming  too  interested  in  his  wife,  would  be  un- 
believable were  it  not  corroborated  to  a great  extent  by  written 
documents.  There  was  the  new  will  of  3rd  September,  1885, 
which  the  deceased,  be  it  noted,  executed  at  his  place  of  business, 
when  neither  his  wife  nor  Mr.  Dyson  was  present,  and  there  was 
the  correspondence  exchanged  between  the  two  men  at  the  time 
of  the  Dover  visit.  Mr.  Bartlett’s  letter  of  21st  September  was 
“ the  key  to  the  whole  case.”  Why  should  he  express  thankful- 
ness that  another  man  had  written  “ a very  loving  letter  to 
Adelaide”?  That  letter,  counsel  contended,  went  a long  way 
towards  confirming  the  statement  which  had  been  made  about  his 
matrimonial  relations.  When  they  took  up  their  abode  in  Claver- 
ton  Street  the  Bartletts  stipulated  with  the  landlady  for  two  beds. 
No  great  significance  should  perhaps  bo  attached  to  that;  never- 
theless, as  far  as  it  went,  it  supported  the  prisoner’s  story.  In 
the  course  of  his  professional  visits  to  Claverton  Street  Dr.  Leach 
had  many  opportunities  of  observing  the  deceased  and  his  wife 
together.  He  has  been  examined  and  cross-examined  at  length 
about  the  impression  which  they  made  upon  him.  He  has  said 
that  on  26th  January,  when  the  prisoner  confided  to  him  the 
terms  upon  which  she  lived  with  her,  husband,  he  did  not  treat 
her  statement  as  either  ” extraordinary  ” or  ” unbelievable.” 
As  he  thought  the  matter  over,  he  remembered  their  demeanour 
and  the  general  ” tone  of  their  companionship,”  and  came  to  the 
conclusion  that  what  she  told  him  might  not  improbably  be 
true.  ” That  is  the  whole  of  the  evidence.  It  is  amazing  that 
there  should  be  so  much.” 

It  was  no  part  of  his  duty,  continued  counsel,  to  explain  how 
this  man  met  his  death,  but  probabilities  in  a case  of  this  kind 
had  to  be  considered.  During  nearly  the  whole  of  the  last  three 
weeks  of  his  life  the  deceased  was  ill  and  confined  to  his  room,  if 
not  to  his  bed.  His  physical  condition  was  not  perhaps  very  serious, 
but  it  was  complicated  by  severe  toothache  and  by  hypochondria 


Introduction. 


and  sleeplessness  brought  on  hj  overwork.  The  history  of  the  case 
was  one  of  frequent  relapses,  which  must  have  tried  him  sorely. 
Drugs  to  which  he  did  not  readily  respond  were  administered,  and 
only  served  to  increase  his  depression.  Then  in  the  last  days  of 
December,  when  he  seemed  to  be  regaining  his  health,  the  trouble 
in  the  jaw  set  in,  and  at  the  dentist’s  the  ugly  word  necrosis  was 
mentioned  in  his  hearing.  Who  can  doubt  that  his  spirits  were 
greatly  afiEected  by  this  fresh  misfortune?  And  that  same  night, 
when  he  was  in  bed,  his  wife  gave  him  the  chloroform,  and,  having 
explained  why  she  had  procured  it,  told  him  that  there  could 
be  no  going  back  upon  the  sanction  which  he  had  given  to  her 
relations  with  Mr.  Dyson.  “ No  longer  was  he  to  enjoy  the  rights 
that  a husband  can  exercise.”  What  happened  after  that  can  ” be 
sketched  in  imagination.”  It  was  the  prisoner’s  habit  to  go  into 
the  back  room  to  wash  and  make  other  preparations  before  settling 
down  for  the  night.  There  are  no  grounds  for  supposing  that  she 
departed  from  her  usual  practice  on  this  particular  evening.  If 
she  acted  thus,  the  deceased  would  be  left  alone,  and  the  poison 
would  be  within  his  reach.  His  spirit  had  been  weakened  by  sufier- 
ing  and  ill-health,  and  he  had  just  been  told  that  he  must  look  upon 
” the  effectual  marriage  tie  between  his  wife  and  himself  ” as 
severed.  May  he  not  have  seized  the  chloroform  bottle,  and,  pour- 
ing out  a glass — ^half  a wine-glassful  would  suffice — ^have  put  an 
end  to  all  his  troubles?  If  something  of  this  kind  did  occur,  he 
may  have  passed  into  a state  of  coma  before  the  prisoner  returned 
to  the  room.  According  to  her  statement,  she  noticed  nothing 
during  the  night  except  that  he  snored  in  a somewhat  peculiar 
fashion.  Stertorous  breathing  is  a well-known  symptom  of  chloro- 
form poisoning,  and,  if  she  were  guilty,  it  is  diflB.cult  to  believe 
that  she  would  have  mentioned  the  circumstance  to  Dr.  Leach. 
Taking  everything  into  consideration,  it  is  surely  more  probable 
that  in  a fit  of  despair  he^took  the  fatal  draught  than  that,  alone 
and  unassisted,  ” the  grocer’s  widow  ” worked  a “ scientific 
miracle.” 

From  the  moment  that  she  discovered  that  her  husband  was  dead 
the  prisoner  behaved  like  the  loving  and  devoted  wife  which  she 
had  shown  herself  to  be  throughout  his  illness.  She  sent  for  the 
doctor,  she  aroused  the  house,  and,  when  she  was  told  that  a post- 
mortem examination  would  be  necessary,  the  only  wish  which  she 
expressed  was  that  it  should  take  place  as  soon  as  possible.  When 
the  doctor  spoke  of  chlorodyne  as  the  possible  cause  of  death  she 
combated  the  notion.  Tet  it  was  a suggestion  which  a guilty 
woman  would  have  adopted  eagerly.  When  she  quitted  Claverton 

61 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Street  she  made  no  attempt  to  remove  the  chloroform  bottle,  but 
left  it  behind  in  one  of  the  drawers.  Eventually,  it  is  true,  she 
threw  it  away,  but  she  did  not  thus  dispose  of  it  until  three  days 
after  Mr.  Dyson  had  cast  away  his  bottles  amidst  the  gorse  bushes 
on  Wandsworth  Common.  Without  doubt  at  the  Matthews'  she  was 
very  angry  that  Mr.  Dyson  should  bother  her  about  his  wretched 
verses.  A few  days  later,  on  9th  January,  she  gave  them  back 
to  him,  and  when  he  said  something  about  the  chloroform,  she 
turned  upon  him  indignantly  and  told  him  “ not  to  mince  matters  " 
but  to  say  “ I gave  it  to  him."  The  first  challenge  to  the  world 
to  bring  this  charge  came  from  her  lips.  The  learned  counsel  con- 
cluded by  drawing  a moving  picture  of  the  lonely  and  unprotected 
woman  whose  fate  was  in  the  hands  of  the  jury.  One  friend  she 
still  had,  the  spirit  of  justice.  That  spirit  would  be  present  at  their 
deliberations,  and  would  speak  with  no  uncertain  voice  when  they 
brought  in  their  verdict  that  Adelaide  Bartlett  was  not  guilty. 

When  Mr.  Clarke  sat  down,  amidst  a burst  of  applause  such 
as  is  seldom  heard  in  an  English  Court,  he  had  been  speaking 
for  six  hours.  His  lordship,  accordingly,  adjourned  the  further 
proceedings  to  the  morrow,  when  he  announced  that  he  would  sit 
at  nine  o'clock.  On  Saturday,  I7th  April,  the  sixth  and  the  last 
day  of  the  trial,  the  greater  part  of  the  morning  was  taken  up 
with  the  Attorney-General's  reply.  They  had  been  told,  said  Mr. 
Attorney,  that  " this  was  the  first  case  of  suggested  death 
by  the  use  of  chloroform."  But  might  not  Palmer's  counsel  have 
said  the  same  of  strychnine  and  Lamson's  of  aconitine?  The  ques- 
tion they  had  to  decide  was  whether  chloroform  had  been  applied 
with  criminal  intent,  and,  if  so,  was  the  prisoner  the  person  who 
used  it?  The  learned  counsel  for  the  defence  had  confined  himself 
to  suggesting  difficulties  in  the  way  of  administering  it  to  another 
person,  and  had  " marshalled  his  fac^s  and  arguments  in  support 
of  one  suggestion  only — suicide,  deliberate  suicide  on  the  part  of 
the  deceased."  It  must  always  be  borne  in  mind  that  in  cases  of 
this  kind  proof  to  demonstration  of  the  crime  " was  never  ob- 
tainable. The  clue  to  the  truth  must,  so  to  speak,  be  groped  for 
in  the  dark.  Now  it  was  very  necessary  to  consider  the  antecedent 
history  of  these  people,  and  with  regard  to  that  the  autumn  of 
1881  was  of  especial  importance.  It  was  the  date  of  the  prisoner's 
confinement.  According  to  her  own  account,  she  was  so  anxious  to 
become  a mother  that  she  submitted  to  one,  only  one,  act  of  sexual 
intercourse,  in  order  to  realise  her  wish.  She  has  alleged  that 
in  all  the  previous  years  of  her  married  life  she  had  had  no  sexual 
relations  with  her  husband  • Is  that  a story  which  any  man  of 
62 


Introduction. 


common  sense  can  accept?  How  did  she  know,  how  could  she^ 
know,  that  one  act  would  enable  her  to  count  with  certainty  or 
probability  on  the  fruition  of  her  hopes?  ” The  birth  of  the  still- 
born child  appears  to  have  been  a source  of  great  physioal 
anguish  to  her/'  and  her  longing  to  be  a mother  seems  quickly  to 
have  disappeared.  But  for  all  that  her  words  to  Annie  Walker 
are  “ consistent  only  with  the  desire  to  avoid  child-bearing." 
They  do  not  necessarily  imply  a cessation  of  marital  intercourse, 
and  with  regard  to  that  the  articles  which  the  police  found  among 
the  clothes  at  Claverton  Street  were  highly  significant. 

There  was  not  a scintilla  of  evidence  to  support  the  idea  that 
these  two  people  did  not  live  on  the  ordinary  terme  of  husband 
and  wife.  In  1885  they  made  the  acquaintance  of  Mr.  Dyson. 
It  was  impossible  to  speak  with  certainty  about  the  nature  of  the 
relations  between  the  prisoner  at  the  bar  and  George  Dyson.  It 
was,  however,  " quite  clear  that  George  Dyson  was  received  on 
terms  of  dangerous  intimacy  by  Mrs.  Bartlett  and  by  Mrs.  Bartlett's 
husband.'’  His  learned  friend's  description  of  the  situation  was, 
unless  he  had  misunderstood  him,  something  to  this  efiect.  The 
deceased  perceived  that  there  was  a growing  affection  between 
his  wife  and  Mr.  Dyson.  This  he  recognised  would,  in  the  event 
of  his  death,  “ culminate  in  a closer  and  nearer  relation — ^the 
relation  of  man  and  wife."  Nor  was  that  all.  He,  a man  only 
a few  years  older  than  either  of  them,  so  far  contemplated  the 
possibility  that  he  would  predecease  them  that  he  actually  made 
over  in  reversion  his  living  wife  to  the  man  whose  friendship  he 
was  cultivating."  And  what  happened  after  that?  This  com- 
pliant husband,  when  his  wife  said  to  him,  " You  have  made  me 
over  to  George  Dyson,  it  is  unfair  that  you  should  exercise  your 
rights  as  a husband,"  turns  over  on  his  pillow  and  does  an  act 
“ which  removes  the  only  obstacle  to  their  immediate  union."  It 
has  been  urged  that  the  Correspondence  which  has  been  produced 
in  Court  and  the  deceased's  will  confirm  the  existence  of  this 
extraordinary  compact.  But  it  was  Mr.  Attorney's  submission 
that  the  letters  which  passed  between  the  deceased  and  Mr.  Dyson 
suggested  nothing  more  than  that  the  two  men  entertained  for 
one  another  feelings  of  respect  and  admiration.  The  words  which 
the  deceased  is  said  to  have  used  at  Putney,  when  Mr.  Dyson  told 
him  that  he  was  growing  too  interested  in  his  wife,  only  diowed 
that  he  had  confidence  in  his  friend  and,  apparently,  in  his  wife, 
and  the  same  might  be  said  about  the  will  of  3rd  September. 

It  would  be  incorrect  to  speak  of  the  illness  from  which  the 
deceased  began  to  suffer  on  10th  December  as  serious  or  dangerous. 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 

It  was  true  that  it  was  attended  by  tiresome  complications,  and 
that  the  patient  was  troubled  with  his  teeth.  There  was  no  sug- 
gestion that  during  this  time  the  prisoner  ever  failed  in  her 
attention  to  him.  But  in  regard  to  that,  Mr.  Attorney  felt  bound 
to  observe  that  if  she  had  a guilty  purpose  in  her  mind,  when 
she  requested  Mr.  Dyson  to  procure  the  chloroform,  she  had  to 
be  very  careful  to  avoid  raising  a suspicion  that  she  was  wanting 
in  afection  to  the  person  against  whom  her  criminal  intentions 
were  directed.  The  jury  -would  doubtless  remember  her  senti- 
mental talk  in  the  cab  on  the  way  to  the  dentist’s — a situation 
hardly  calculated  to  arouse  romantic  feelings.  The  question 
which  he  would  now  invite  them  to  ask  themselves  was,  why  did 
she  want  the  chloroform?  Was  it  probable,  was  it  even  possible, 
that  her  statements  about  Dr.  Nichols  and  Annie  Walker  and  the 
mysterious  internal  complaint  were  figments  of  Mr.  Dyson's 
imagination?  It  was  plain  that  she  must  have  given  him  some 
reason  to  explain  her  desire  to  possess  the  chloroform.  Her  own 
account  of  the  matter  was  that,  with  the  exception  of  the  one 
act  which  was  to  gratify  her  longing  to  be  a mother,  her  rela- 
tions with  her  husband  were  always  platonic.  Nevertheless,  about 
16th  December,  when  he  was  still  an  invalid,  his  passion,  which 
had  lain  dormant  for  ten  years,  began  to  manifest  itself.  It  was 
in  order  to  be  able  to  wave  a handkerchief  soaked  in  chloroform 
in  his  face  and  thus  resist  his  advances  that  she  commissioned 
Mr.  Dyson  to  purchase  the  drug  for  her.  “ Gentlemen/’  said 
the  Attorney-General,  if  you  can  accept  that  statement  or  that 
explanation,  by  all  means  accept  it.’’ 

There  were  but  two  w^ays  in  which  the  poison  could  have  been 
criminally  administered.  Either  the  prisoner,  for  no  other 
person  could  have  done  it,  must  have  given  it  to  the  deceased, 
while  he  was  lying  upon  his  bade,  with  his  mouth  open  in  a 
state  of  partial  or  total  insensibility,  or  she  must  have  handed 
him  a glass  containing  the  fatal  draught,  as  if  for  an  ordinary 
purpose.”  These  last  words  called  forth  a strong  protest  from  Mr. 
Clarke  against  the  introduction  of  a fresh  theory  at  this  stage  of 
the  case.  This  was  the  first,  he  contended,  that  they  had  heard 
of  this  new  suggestion.  He  had  founded  his  comments  and  his 
cross-examination  upon  the  passage  in  the  Attorney-Generars 
address  in  which  he  said  that,  if  the  chloroform  had  Urn  crimin- 
ally administered  to  the  deceased,  he  must  have  lieen  **  lulled 
into  a state  of  stupor.”  Seeing  that  his  learned  friend  had' 
^erected  the  theory  of  suicide,  he  was  bound,  replied  Mr;  i 
Attorney,  to  submit  any  theory  which  ^'  pointed  in  a more 


Mts.  Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Introduction. 


able  direction.”  He  did  not  pretend  for  a moment  that  the  sug- 
gestion that  the  deceased  took  the  poison  from  the  hands  of  the 
prisoner  and  “ gulped  it  down  in  confidence  ” was  free  from  diffi- 
culties. It  would  cause  pain  and  would  presumably  be  followed 
by  “ violent  exclamations.”  Nevertheless,  it  was  an  infinitely 
more  acceptable  theory  than  that  of  suicide.  Adverting  to  the 
first  theory  and  the  medical  evidence  in  regard  to  it,  Mr.  Attorney 
did  not  deny  that  the  experts  had  described  the  process  of  ad- 
ministering chloroform  to  a sleeping  person  as  difficult.  But  was  it 
not  possible  that  the  attempt  to  render  the  deceased  insensible  had 
been  begun  before  he  fell  asleep!  The  doctors  also  spoke  of  the 
introduction  of  a liquid  into  the  gullet  of  an  insensible  man  as 
a delicate  operation.”  But  it  must  be  borne  in  mind  that 
they  were  talking  from  a purely  medical  point  of  view.  If  chloro- 
form were  given  to  this  man  with  criminal  intent,  no  considera- 
tions of  surgical  delicacy  would  arise.  It  would  simply  be  a 
question  of  pouring  it  down  his  throat  efiectively. 

The  behaviour  of  the  deceased  on  that  last  day,  the  oysters 
and  the  delicacies  of  which  he  partook  so  generously,  the  relish 
with  which  he  ordered  his  next  day’s  breakfast,  his  pleasurable 
anticipation  of  a visit  to  the  seaside,  were  suggestive  only  of  a 
man  who  felt  the  enjoyment  of  life,  and  not  of  one  who  medi- 
tated suicide.  The  theory  propounded  by  his  learned  friend  was 
that,  that  night,  after  his  strange  conversation  with  hie  wife,  he 
was  left  alone,  and  took  a fatal  dose  from  the  bottle  which  stood 
upon  the  mantelpiece  within  reach  of  his  bed.  The  question  of 
what  became  of  that  bottle  was  of  the  very  highest  importance. 
Dr.  Leach  swore  that  he  searched  the  room  carefully  about  half- 
past  four  that  morning  and  could  not  find  it.  ” Tou  must  ask 
yourselves  gravely,”  by  whom  and  for  what  reason  that  bottle 
was  removed?  The  prisoner  was  questioned  by  Dr.  Leach  as  to 
whether  the  deceased  could  Ifave  obtained  any  poison.  Her  reply 
was  that  it  was  impossible,  and  to  that  she  adhered  until  26th 
January,  when  she  told  him  that  amazing  story  of  how  she  came 
to  procure  the  chloroform.  On  the  day  following  her  husband’s 
death  she  presented  Mr.  Dyson  with  his  gold  watch,  saying  that 
” Edwin  told  her  to  give  it  to  him.”  When  did  he  say  that?  Is 
there  a shred  of  evidence  that  he  contemplated  anything  but  a 
life  of  ordinary  duration?  They  must  consider  whether  all  these 
circumstances  were  **  reasonably  consistent  with  the  innocence  ” 
of  the  prisoner,  who,  if  the  poison  were  criminally  administered, 
was  the  only  person  who  could  have  administered  it. 

It  was  fair  to  suggest  that  this  woman  not  improbably  saw  in 

65 


F 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Mr.  Dyson  a man  with  whom  her  husband  compared  unfavour- 
ably. She  knew  that  the  restrictions  of  which  she  had  formerly 
complained  were  no  longer  present  in  the  will  which  was  executed 
on  3rd  September.  On  10th  December » when  the  deceased  fell 
ill,  he  was  attended  by  a doctor  who  was  certainly  not  a strong- 
headed man,  and  was  in  addition  a stranger.  May  she  not  have 
taken  this  opportunity  of  ridding  herself  of  a husband  who  had 
become  distasteful  to  her,  in  order  “ to  clear  the  way  to  a union 
with  a man  for  whom  of  late  she  had  conceived  admiration  and 
apparently  affection  1 ” Motive  is  important,  and  the  absence  of 
motive  is  important;  but  if  the  logic  of  facts  drove  them  to  one 
conclusion,  they  could  not  escape  from  giving  effect  to  it  by  their 
verdict,  because  **  they  were  unable  to  satisfy  themselves  about 
the  strength  or  the  character  of  the  motive.  . . . ” 

When  the  Attorney-General  eat  down,  Mr.  Clarke  begged  his 
lordship  to  recall  Annie  Walker  and  put  to  her  one  question  with 
regard  to  anything  which  she  knew  about  the  single  act  ” — his 
lordship  would  understand  what  he  meant.  Annie  Walker  was, 
accordingly,  invited  “ to  step  up,*’  and  Mr.  Clarke,  by  his  lord- 
ship’s direction,  asked  her  whether,  while  she  was  attending  the 
prisoner  in  her  confinement,  anything  was  said  to  lead  her  to 
suppose  that  it  was  the  result  of  a single  act.  Her  reply  was  a 
simple  affirmative,  with  which  Mr.  Clarke  was  well  content,  but, 
unfortunately  for  him,  his  lordship  would  not  allow  the  matter  to 
rest  at  that.  Two  or  three  questions  from  the  bench  were  suffi- 
cient to  elicit  from  the  witness  that  what  she  meant  by  a single 
act  ” was  a single  act  without  a resort  to  preventive  measures. 
Both  husband  and  wife  had  told  her  that,  except  on  one  solitary 
occasion,  they  always  took  precautions. 

At  the  conclusion  of  this  incident,  which  must  have  caused  Mr. 
Clarke  to  regret  very  bitterly  that  hja  had  asked  for  the  witness’s 
recall,  Mr.  Justice  Wills  began  his  charge  to  the  jury.  The  de- 
cision of  the  Crown,  he  told  them,  not  to  proceed  against  Mr. 
Dyson,  far  from  being  a disadvantage,  was  on  the  contrary  an 
immense  gain,”  to  the  prisoner  at  the  bar.  Not  only  did  it  enable 
her  counsel  to  cross-examine  him,  but  it  prevented  the  calling  of 
evidence  as  to  ” circumstances  of  uncommon  suspicion  ” which 
could  not  fail  to  have  told  with  more  or  less  fatal  effect  against 
her,  as  well  as  against  him.”  His  lordship  then  adverted  to  the 
principal  events  in  the  early  history  of  the  Bartletts.  It  was 

unnecessary  to  inquire  into  the  merits  of  the  dispute  of  1878 

“ very  little,  indeed,  depended  upon  the  evidence  of  the  senior 
Bartlett.”  But  one  remark  he  must  make:  from  the  moment 


Introduction. 


that  he  appeared  upon  the  scene  after  his  son’s  death,  the  prisoner 
may  fairly  be  said  to  have  “ lived  under  the  observation  of  keen 
and  suspicious  eyes.”  Passing  on  to  the  prisoner’s  confinement, 
the  learned  judge  denounced  in  scathing  terms  works  such  as 
“ Esoteric  Anthropology.”  “ The  women  of  the  present  day  were 
used  to  strange  things,  and  it  was  such  reading  as  that  which 
helped  to  unsex  them.”  The  articles  discovered  in  Claverton 
Street,  and  what  they  had  just  now  heard  from  Annie  Walker  in 
the  witness-box,  were  ” the  natural  and  expected  consequences  of 
indulgence  in  literature  of  that  kind.”  Nevertheless,  despite 
these  ” vulgar  facts,”  these  people  were,  after  their  fashion,” 
living  happily  and  contentedly  together,  when  they  had  the  mis- 
fortune to  make  the  acquaintance  of  the  Rev.  George  Dyson.  They 
had  been  told  how  a close  intimacy  grew  up  between  them,  and 
how  a Christian  minister  took  advantage  of  the  husband’s  weak- 
ness to  spend  long  hours  with  the  wife,  under  the  pretence  of 
giving  her  lessons.  He  admitted  that  he  kissed  her,  and  they 
had  heard  how  she  had  been  seen  reclining  at  his  feet  with  her 
head  upon  his  knees.  And,  unfortunately,  it  was  impossible  to 
doubt,  because  they  ” had  it  on  the  statement  of  the  wife  as  well 
as  on  the  statement  of  the  Rev.  George  Dyson,”  that  a degree  of 
intimacy  was  reached  in  which  the  death  of  the  husband  and 
the  possibility  of  Dyson  succeeding  him  ” were  discussed. 

With  I'egard  to  the  Rev.  George  Dyson,  his  lordship  had  this 
advice  to  ofier.  They  should  only  place  ” a very  slender  faith  ” 
in  anything  he  said.  They  must  remember  that  he  had  to  make 
the  story  which  he  told  them  agree  with  what  he  had  already  said 
at  the  inquest.  Now,  when  he  deposed  in  the  Coroner’s  Court, 
he  was  in  fear  of  his  life,  and  could  any  one  doubt,  who  had  watched 
him  during  these  proceedings,  that  he  gave  his  evidence  on  that 
occasion  with  the  full  determination  that,  whatever  might  happen, 
the  Rev.  George  Dyson  should  suffer  as  little  harm  as  possible? 
There  was  his  account  of  the  interview  at  Putney  when,  if  he  can 
be  believed,  he  informed  the  deceased  that  he  was  growing  too 
interested  in  his  wife,  and  the  deceased  replied  by  pressing  him  to 
continue  the  intimacy.  That  story  rested  upon  his  own  word, 
and,  in  his  lordship’s  opinion,  presented  features  of  almost  re- 
volting improbability.”  On  the  other  hand,  he  was  disposed  to 
believe  what  Dyson  said  about  the  letter  which  the  deceased  sent 
him  from  Dover.  It  was  probably  true  that  it  referred  to  the 
prisoner’s  spiritual  state  and  to  the  effect  which  Mr.  Dyson’s 
preaching  had  upon  her.  In  any  event,  neither  in  the  husband’s 
letter  nor  in  Dyson’s  reply  could  his  lordship  discover  anything 

67 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


to  support  Mr.  Clarke's  contention  that  those  documents  “ stamped 
a new  phase  of  life  " in  which  this  woman  was  ''  consecrated  " 
as  the  object  of  Mr.  Dyson's  “special  personal  interest."  Dyson 
has  said  that  at  Claverton  Street  the  prisoner  spoke  of  her  hus- 
band's death  as  likely  to  occur  in  the  near  future.  According  to 
his  story,  he  was  incredulous  and  asked  her  to  explain,  and  it  was 
then  that  she  told  him  about  the  internal  complaint.  Other  con- 
versations on  this  subject  followed,  culminating  in  the  mention  of 
chloroform — “ chloroform  which  was  to  be  used  when  he  was  violent 
or  in  a paroxysm."  If  all  this  be  true,  it  is  a serious  matter,  for, 
said  his  lordship,  this  tale  about  the  internal  complaint  is  “ all 
moonsliine."  he  had  already  observed,  they  must  receive 

everything  which  this  man  said  with  “ becoming  caution,"  but  in 
this  instance  his  story  was  confirmed  by  another  witness.  Mrs. 
Matthews  has  stated  that  the  prisoner  assured  her,  when  she  asked 
her  why  she  “ told  those  lies  to  Mr.  Dyson,"  that  “ Edwin  did 
think  that  he  was  going  to  die."  Mr.  Dyson,  however,  disbelieved 
her,  and  to  convince  him  she  told  him  lies.  In  the  face  of  that, 
it  is  hardly  open  to  doubt  that  some  conversation,  such  as  Mr. 
Dyson  described,  did  in  effect  take  place. 

All  the  available  evidence  as  to  the  prisoner's  conduct  during 
her  husband's  illness  pointed  to  the  care  with  which  she  watched 
over  him.  Throughout  that  trying  time  she  scarcely  took  off  her 
clothes,  and  nursed  him  with  unremitting  attention.  In  all  the 
years  of  her  married  life  she  was  never  anything  but  “ perfectly 
devoted,  perfectly  affectionate."  That  was  greatly  in  her  favour. 
It  should  never  be  lost  sight  of,  and  should  “ stand  her  in  the 
fullest  stead."  The  learned  judge  then  went  on  to  discuss  the 
circumstances  attending  the  death  of  the  deceased.  In  view  of  the 
conditions  under  which  it  took  place,  he  could  see  nothing  sus- 
picious in  the  conversation  about  chloroform  with  Mrs.  Doggett, 
and  the  same  might  be  said  about  the  trivial  directions  for  the 
night  given  to  the  maidservant.  According  to  the  prisoner's 
statement,  she  woke  up  at  four  o'clock  in  the  morning  and  found 
that  her  husband  was  dead.  There  could  be  no  doubt  that  he  died 
from  swallowing  liquid  chloroform.  And  at  this  stage  he  must 
warn  them  to  disregard  every  supposition  which  has  been  put 
forward  except  the  original  theory  of  the  prosecution.  “ In  the 
name  of  justice,"  he  must  ask  them  completely  to  ignore  the  further 
suggestions  which  “ the  Attorney-General  let  fall  this  morning." 
They  had  heard  a great  deal  about  the  possibility  of  producing 
partial  insensibility  and  of  the  ability  of  a person  in  that  condi- 
tion to  swallow.  It  all  amounted  to  this : the  operation  would 
68 


Introduction. 


be  so  fraught  with  difficulties  that  a skilled  person  would  hardly 
venture  to  attempt  it.  They  were  not  dealing,  however,  with  the 
possible  action  of  an  individual  possessed  of  technical  knowledge, 
and,  in  connection  with  that,  he  must  remind  them  of  Pope’s 
line — ‘‘  Fools  rush  in  where  angels  fear  to  tread.”  Nevertheless, 
it  appeared  to  be  established  that,  up  to  the  present  time,  there 
was  no  recorded  instance  in  this  country  of  the  successful  adminis- 
tration of  chloroform  to  a grown  up  man  in  his  sleep.  Moreover, 
supposing  this  first  difficulty  were  to  be  overcome,  there  would  still 
remain  ” the  second  difficulty  of  selecting  the  right  moment  for 
the  rest  of  the  operation.”  It  was  plain  that  only  by  a singularly 
lucky  concatenation  of  circumstances  could  this  double  operation 
be  successfully  performed.  That  was  one  of  the  great  objections 
— and  “ a very  formidable  one  ” — ^to  the  theory  of  murder.  Now, 
if  the  difficulties  attending  the  administration  of  chloroform  to 
this  man  be  considered  apart  from  surrounding  circumstances, 
they  will  be  found  to  be  so  great  that  most  people  would  say  that 
it  could  never  have  taken  place.  But  Bartlett  did  swallow 
chloroform  which  must  have  been  given  him  ” either  criminally  or 
not  criminally.”  One  of  two  seemingly  impossible  theories  must 
therefore  be  right.  They  had  to  choose  between  them.  If  they 
could  not  decide  the  question,  then  the  Crown  had  failed  to  make 
out  a case. 

They  had  now  to  consider  ” the  history  of  the  chloroform 
bottle.”  It  was  ‘‘  the  most  material  element  in  the  case,”  and 
one  which  “ pressed  more  strongly  against  the  prisoner  than  almost 
any  other.”  But  before  going  into  the  matter  he  would  ask  them 
to  assume  that,  for  some  innocent  reason,  a bottle  of  chloroform 
was,  on  the  fatal  night,  within  the  reach  of  the  deceased.  He  had 
been  suffering  terribly  from  insomnia.  Only  those  who  have  had 
a similar  experience  can  recdise  the  intense  craving  which  a man, 
so  affiicted,  would  feel  for  that  which  would  give  him  sleep.  Was 
it  not  conceivable  that  he  might  have  sought  to  obtain  relief  from 
that  bottle,  and  in  the  dark  have  poured  out  a larger  amount  than 
he  intended  9 It  was  only  a conjecture,  but  it  offered  a better 
explanation  of  the  man’s  death  than  that  of  suicide  which  the 
learned  counsel  for  the  defence  had  been  instructed  to  suggest.  If 
the  chloroform  were  administered  to  Bartlett  non-criminally  (and 
under  that  denomination  his  lordship  included  “ every  variety  of 
suicide  and  accident  ”),  some  of  the  contents  of  that  bottle  must 
have  found  their  way  into  the  glass  which  Doggett  described  as 
having  a smell  of  ether  or  paregoric  about  it.  It  was  a strong 
fact  in  the  prisoner’s  favour  that  no  attempt  was  made  to  clean  it. 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


It  could  not  be  that  she  purpo&elj  left  it  with  the  smell  lingering 
about  it  in  order  to  create  the  impression  that  the  deceased  took 
the  poison  accidentally.  If  that  had  been  her  idea,  she  would  have 
suggested  something  of  the  kind,  and  that  she  never  did. 

The  glass  remained  upon  the  mantelpiece,  but  the  bottle  dis- 
appeared. The  prisoner  has  said  that,  ''  about  breakfast  time,'’ 
she  placed  it  in  a drawer  in  the  back  room.  But  what  happened 
to  it  in  the  meantime?  Soon  after  half-past  foxir  Dr.  Leach 
searched  the  room,  and,  if  there  be  one  circumstance  in  this  case 
about  which  he  is  clear,  it  is  that  “ that  bottle  was  not  there." 
The  learned  counsel  for  the  defence  was  yesterday  unable  to  offer 
any  satisfactory  explanation  of  its  disappearance.  In  the  course 
of  an  anxious  discussion  with  the  prisoner  about  the  cause  of  death 
Dr.  Leach  told  her  that  he  had  found  a bottle  of  chlorodyne.  The 
smell  of  chlorodyne  closely  resembles  that  of  chloroform.  Never- 
theless, she,  who  must  at  the  time  have  had  " a large  bottle  of  the 
fatal  stuff  in  her  possession,  said  nothing  about  it."  There  is  a 
complete  answer  to  all  this,  provided  that  the  story  which  she  told 
Dr.  Leach  on  26th  January  be  accepted.  If  it  be  true,  there  are 
" principles  of  modesty,  reserve,  and  delicacy  " which  might  well 
restrain  any  woman  from  disclosing  the  real  facts.  It  would, 
moreover,  explain  why  she  made  those  false  statements  to  Mr.  Dyson 
when  asking  him  to  procure  the  chloroform.  Much  must,  therefore, 
depend  upon  the  light  in  which  they  regarded  that  story.  But' 
before  going  into  the  matter,  his  lordship  ran  through  the  chief 
ev^ts  which  intervened  between  Mr.  Bartlett's  death  and  the 
prisoner's  visit  to  Dr.  Leach  on  26th  January.  It  was  much  in 
her  favour  that  she  appeared  to  have  been  genuinely  anxious  that 
the  post-mortem  should  take  place  as  soon  as  possible.  No  one 
can  say  whether,  when  she  left  the  house  after  the  post-mortem, 
she  took  tJie  chloroform  bottle  with  hear.  She  says  that  she  left  it 
behind  in  a drawer  in  the  back  room.  Unfortunately,  the 
coroner's  officer,  " a grown-up  policeman,"  who,  on  the  following 
Monday,  4th  January,  removed  some  empty  medicine  bottles  and 
the  sealed-up  jars  from  Claverton  Street,  omitted  to  search  the 
bedroom.  It  was  probably  true  that,  while  escorting  her  to 
Dulwich,  Mr.  Dyson  did  speak  about  the  chloroform.  That  he 
was  unea^  on  that  subject  is  shown  by  his  action  the  following 
day,  when  " he  sanctified  the  Sabbath  " by  throwing  away  on 
Wmdsworth  CJommon  the  four  bottles  which  had  originally  cem- 
teined  the  drug.  With  r^ard  to  the  angry  scene  at  the  Ifatthero’ 
ho^  on  4th  January,  when  Mr.  Dyson  bowed  his  head  and  e*- 
dauned,  “ Oh,  my  God,"  his  lordship  was  disposed  to  think  that 


Introduction. 


“ the  key  to  it  was  missing.  Probably  it  does  not  suit  Mr.  Dyson 
to  give  it  to  us.’’  But,  seeing  that  in  the  main  it  was  corroborated 
by  the  Matthews,  they  would  be  justified  in  accepting  Dyson’s 
account  of  his  subsequent  interviews  with  the  prisoner. 

For  the  first  time,  on  26th  January,  the  prisoner  informed  Dr. 
Leach  that,  when  her  husband  died,  she  had  chloroform  in  her 
possession.  She  explained  the  matter  by  that  wonderful  story  of 
a platonic  union,  broken  hj  one  solitary  act  which  led  to  her 
confinement  and  the  birth  of  a still-born  child.  If  that  were  true, 
it  might  also  be  true  that  she  intended  to  wave  the  chloroform 
in  her  husband’s  face  and  so  produce  a cessation  of  his  urgency.” 
Dr.  Leach  has  said  that  his  own  observations  strongly  disposed  him 
to  believe  her.  But,  when  examined,  he  was  unable  to  point  to 
a single  fact  which  would  induce  an  ordinary  person  to  suppose 
that  the  relations  of  these  people  were  other  than  those  which  nor- 
mally subsist  between  husband  and  wife.  They  had  been  told 
about  the  articles  found  in  the  deceased’s  trousers  pocket,  and  they 
had  heard  what  Annie  Walker  said  in  the  witness-box  that 
morning.  Had  she  not  by  one  sentence  swept  away  the  whole 
foundation  of  that  morbid  romance?  And,  if  they  rejected  that 
story,  this  was  the  situation  which  they  must  face-—”  chloroform 
procured  for  an  unexplained  and  inexplicable  purpose,  death  by 
chloroform,  the  bottle  disappearing,  and  by  the  statement  of  the 
woman  herself  emptied  and  thrown  away  1^  her.  When  at  last 
an  explanation  is  given  it  is  a tissue  of  romance  such  as,  if  the 
evidence  of  Annie  Walker  be  accepted,  could  deceive  no  one  but 
the  ecstatic  person  to  whom  it  was  originally  detailed.” 

They  were  dealing,  said  his  Lordship  in  conclusion,  ” with 
the  case  of  a married  woman  who  had  fallen  into  a perilous  friend- 
ship with  a man  who  was  not  her  husband.”  That  husband  in  the 
latter  part  of  his  life  was  4)robably  ” no  attractive  object  either 
mentally  or  physically,  and  the  only  explanation  of  the  circum- 
stances connected  with  his  disappearance  from  this  world  would 
not  stand  in  the  presence  of  vulgar  facts.”  That,  however,  was 
only  his  opinion.  They  were  the  jury,  and  they  must  decide. 
He  had  drawn  their  attention  to  certain  very  important  points 
which  told  greatly  in  the  prisoner’s  favour,  and,  with  regard  to  the 
others,  he  would  feel  ” no  tinge  of  regret  ” should  they  come  to 
the  conclusion  that  he  had  ” erred  on  the  side  of  severity.”  But 
they  must  do  their  duty,  and,  with  a few  words  of  advice,  he  in- 
vited them  to  retire  and  consider  their  verdict. 

Every  day  since  the  opening  of  the  trial  public  interest  in 
the  case  had  increased,  and  it  was  in  a densely  crowded  Court 

71 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


that  Mr.  Justice  Wills  delivered  his  charge.  “ No  one,”  says  ar 
anonymoua  contributor  to  the  Pall  Mall  Gazette,^  is  likely  evei 
to  forget  the  lucid,  the  impressive,  and  the  eloquent  summing 
up  of  Judge  Wills.  He  will  remember  the  grave  but  kind  voice 
which  rose  to  vehemence  and  sank  to  a whisper.  ...  As  the 
afternoon  grew  older  and  the  shadows  deeper  the  tone  of  the 
judge  seemed  to  increase  in  solemnity,  until  the  faintest  sound, 
the  shutting  of  a door,  the  fall  of  a book,  the  scratching  of  a pen 
became  an  irritant,  so  tense  had  the  occasion  become.”  After 
about  an  hour  the  clatter  of  tongues,  which  broke  out  directly  the 
jury  retired  and  the  judge  quitted  the  bench,  was  hushed  as  the 
jurymen  re-entered  the  box  and  as  a fragile  figure  in  black  sup- 
ported on  either  side  by  two  female  warders,  the  only  woman  in 
Court  without  a hat,^  appeared  in  the  front  of  the  dock.  It 
was  not,  however,  to  announce  their  verdict,  but  to  inquire  at 
what  hour  the  Doggetts  had  gone  to  bed  on  the  fatal  night,  that, 
the  jury  had  returned.  Mr.  Doggett  was  present  in  Court,  and, 
having  stated,  in  reply  to  the  learned  judge,  that  it  was  at  half- 
past  twelve,  as  near  as  he  could  tell,  they  again  retired.  More 
than  another  hour  elapsed  before  they  came  back  and  ” with 
solemn  faces  ascended  to  their  pew-like  seats.”  Once  more  the 
terrible  silence  was  broken  ” by  the  click  of  the  dock  handle 
as  it  turned  to  give  passage  to  the  prisoner,  whose  face  was  now 
livid,  her  eyes  closed,  her  lips  glued  together,  and  scarcely  alive. 
Carried  to  the  front  of  the  dock,  she  was  supported  on  each  si<le 
by  the  faithful  women,  pale  but  composed.  Two  spruce  doctors 
and  the  grave  chaplain  stood  on  her  left,  and  behind  her  again 
was  the  sturdy  policeman.”^  “ Do  you  find  Adelaide  Bartlett 
guilty  or  not  guilty?”  asked  the  Clerk.  ” Although,”  replied  the 
foreman,  and  then  he  paused,  for  from  the  street  outside  came  the 
sound  of  a great  crowd  cheering,  y although,”  he  continued, 
we  think  there  is  the  gravest  suspicion  attaching  to  the  prisoner, 
we  do  not  think  there  is  sufiicient  evidence  to  show  bow  or  by 
whom  the  chloroform  was  administered,”  ” Then  you  say,  gentle- 
men, that  the  prisoner  is  not  guilty?”  ‘‘  Not  guilty,”  replied 
the  foreman,  and  at  these  words  the  spectators  gave  vent  to  their 
pent-up  feelings  in  a loud  burst  of  applause — a demonstration 
which  the  learned  judge  sternly  repressed.  Then,  after  the 
prisoner  in  a fainting  condition  had  been  assisted  down  the  stairs 


B PaU  Mall  Gazette,  19th  April,  1886. 
^ Daily  Telegraph,  19th  April,  1886. 

1 Pan  Man  GazetU,  19th  April,  1886. 
72 


Introduction. 


from  the  dock,  he  addressed  a few  courteous  thanks  to  the  jury. 
But,  whether  by  accident  or  by  design,  when  he  thus  dismissed 
them,  he  omitted  to  say  that  he  concurred  with  their  verdict. 

Mr.  Clarke  was  the  hero  of  the  hour.  When  his  brougham 
emerged  from  the  courtyard  of  the  Old  Bailey  it  was  followed 
along  the  Strand  by  excited  admirers,^  and  that  evening,  when 
he  went  to  the  Lyceum  to  see  Irving  in  “ Faust,"  the  audience 
gave  him  an  enthusiastic  welcome.  The  newspapers  throughout  the 
kingdom  joined  in  the  general  chorus  of  approval,  but  in  a more 
subdued  tone.  " No  other  verdict,"  said  the  Timesj  “ could  be 
expected,  but  the  Pimlico  mystery  was  as  much  a mystery  as 
ever.  . . . Whether  on  the  theory  of  guilt  or  innocence,  the 

whole  story  was  marvellous."®  A few  days  later,  the  Lancet,^ 
in  a closely  reasoned  article,  expressed  the  opinion  that  there  was 
**  not  sufELcient  evidence  to  prove  beyond  all  reasonable  doubt  that 
a murder  had  been  committed."  Nevertheless,  “ the  purchase  of 
the  chloroform  by  Mr.  Dyson,  at  Mrs.  Bartlett's  request,  the  certain 
death  of  Mr.  Bartlett  by  swallowing  the  drug,  and  the  disappear- 
ance of  the  bottle  which  contained  it,  formed  a chain  of  events 
which  required  all  the  forensic  talent  of  Mr.  Clarke  to  loosen  and 
unlink  to  the  satisfaction  of  the  jury."  A month  later  the  same 
paper,  in  two  successive  issues,  published  an  article  by  Dr.  Leach, 
in  which  he  told  the  story  of  his  attendance  upon  Mr.  Bartlett  in 
Claverton  Street.®  It  was  simply  a very  technical  account  of  his 
illness,  but  it  concluded  with  a suggestion  as  to  how  the  patient 
came  to  swallow  the  chloroform.  According  to  Dr.  Leach,  " he 
took  it  out  of  sheer  mischief  with  the  intention  of  alarming  by 
his  symptoms  the  wife  who,  an  hour  or  two  before,  had  talked 
about  using  it  in  an  emergency."® 

All  attempts  to  solve  the  problem  are  fraught  with  difficulties, 
and,  on  the  hypothesis  of  ]|^Irs.  Bartlett’s  innocence.  Dr.  Leach’s 
conjecture  is  as  good  as  any  other.  He  accepts  her  explanation 
of  why  she  procured  the  chloroform.  That  a bottle  of  chloroform 
was,  for  some  innocent  reason,  in  the  room  is  a necessary  corollary 
to  any  theory  that  Mr.  Bartlett  himself  either  deliberately  or 
accidentally  took  the  poison.  Turning  to  the  other  side  of  the 
question,  it  is  evident  that,  when  the  Attorney-General  came  into 
Court,  his  knowledge  of  the  scientific  side  of  the  case  was  greatly 

®Sir  E.  Clarke,  *‘The  Story  of  My  life,”  253. 

®The  TVmes,  19th  April,  1886. 

* The  Lcmcet,  24th  April,  1886. 

® The  LcunceU  22nd  and  ^th  May,  1886. 

® The  Xonce^,  29th  May,  1886. 


73 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


inferior  to  that  of  Mr,  Clarke.  It  was  a time  of  considerable 
political  excitement.  Mr.  Gladstone  had  just  introduced  his  first 
Home  Rule  Bill,  and  Mr.  Attorney,  an  ardent  nationalist,  threw 
himself  heart  and  soul  into  the  struggle.  Had  he  been  less  occu- 
pied with  other  matters,*  it  is  possible  that  the  case  for  the  Crown 
might  have  been  presented  differently.  As  it  was,  the  theory  of  the 
prosecution  was  so  weakened  by  the  cross-examination  of  the 
medical  witnesses  that  Mr.  Attorney  tried  to  shift  his  ground, 
and,  in  his  final  address  to  the  jury,  made  two  new  suggestions 
which  Mr.  Justice  Wills  ruled  came  too  late  and  were  iiia<lnii«sible. 
The  first  of  these  was  that  the  prisoner  might  have  given  the  <le- 
ceased  the  fatal  dose  in  a glass  of  water  which  “ he  gulped  down 
in  confidence.”  But,  as  Mr.  Attorney  himself  acknowledged,  that 
was  open  to  the  grave  objection  that  the  pain  of  swallowing  the 
drug  must  have  caused  the  unfortunate  man  to  break  out  into 
violent  exclamations.”  The  second  suggestion  was  of  a dif- 
ferent character,  and,  like  the  original  theory,  was  based  on  the 
supposition  that  the  poison  was  poured  down  his  throat  after  he 
had  been  ” lulled  into  a stupor  ” by  the  process  of  inhalation. 
There  was  this  difference,  however,  that  Mr.  Attorney  now  inti- 
mated that  the  attempt  to  render  him  insensible  might  very  pro- 
bably have  begun  before,  not  after,  he  fell  asleep.  But,  having 
put  forward  the  idea,  he  did  not  follow  it  up  and  develop  ii , Tet 
it  appears  to  be  deserving  of  serious  consideration. 

It  is  interesting  to  wonder  whether  the  trial  might  have 
had  another  termination  had  the  Crown  proceeded  on  the  supposi- 
tion that  Mr.  Bartlett  allowed  himself  to  be  “ chloroformed.”  The 
general  circumstances  are  by  no  means  inconsistent  with  that 
possibility.  In  the  course  of  the  day  gas  had  been  given  him  at 
the  dentist^B,  and,  not  only  did  he  suffer  no  inconvenient  after- 
effects, but,  according  to  Dr.  Leach^^  who  administered  it,  he 
recovered  from  it  with  exceptional  rapidity  and  went  home  in 
excellent  spirits.  He  had  been  greatly  troubled  with  insomnia, 
and  the  soporifics  which  the  doctor  prescribed  afforded  him  little 
relief.  He  trusted  his  wife  implicitly,  and,  if  she  told  him  that 
she  could  insure  him  a good  night’s  rest  through  the  instrumen- 
tality of  chloroform,  he  may  very  well  have  allowed  her  to  try  the 
experiment.  And  in  connection  with  that  her  inquiry  as  to 
whether  chloroform  was  not  pleasant  to  take,  which  she  put  to 
Mrs.  Doggett  in  her  husband’s  presence,  acquires  some  significance. 
If  the  Crown  had  adopted  this  theory,  the  question  of  the 


^ The  Lancet^  22nd  May,  1886. 
74 


Introduction 


feasibility  of  administering  chloroform  during  sleep  would  never 
have  arisen.  It  would  only  have  been  necessary  to  show  that  the 
difficulty  of  pouring  the  liquid  down  the  throat  of  an  unconscious 
person  was  not  insurmountable. 

That,  however,  is  mere  speculation.  What  happened  on  that 
New  Tear’s  night  in  Claverton  Street  is  never  likely  to  be  known, 
and  most  people  who  study  the  case  will  probably  come  to  the  con- 
clusion that,  in  the  circumstances,  the  jury  returned  the  right 
verdict.  But  among  those  who  hold  that  opinion  there  may  be 
some  who  will  say  with  Sir  James  Paget^  that,  once  it  was  all  over, 
she  should  have  told  us,  in  the  interests  of  science,  how  she  did 
it. 


^ l^et.  Sir  James  (1814-1899) ; created  Baronet,  1871 ; serg^t-snrgeon  to 
Queen  vietoria,  1877 ; consulting  surgeon  to  St.  Bartholomew’s  Hospital. 


Leading  Dates  in  the  Bartlett  Trial. 


1876. 

April  9 Thomas  Edwin  Bartlett  married  Adelaide  Blanche  de  la 

Tremoille,  of  which  marriage  there  was  a stillborn  child. 

1889. 

November  15  Mr.  Bartlett  accepted  by  the  British  Equitable  as  a first- 
class  life. 


1885. 

June 

September  8 


October 

December  8 
15--21 

19 

27 

28 
81 


1886. 

January  1 

2 
3 

6 

7 

26 

February  4 

11 
18 


March  20 

April  12 

17 


The  Bartletts  made  the  acquaintance  of  the  Rev.  George 
Dyson. 

Mr.  Bartlett  made  a will  leaving  everything  to  his  wife,  and 
nominating  Dyson  one  of  his  executors. 

Dyson  twice  visited  the  Bartletts  at  Dover. 

The  Bartletts  moved  to  Claverton  Street,  London,  where 
Dyson  visited  them  repeatedly. 

Mr.  Bartlett  took  ill,  and  Dr.  Leach  found  systems  o 
mercurial  poisoning. 

Mr.  Bartlett,  troubled  by  his  teeth,  made  visits  to  the 
dentist. 

Dr.  Dudley  called  in  to  assist  Dr.  Leach. 

Dyson  agreed  to  purchase  chloroform  for  Mrs.  Bartlett. 

Dyson  bought  6 ounces  of  chloroform. 

Mr.  Bartlett,  apparently  in  excellent  spirits,  visited  the 
dentist.  Mrs.  Bartlett  had  a discussion  with  Mrs. 
Doggett  about  chloroform. 

Mr.  Bartlett  died  in  the  early  morning. 

Post-mortem  examination ; no  natural  cause  of  death  found. 

Dyson  threw  away  four  bottles  which  had  contained  chloro- 
form on  Wandsworth  Common. 

Mrs.  Bartlett  threw  away  a bottle  of  chloroform. 

Opening  of  Coroner’s  inquest. 

Government  analyst  reported  chloroform  to  be  the  eause  of 
death. 

Inquest  resumed. 

Mrs.  Bartlett  arrested. 

Coroner’s  jury  returned  verdict  of  “wilful  murder”  against 
Mrs.  Bartletti  and  found  Dyson  aooessory  before  the 
fact.  Dyson  was  then  taken  into  custody. 

Mrs.  Bartlett  and  Dyson  committed  for  triaL 

Trial  eommenced^  and  Attorney-Genera!  withdrew  the 
charge  against  Dyson, 

Mrs.  Bartlett  found  “Not  Guilty.” 


76 


THE  TRIAL 


WITHIN  THB 

CENTRAL  CRIMINAL  COURT, 
Old  Bailey,  London, 

MONDAY,  12th  APRIL,  1886. 


Judge — 

The  Hon.  Mr.  JUSTICE  WILLS. 

Counad  for  the  Crown — 

The  Attorney-General  (Sir  Charles  Rdssell,  Q.C.,  M.P.), 
Mr.  Harry  B.  Poland, 

Mr.  R.  S.  Wrioht,  and 
Mr.  Moloney. 

(Instructed  by  the  Solicitor  to  the  Treasury.) 

Oounsd  for  like  Prisoner,  Mrs.  Bartlett — 

Mr.  Edward  Clarke,  Q.C.,  M.P., 

Mr.  Mead,  <and 
Mr.  Edward  Beal. 

(Instructed  by  Messrs.  Lewis  & Lewia) 

Gowned  for  PLeo.  G.  Dyson — 

Mr.  Lockwood,  Q.C.,  M.P., 

Mr.  Charles  Mathews. 

SoHdeitor  for  Mrs.  Barttett — Mr.  K N.  Wood. 


n 


First  Day— Monday,  I2th  April,  1886. 
Application  on  behalf  of  Rev.  G.  Dyson. 


Mr.  Lockwood — My  lord,  before  the  Court  proceeds  to  arraign 
the  prisoners,  I appear  before  your  lordship  with  my  learned 
friend,  Mr.  Charles  Mathews,  on  behalf  of  the  prisoner  Dyson, 
and,  with  reference  to  the  course  that  is  to  be  pursued  in  this 
Court,  I do  not  propose  to  go  at  any  length  into  the  reason  for 
making  the  application  that  I am  about  to  make  to  your  lordship, 
because  that  would  be  obviously  an  inconvenient  course.  There- 
fore, I do  not  think  it  necessary  to  do  it,  because  I am  sure  your 
lordship  is  fully  familiar  from  the  depositions  with  the  main  facts 
of  this  case.  Those  main  facts  are  also  very  familiar  both  to  my 
learned  friend  and  myself,  and,  having  regard  to  those  facts  con- 
tained in  those  depositions,  I make  this  application  on  behalf  of 
my  client,  that  the  prisoners  be  tried  separately. 

Mr.  Justice  Wills — I quite  understand  and  anticipate  your 
reasons,  Mr.  Lockwood;  they  are  patent  to  anybody  who  has  read 
such  depositions  as  these. 

Mr.  Clarke — My  Lord,  the  application  that  my  learned  friend 
has  made  on  behalf  of  his  client  I know  is  made  upon  his  own 
responsibility;  but  it  is  one  that  I most  sincerely  concur  in,  for 
reasons  which  your  lordship  may  anticipate. 

The  Attornbt-General — It  is  unnecessary,  my  lord,  to  con- 
sider the  application  that  has  been  made,  b^ause  of  the  course 
which,  after  the  anxious  and  careful  consideration  my  learned 
friends  and  myself  have  given  to  this  matter,  we  have  resolved 
to  take.  We  have  come  to  the  conclusion  that  there  is  no  case  to 
be  submitted  to  the  jury  upon  which  we  could  properly  ask  them 
to  convict  George  Dyson,  and  after  his  arraignment  we  propose 
to  offer  no  evidence  against  him.  ^ 

. . JUSTICE  Wills — ^All  I have  to  say  upon  this  subject  is  that 
it  IS  in  the  competence  of  the  Crown  to  take  such  course  as  they 
think  fit  to  take,  and  no  one  can  doubt  that  it  is  taken  under  a 
due  sense  of  responsibility.  With  regard  to  matters,  I think  the 
more  proper  course,  for  every  reason,  is  that  I should  express  no 
opim<m  about  it  one  way  or  the  other;  any  expression  of  mine 
shall  he  reserved  until  the  case  has  been  investigated  against  the 
other  prisoner.  o o 


A Juror— I beg  to  inform  your  lordship,  as  to  Mr.  Dyson,  that 
I am  a personal  friend  of  his. 

Mr.  Justice  Wills— Well,  that  is  ho  disqualification. 

The  Attoroty-General — If  the  Crown  expresses  no  opinion 
upon  the  question,  I may  say  that  may  certainly  be 

7S' ■ 


Application  on  behalf  of  Rev.  G.  Dyson. 

called  as  a witness.  There  can  be  no  desire  that  any  personal 
friend  of  his  should  be  on  the  jury.  I will  therefore,  on  behalf 
of  the  Crown,  ask  the  gentleman  to  stand  by. 

[The  juror  retired,  and  another  gentleman  was  substituted  in 
his  place.] 

The  prisoners  pleaded  not  guilty. 

The  jury  were  then  sworn,  and  both  prisoners  were  given  in 
charge  on  the  indictment,  and  also  on  the  coroner^s  inquisition. 

The  Attorney-General — My  lord,  I offer  no  evidence  on  the 
part  of  the  Crown  against  Mr.  Dyson;  and  in  taking  that  course 
we  follow  the  course  that  wus  taken  by  the  late  Lord  Chief  Baron 
Pollock,  and  offer  no  evidence  against  him. 

Mr.  Justice  Wills — Gentlemen,  the  Attorney-General,  who 
appears  for  the  Crown  in  this  case,  having  thoroughly  considered 
the  matter,  and  having  the  best  means  of  knowledge  of  anybody, 
and  acting  ui  iler  a grave  sense  of  responsibility,  has  decide<l  that 
the  proper  course  to  be  followed  in  this  case  is  to  offer  no  evidence 
on  the  part  of  the  Crown  against  Mr.  Dyson.  Therefore  your 
duty  is  to  say  at  once  that  he  is  not  guilty. 

The  Foreman — Not  guilty,  my  lord. 

Mr.  Lockwood — I do  not  know  whether  your  lordship  will 
take  upon  yourself  formally  to  discharge  him. 

Mr.  Justice  Wills— Yes;  he  is  entitled  to  his  discharge;  the 
grand  jury  are  not  sitting. 


Opening  Statement  for  the  Crown. 

The  Attorney-General — My  lord,  and  gentlemen  of  the  jury, 
it  now  becomes  my  duty  to  lay  before  you,  as  clearly  as  I can, 
the  facts  of  this  case  in  support  of  the  very  serious  charge  upon 
which  the  prisoner  at  the  bar  is  arraigned.  Before  I enter  upon 
these  facts,  I owe  a word  of  explanation  as  to  the  course  which 
has  just  been  taken  in  reference  to  Mr.  Dyson.  There  would  have 
been  great  inconvenience  in*  trying  these  prisoners  together.  As 
my  learned  friend  Mr.  Lockwood,  however,  has  applied  they  should 
be  tried  separately,  that  removes  any  inconvenience,  which  possibly 
might  result  in  injustice;  but  that  is  a question  which  need  not 
at  this  moment  be  decided.  There  would  be  a still  greater  incon- 
venience, and  even  greater  peril  of  injustice,  if  they  had  been 
tried  together,  because  if  they  were  tried  together  the  statements 
which  have  been  made  by  Mr.  Dyson  would  have  been  admissible  in 
evidence  on  the  part  of  the  prosecution  as  evidence  against  him, 
but  which  statements,  except  in  so  far  as  they  were  proved  to  have 
been  made  in  the  hearing  and  presence  of  the  prisoner,  would  not 
have  been  any  evidence  whatever  against  her.  You  cannot  fail  to 
see  that,  although  it  would  not  be  evidence  against  her,  her  case 

79 


Adeleide  Bartlett. 

The  Attorney-General  ^ 

might  be  prejudiced  by  statements  so  proved  to  have  been  made 
by  the  other  prisoner,  and  it  would  have  been  obviously  unjust 
to  her  that  she  should  have  been  in  any  way  aftected  by  statements 
made  by  him,  some  of  which  were  not  made  on  oath,  and  as  to 
none  of  which  could  her  learned  counsel  have  an  opportunity 
before  you  of  cross-examining  the  man  who  made  them.  Hut 
beyond  this  consideration,  gentlemen,  as  1 am  sure  you  will  believe, 
we  representing  the  interests  of  the  Crown  and  the  interests  oi 
the  public  having  carefully  examined  for  ourselves  whether  there 
was  a case  which  it  would  be  proper  to  lay  before  you,  and  upon 
which  it  would  have  been  proper  for  you  to  have  been  asked  to 
o-ive  a decision,  felt  certain  upon  the  best  consideration  that  we 
could  give  to  the  casfr— in  view  not  only  of  the  evidence  given 
at  the  previous  inquiry,  but  as  the  result  of  later  and  oi  more 
extended  inquiry  and  examination— we  came  to  the  conclusion 
that  after  we  had  exhausted  the  evidence  at  our  command,  the 
learned  iudge  who  presides  here  would  in  all  probability  ask  me 
to  say,  would  certainly  have  felt  called  upon  to  ask  the  counsel 
for  the  prosecution  whether  in  fact  there  was  a case  proper  to  be 
considered  by  the  jury  against  Mr.  Dyson,  and  we  should  have 
felt  called  upon  to  say,  as  we  now  say,  that,  although  there  are 
circumstances  of  some  suspicion  in  the  case  against  Mr.  Dyson, 
yet  that  upon  the  whole  there  is  no  rule  by  which  we  should  have 
been  justified  in  asking  it  to  be  considered  by  you  in  the  box 
upon  the  question  of  his  guilt. 

Now,  gentlemen  of  the  jury,  the  prisoner  at  the  bar,  Adelaide 
Bartlett,  is  charged  with  the  murder  of  her  husband,  that  murder 
having  taken  place — if  it  were  a murder— either  on  the  night  of 
31st  December  or  early  on  the  morning  of  1st  January  in  the 
present  year.  The  deceased  was  a man  named  Thomas  Edwin 
Bartlett.  He  was  at  the  time  of  his  death  forty  years  of  age. 
He  had  married  the  prisoner  at  the  bar  on  9th^  April,  1876,  at 
the  parish  church  of  Croydon.  She  is  now  some  thirty  or  thirty-one 
years  of  age,  having  been  born  in  tfee  month  of  December,  1866. 
Her  maiden  name — for  she  was  a Frenchwoman— was  Adelaide 
Blanche  de  la„  Tremoiile.  She  was  born  at  Orleans  in  the  year 
and  month  I have  stated.  She  appears  to  have  met  her  husband 
for  the  first  time  in  the  beginning  of  1876,  while  she  was  staying 
or  lodging  with  one  Charles  Bartlett,  a brother  of  the  deceased. 
Thomas  Edwin  Bartlett  started  in  business  some  thirteen  years 
ago,  in  partnership  with  a Mr.  Baxter,  in  the  neighbourhood  of 
Herne  Hill  and  Dulwich.  Their  business,  being  that  of  grocers, 
apparently  thrived  and  grew,  until,  at  the  time  of  his  death, 
the  deceased  was  owner,  or  part  owner,  and  interested  in  alto- 
gether some  six  shops  of^  p^^  which  ara  about 

Brixton,  Dulwich,  and  that  neighfeurhobd.  After  the  marriage, 
which  occurred,  as  I have  told  you,  in  the  month  of  April,  1875, 
80 


Sir  Charles  Russell.  Q.Ci.  M.P. 


Opening  Statement  for  the  Crown. 

The  Atlorney-Gencnl 

this  lady  was  sent  to  school— or  went  to  school,  perhaps  I ought 
more  correctly  to  say — at  Stoke  Newington,  and  during  the  vaca- 
tion she  cohabited  with  her  husband.  At  a later  period  she  went 
to  a convent  school  in  Belgium,  where  she  remained  for  some 
eighteen  months,  and  in  the  intervals  of  the  vacation  she  was  in 
the  habit  of  rejoining  her  husband.  In  1877  she  came  to  live 
with  her  husband,  and  at  that  time  they  took  up  their  residence 
at  one  of  the  shops  of  the  deceased — namely,  a shop  in  Station 
Road,  Herne  Hill — and  they  continued  to  live  there  from  the 
year  1877  till  1883.  In  the  Christmas  of  1881  the  prisoner  gave 
birth  to  a stillborn  child,  and  on  that  occasion  the  pain  of  labour 
seems  to  have  been,  exceptionally  great;  and  she  seems  to  have 
formed  the  resolution,  or  at  all  events  to  have  expressed  a resolu- 
tion, that  dbe  would  have  no  more  children. 

In  1882  the  deceased  and  his  wife,  the  prisoner  at  the  bar, 
‘nioved  to  a place  in  Lordship  Lane,  also  one  of  the  deceased’s 
shops.  In  1883  they  removed  to  The  Cottage  at  Merton  Abbey, 
not  far  from  Wimbledon,  and  there  they  remained  until  the  month 
of  September,  1883. 

- Early  in  1885  the  deceased  and  the  prisoner  at  the  bar  first 
made  the  acquaintance  of  George  Dyson,  who  not  long  ago  stood 
in  that  dock.  He  is  a man,  I think,  of  some  twenty-seven  or 
thirty  years  of  age.  He  is  a Wesleyan,  and  I believe  is  a Wesleyan 
minister.  He  graduated  at  Trinity  College,  Dublin,  and  he  is 
the  son  of  a Wesleyan  minister  at  Poole,  who,  I believe,  is  well 
known  and  respected.  Finally,  Mr.  George  Dyson  was  placed  in 
charge  of  some  Wesleyan  chapel,  and  the  congregation  belonging 
to  it,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Puiney.  He  seems  very  early  to 
have  become  acquainted  with  the  deceased  and  with  the  prisoner 
at  the  bar.  Their  acquaintance,  I think,  began  by  the  prisoner 
and  her  husband  attending  at  his  place  of  worship.  He  seems 
to  have  been  in  the  habit  of  visiting  and  dining  and  being  on 
close  terms  of  social  intimacy  with  the  deceased  and  with  the 
prisoner  at  the  bar;  and  th^re  is  no  doubt  that,  so  far  as  the 
evidence  enables  one  to  judge,  his  acquaintance  and  his  friend- 
ship seems  to  have  been  greatly  valued,  if  I may  judge  by  some 
letters  which  are  put  before  me,  by  the  deceased  himself. 

I have  given,  gentlemen,  the  narration  in  the  order  in  which 
you  may  probably  find  it  moat  convenient,  namely,  in  the  order 
of  time.  In  the  month  of  September,  1885,  the  deceased  made 
his  will — on  the  3rd  of  September;  and  by  that  will,  which  was 
witnessed  by  two  of  his  own  clerks  in  one  of  his  places  of  business, 
he  left  all  he  possessed  to  the  prisoner  at  the  bar,  and  by  that 
will  he  made  Mr.  Dyson  and  a solicitor,  Mr.  Wood,  the  executors. 
Whether  that  was  the  first  will  that  the  deceased  made  may  be 
doubted.  There  seems  to  be  some  suggestion,  in  the  statement  of 
a witness  who  will  be  called  before  you,  tbat  he  had  made  a 

G 81 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Tlie  AttomeT'General 

previous  will,  unquestionably  benefiting  his  wife,  but  supposed  to 
contain,  according  to  her  statement  of  it,  some  restriction  upon 
the  benefits  which  she  was  to  receive  under  it — in  this  sense,  that 
if  she  married  again  those  benefits  should  cease,  or  should  ije 
lessened.  There  is  no  doubt,  as  regards  the  will  of  September, 
1886,  both  Mr.  Dyson  and  the  prisoner  knew  the  contents  of  that 
will. 

Now,  gentlemen,  the  next  date  is  October,  1885.  About  that 
date  the  deceased  and  his  wife  moved  to  Claverton  Street — -No. 
86,  I think — ^where  they  had  lodgings  on  the  first  or  drawing- 
room floor,  consisting  of  the  drawing-room,  which  faced  the  street, 
and  of  a bedroom  opening  from  and  behind  the  drawing-room; 
and  they  continued  to  live  there  from  the  month  of  October,  1885, 
until  the  date  of  his  death,  on  the  night  of  31st  December,  or  the 
morning  of  1st  January  in  this  year. 

Mr.  Dyson’s  intimacy  was  continued  with  the  deceased  and 
his  wife  down  to  the  time  of  the  husband’s  death ; and,  as  I have 
mentioned,  the  will  by  which  his  wife,  the  prisoner  at  the  bar, 
was  benefited — in  fact,  the  sole  person  benefited — ^had  been  made. 
And  it  is  right  to  state  that  so  far  as  the  evidence  which  we  have 
to  offer  to  you  on  the  part  of  the  Crown  (and,  of  course,  we  shall 
put  before  you  all  the  evidence  we  have,  whether  it  makes  for 
or  against  the  prisoner  at  the  bar)  does  not  point  to  the  existence 
of  any  quarrel  between  the  husband  and  wife.  There  is  no  evi- 
dence that  points  to  any  existing  ill-will  between  the  husband 
and  wife.  They  seem  to  have  lived,  so  far  as  ordinary  observers 
could  see  and  judge,  upon  fairly  good  terms. 

In  the  month  of  December,  1886,  while  they  were  continuing 
to  live  at  Claverton  Street,  the  deceased,  for  I believe  the  first 
time  in  his  life,  became  seriously  ill.  That  illness  began  on  10th 
December.  There  was  something  which  excited  curiosity  and  some 
surprise  on  the  part  of  the  medical  man  who  attended  him  in 
some  of  the  s^ptoms  which  his  condition  disclosed.  The  state  of 
his  gums  particularly  suggested  to  tlje  medical  man  who  was  called 
in,  and  who  will  be  called  before  you,  that  his  illness  was  certainly 
due  to  mercury  having  been  in  some  fashion  or  other  taken  by  him, 
or  administered  to  him;  but  although  he  then  suffered,  and 
undoubtedly  severely  suffered,  it  was  simply  in  the  form  of  nervous 
depression,  sleeplessness,  and  so  forth;  and  Dr.  Leach  will  tell 
you  that  from  the  illness  he  had  on  that  day  he  had  entirely 
recovered.  He  was  also  apparently  troubled  with  his  teeth,  which 
seem  to  have  been  in  a very  bad  state,  and  which  required  the 
assistance  of  a dentist  on  several  occasions. 

On  19th  December— the  ordinary  medical  attendant,  being  the 

gentleman  whose  name  I have  mentioned.  Dr.  Leach  a Dr. 

Dudley  was  also  called  in.  I will  not  stop  to  explain  why  Dr! 
Dudley  was  called  in.  Dr.  Leach  attributes  to  the  decea^  a 
82 


opening  Statement  for  the  Crown. 

Tlie  AttQrney’General 

suggestion  certainly  of  some  very  extraordinary  kind,  namely, 
that  the  deceased  himself  thought  it  was  advisable  that  a second 
doctor  should  be  called  in,  lest  the  friends  of  the  deceased  should 
suspect,  if  anything  happened  to  him,  that  Mrs.  Bartlett,  his 
wife,  was  poisoning  him — a veiy  extraordinary  suggestion  cer- 
tainly; but  that  is  a suggestion,  and  is  a statement  that  he  had 
already  made,  which  Dr.  Leach  attributes  to  the  deceased  man. 

I ought,  perhaps,  in  this  connection,  to  say  that,  although 
there  is  no  evidence  of  any  feeling  of  ill-will  existing  between  the 
husband  and  the  wife,  she  did  not  seem  to  have  got  on  very 
cordially  with  his  relations,  and  notably  with  the  father  of  her 
husband.  She  seems  to  have  kept  him  at  arm’s  length,  and  during 
the  illness  to  which  I am  now  adverting,  in  the  month  of  December, 
she  wrote  a letter,  which  will  be  read,  and  which,  while  disclaim- 
ing any  intention  of  being  otherwise  than  desiring  to  be  on 
friendly  relations  with  her  husband’s  father,  she  in  e&ect  stated 
to  him — I do  not  stop  to  read  it  at  this  moment,  it  will  be  put 
in  in  the  course  of  the  case — she  in  efiect  stated  to  him  that  he 
must  consider  himself,  in  the  mattei'  of  visits,  simply  like  any 
other  ordinary  visitor;  in  other  words,  that  he  could  not  come 
and  go  as  he  liked,  but  as  he  was  told  he  might  come.  The  relation, 
therefore,  between  them  seems  to  have  been  a little  strained. 

Now,  gentlemen,  by  that  19th  of  December  the  symptoms  that 
had  excited  the  curiosity  and  surprise  of  Dr.  Leach  had  passed 
away,  and  the  deceased  was  upon  a fair  way  of  recovery.  By 
24th  December  he  was  practically  convalescent,  and  it  was  arranged 
that  he  should  upon  an  early  day,  for  change  of  air,  go  to  some 
seaside  place,  and  I think  Torquay  was  mentioned,  and  by  that 
time — ^by  the  24th  or  26th  of  December — ^Dr.  Leach  will  tell  you 
that  he  was  practically  well,  although  he  was  still  suffering  from 
weakness,  and  so  forth,  from  the  illness  from  which  he  was 
recovering.  On  28th  December  he  went  out  for  a drive,  and 
came  back,  showing  in  the  food  which  he  was  able  to  take,  and 
the  appetite  which  he  display^  for  it,  every  sign  of  returning 
to  his  ordinary  health. 

On  27th  December  one  important  thing  took  place : the  prisoner 
at  the  bar  applied  to  Mr.  Dyson  to  procure  for  her  a considerable 
quantity  of  chloroform;  and  he  did  procure  it  for  her  in  the 
way  and  under  the  circumstances  which  I will  detail  to  you.  That 
she  had  the  chloroform  will  not  depend  upon  Dyson’s  statement 
only ; for,  indeed,  it  will  be  made  clear  that  she  had  the  chloroform 
apart  wholly  from  Dyson’s  statement.  She  gave  to  him  a reason 
that  she  had  used  it  before  with  effect  for  her  husband;  that  he 
was  suffering  from  what  she  called  an  internal  ailment,  an  affliction 
of  long  standing ; that  this  internal  affliction  or  ailment  had  upon 
previous  occasions  given  him  paroxysms.  She  expressed  apparently 
some  belief  that  he  might  die  suddenly  in  one  of  those  paroxysms. 

83 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


The  Atterney^General 


She  said  that  upon  previous  occasions  she  had  obtained  the  chloro- 
form, which  she  alleged  she  had  used,  through  the  instrumentality 
of  one  Annie  Walker.  She  said  that  Annie  Walker  was  not  then 
within  her  knowledge  as  to  her  residence  and  so  forth.  Indeed, 
she  suggested  that  she  had  gone  to  America,  and  she  said  that, 
on  one  of  those  occasions  on  which  her  husband  had  suffered  from 
this  internal  ailment  or  affliction,  a Dr.  Nichols,  of  Fopstone 
Road,  Earl’s  Court,  had  said  to  her  that  her  husband,  Mr. 
Bartlett,  would  die  soon.  Now,  according  to  the  evidence  which 
will  be  laid  before  you,  there  was  apparently  no  ground  for  sug- 
gesting that  he  was  suffering  from  any  internal  ailment  or  affliction. 
I think  she  used  on  one  occasion  the  word  growth.”  It  is  not 
true  that  she  had,  through  the  instrumentality  of  Annie  Walker, 
on  previous  occasions  obtained  chloroform  and  applied  it  for 
external  purposes;  and  it  is  not  true  that  Dr.  Nichols,  of  Fopsttme 
Road,  Earl’s  Court,  had  ever  been  called  in  in  relation  to  ihis 
matter,  or  expressed  any  opinion  as  to  the  possible  sudden  death 
or  dying  soon  which  was  attributed  to  him. 

Gentlemen,  I think  you  will — I will  say  you  may — ^when  you 
have  heard  the  whole  of  this  case,  and  especially  when  you  hear 
some  extraordinary  statements  made  by  the  prisoner  herself  to  Dr. 
Leach,  come  to  the  conclusion  that  she  had  somehow  or  other 


obtained  considerable  influence  over  Mr.  Dyson.  He  meekly  yieldctl 
to  her  request,  and  he  proceeded  to  obtain  for  her  the  chloroform 
which  she  demanded.  But  it  is  proper  to  say  at  once  that  he  did 
that  by  making  application  to  three  persons,  to  all  of  whom  he 
would  appear  to  have  been  known,  and  one  of  them  had  his  shop 
or  place  of  business  within,  I think,  fifty  paces  of  the  Wesleyan 
ohapel  of  which  Mr.  Dyson  was  the  minisler.  He  does  certainly 
at  once  place — I am  not  sure  whether  it  was  that  of  tho  i»er.son 
who  supplied  the  drug — ^make  a statement.  My  friend  Mr.  Clarko 
reminds  me  that  I ought,  perhaps,  not  to  dwell  upon  what  took 
place  then.  It  is  enough  to  say  that  he  got  the  chloroform  at 
those  place^first  at  the  shop  of  a iflan  called  Humble,  which  was, 
I think,  within  a very  short  distance  of  the  chapel.  Another 
vendor  was  Mr.  Penrose,  at  Wimbledon;  and  another  a Mr.  Mellin 
_ at  Wimbledon.  Portions,  I think,  of  the  chloroform  ho 
oraamed  were  methylated,  but  it  was  all  put  into  one  l^tle,  and  I 
the  entire  quantity  altogetheiv-certainly  a large,  and  I 
uiiTMual  quantity— was  about,  or  exceeded  4 ouncen. 

prisoner  at  the 

DM.  On  30th  December  the  deceased  was  a(i%Bll  that  Dr.  Tfftfinh 
who  was  in  attendance,  dTOlared  that  it  was  dianecessary  for  him 
to  keep  up  his  medical  visits;  and  on  30th  and  Slst  De(4nber  the 
-deoeMed  appeared  to  have  Trained  almost  his  usual  health  and 
umri  roirite.  ^d  on  31st  December,  according  to  the  statement 
whiA  Dr.  Leach  attributes  to  Mrs.  Bartlett,  the  prisoner  at  the 


opening  Statement  for  the  Crown. 

The  Attorney^Gener&l 

bar  was  on  particularly  afieotionate  terms  with  her  husband;  in 
fact,  she  is  stated  to  have  declared  that  she  wished  they  were 
unmarried  in  order  that  she  might  have  the  happiness  of  marrying 
him  again. 

On  that  31st  December  the  deceased  takes  his  dinner  with  a 
healthy  appetite.  He  takes  his  supper,  and,  indeed,  makes 
arrangements  for  his  breakfast  the  next  morning,  and  directs 
what  was  to  be  prepared  for  his  breakfast.  I ought  perhaps  to 
have  said  that,  living  in  lodgings,  they  had  no  regular  servant; 
the  persons  in  the  house  appear  to  have  attended  to  them.  My 
friend  reminds  me  that  on  that  31st  of  December  he  had  in  fact 
been  to  see  the  dentist.  On  that  night  of  31st  December,  about 
half-past  ten  o'clock,  Mrs.  Bartlett  told  the  servant  that  she  need 
not  come  again;  and,  according  to  the  landlady,  Mrs.  Doggett, 
who  will  be  called  before  you,  Mrs.  Bartlett,  in  the  course  of  con- 
versation that  day,  appears  to  have  made  an  inquiry  as  to  whether 
she  (Mrs.  Doggett)  had  ever  taken  chloroform,  or  knew  anything 
about  the  effects  of  chloroform.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Doggett  sat  up  to 
see  the  New  Year  in,  and  did  not  go  to  bed  until  after  the  midnight 
hour  had  passed.  At  four  o'clock  the  next  morning,  1st  January, 
the  house  was  aroused  by  Mrs.  Bartlett,  and  it  was  discovered 
that  her  husband  was  dead  in  bed. 

Gentlemen,  I think  I had  better  at  this  stage — although  the 
account  was  not  given  until  a considerably  later  period — ^tell  you 
what  the  explanation  was  which  this  lady  gave  of  the  occurrence 
of  the  night  of  31st  December  and  the  morning  of  1st  January. 
It  appears  that  on  this  night — and  that  had  been  the  course  pur- 
sued during  his  recent  illness — ^the  deceased  slept  on  the  bed,  not 
in  the  bedroom,  but  in  the  drawing-room,  in  a place  near  the 
window  of  that  room,  and  that  the  prisoner  at  the  bar  rested 
on  a couch  which  was  in  the  same  room.  Her  statement  was,  that 
when  her  husband  went  to  bed  she  sat  down  at  the  foot  of  the 
bed;  that  her  hand  was  resting  upon  his  feet;  that  she  dozed 
off  in  her  chair ; that  she  awoke  with  a sensation  of  cramp  in  her 
hand  or  her  arm,  and  she  was  then  horrified  to  find  that  her 
husband's  feet  were  dead  cold ; that  she  tried  to  pour  some  brandy 
down  his  throat,  and  slie  found  he  was  dead;  that  she  then  aroused 
the  household,  and  1 think  the  first  person  who  came  into  the  room 
was  Mr,  Doggett,  the  landlord.  He  was,  as  you  may  well  suppose, 
shocked  at  the  occurrence.  He  will  tell  you  his  ob^rvations  that 
he  made  at  the  time  of  the  condition  of  the  room;  and,  notably, 
he  will  tell  you  that  he  observed  no  bottle  on  the  mantelshelf.  He 
noticed  a smell,  which  suggested  to  his  mind  chloric  ether;  and 
he  noticed  that  the  fire  in  the  room  was  well  made  up,  as  if  it 
had  been  well  attended  to. 

So  far,  gentlemen,  as  to  the  events  of  that  morning.  Dr. 
Leach  was  promptly  sent  for.  He  finds,  so  far  as  external  examina- 

$5 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Hie  Attomev^General 

tion  could  enable  him  to  judge,  nothing  to  account  for  death.  He 
saw  no  bottle  of  chloroform,  but  he  does  see  a small  bottle  with  a 
very  insignificant  portion — a little  more  than  two  drops — of  chloro- 
dyne  in  it,  which  he  says  was  either  on  the  mantelpiece  or  some- 
where else.  Mr.  Doggett,  the  landlord,  is  registrar  of  births  and 
deaths,  and  he  promptly  and,  as  I have  no  doubt  you  will  believe, 
most  properly  declined  to  register  the  death  until  there  was  a 
post-mortem  examination.  You  will  find  that,  so  perplexed  was 
Dr.  Leach  as  to  the  cause  of  death,  he  asked  the  prisoner  at  the  1)ar, 
and  pressed  her,  as  to  whether  it  was  possible  that  the  deceased 
could  have  got  hold  of  any  poison,  and  she  said  that  she  could  not 
suppose  he  could  have  got  hold  of  any  poison;  that  he  had  no  poison, 
and  could  not  have  got  it,  or  had  it,  without  her  knowledge. 

On  2nd  January  the  post-mortem  examination  took  place,  and 
at  that  examination  the  persons  who  took  part  in  it  (the  medical 
men)  were  five — Drs.  Green,  Murray,  Dudley,  Cheyno,  and  Leach. 

I ought  to  say  that  one  of  the  doctors — Dr.  Green — ^who  has  been 
examined  before  the  magistrate,  and  whose  evidence  was  laken 
down  in  the  presence  of  the  prisoner  with  great  minuteness  and 
detail  before  the  magistrate,  and  in  the  presence  of  her  counsel, 
who  had  then  the  opportunity  of  cross-examining — I regret  to  say 
that  Dr.  Green  is  so  seriously  ill  as  to  render  it  impossible  that  he 
should  attend  in  person  here  at  this  Court.  Of  course,  before 
his  deposition  can  be  read,  before  his  examination-in-chief,  and 
his  cross-examination  can  be  read,  it  will  be  necessary  to  satisfy 
my  lord  that  the  facts  are  as  I have  stated,  namely,  that 
Dr.  Green  is  in  such  a condition  as  to  render  it  impossible, 
from  ill-health,  that  he  should  be  able  to  attend  at  this  Court. 
One  other  of  the  doctors,  Dr.  Cheyne,  is  now,  as  I understan<i, 
in  Berlin;  but  you  will  have  before  you  the  fully  taken  and 
carefully  taken  cross-examination  of  Dr.  Green,  and  the  vivd  voce 
evidence  given  before  you  in  this  Court  of  Dr.  Murray  and  Dr. 
Dudley,  and  also  the  evidence  of  Dr.  Leach,  whose  part,  I think,  on 
this  occasion  was  noting  down  the  s,T«nptoms  which  were  observe<l 
in  the  course  of  the  post-mortem  examination.  The  first  thing  that 
attracted  their  attention  was  the  overpowering  smell  of  chloroform 

in  the  stomach,  described  by  some  of  them— I think  by  Dr.  Green 

as  almost  as  strong  as  a freshly  opened  bottle  of  chloroform ; show- 
ing  that  the  chloroform  had  somehow  or  other  got  into  the  stomach 
of  the  deceased  at  a comparatively  recent  time.  Their  examina- 
tion  was  next  directed— indeed,  it  was  all  along  directed— see 
whether  or  not  there  was  in  the  condition  of  the  deceased,  in 
the  condition  of  his  heart,  or  lungs,  or  liver,  or  any  vital  organ, 
any^ing  m any  way  to  account  for,  or  to  suggest  the  cause  of, 
^ath;  and  they  came  to  the  conclusion  that  there  was  nothing  in 
the  most  r^ote  degree  to  account  for  the  death  in  the  condition  of 
the  heart,  the  lungs,  the  liver,  in  fact,  anything  in  the  physical 

QU 


opening  Statement  for  the  Crown, 

The  Attorney^Geaeral 

condition  of  the  man ; and  I think  in  this  inquiry,  probably,  when 
you  have  heard  the  evidence,  you  will  have  little  difficulty  in  com- 
ing to  this  conclusion,  that  the  deceased's  death  was  caused  by  the 
chloroform,  the  evidence  of  the  existence  of,  which  was  disclosed  at 
the  post-mortem  examination,  and  that  the  serious  and  real  ques- 
tion in  this  case  will  be,  how  came  the  chloroform  there  1 

Several  interviews  occurred  between  Mr.  Dyson  and  the 
prisoner  and  other  persons,  notably  Mrs.  Matthews  and  Dr. 
Leach,  to  which  1 do  not  desire  at  this  stage  to  refer  in  any 
detail.  They  contained  some  very  curious  statements,  but  so 
curious  that  I prefer  that  in  the  main,  and  certainly  in  detail, 
with  one  exception,  you  should  hear  them  from  the  witnesses  as 
they  are  called  before  you.  That  one  exception  is  the  statement 
which  the  prisoner  at  the  bar  made  as  to  the  chloroform  itself, 
as  to  the  point  of  whether  she  had  in  any  way,  and  how,  used  it 
for  the  purpose  for  which  she  allied  to  Dr.  Leach  that  she  had 
obtained  it.  That  1 cannot  except,  but  must  trouble  you  with 
now.  The  first  statement  she  made  to  Dr.  Leach,  or  the  first  con- 
versation in  reference  to  the  chloroform,  was  on  6th  January.  He 
appears  to  have  had  on  that  day  a long  interview  with  her.  He 
appears,  indeed,  to  have  gone  the  length  of  reading  over  to  her 
the  post-mortem  notes  which  he  had  taken,  and  she  asked — if  Dr. 
Leach  is  to  be  relied  upon — on  that  occasion,  “ Can  he  have  died 
from  chloroform?”  and  Dr.  Leach,  on  that  occasion,  appears  to 
have  suggested  chlorodyne  as  the  cause  of  death,  and  not  chloro- 
form. She  had  a conversation  on  the  same  day,  or  about  the  same 
time,  with  Mrs.  and  with  Mr.  Matthews. 

Gentlemen,  on  7th  January,  the  coroner^s  jury  met,  and  ad- 
journed from  7th  January  to  ith  February;  for  you  will  observe 
that,  although  there  was  this  post-mortem  examination  on  the  2nd, 
to  which  I had  adverted,  there  had  not  been  at  this  time,  nor  up  to 
this  time,  any  examination  in  the  nature  of  an  analytical  one  of  the 
stomach,  or  the  contents  of  the  stomach.  Between  7th  January, 
when  the  coroner's  jury  first  toet,  and  26th  January,  the  prisoner 
at  the  bar  had  several  interviews  with  several  people;  and  on  11th 
January  the  contents  of  the  stomach  of  the  deceased  were  taken  to 
the  analyst,  Dr.  Stevenson,  who  again  discovers,  and  will  tell  you 
then  discovers,  or  notices,  a smell  of  chloroform,  and  ascertained 
the  fact  of  the  marked  presence  of  chloroform  in  the  stomach.  At 
that  dale  also  was  brought  to  him  a bottle,  and  1 ought  to  notice 
the  fact  without  dwelling  upon  it  with  significance,  if  it  has  any 
significance,  at  this  moment.  I also  introduce  the  fact  that,  in 
the  examination  in  Claverton  Street,  some  French  letters  were  dis- 
covered in  the  clothes  at  Claverton  Street — in  the  clothes,  you  will 
understand,  of  the  deceased,  the  husband.  Meanwhile,  gentlemen, 
on  26th  January,  the  prisoner  again  sees  Dr.  Leach,  and  it  is  on 
that  occasion  that  she  makes  the  statement  that  1 told  you  I must 

87 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


The  AttorneF-GeiMral 

trouble  you  with  in  some  little  detail— a statement  of  a very  extra- 
ordinary kind,  following  upon  the  announcement  of  the  fact  that 
chloroform  had  been  discovered  in  the  stomach,  and  that  tha.t  was 
pointed  to  as  a probable — ^nay,  the  almost  certain  cause  of  death. 
The  police  had  meanwhile  been  making  inquiries,  and  had  pro- 
bably begun  to  get  upon  the  track  of  those  who  supplied  the  chloro- 
form in  question.  On  26th  January,  the  prisoner  at  the  bar  was 
told  by  Dr,  Leach  that  chloroform  was  assigned  as  the  cause  of 
death ; that  it  was  lucky  for  her  it  was  not  prussic  acid,  or  secret 
poison,  as  she  might  be  suspected  if  it  had  been  poison  of  that 
nature.  She  answered  that  she  wished  it  were  anything  else  than 
chloroform;  and  then,  after  some  further  conversation,  she  made  a 
statement,  the  substance  of  which  I am  about  to  tell  you,  but 
which  resulted  practically  as  to  one  point  in  an  admission  that  she 
had  had  in  her  possession — will  tell  you  her  motive  and  object,  as 
she  then  explained  them — ^that  she  had  in  her  possession  chloroform 
upon  the  occasion  in  question;  and,  indeed,  a similar  statement, 
so  far  as  that  point  is  concerned,  she  made  with  perhaps  more  cir- 
cumstantiality to  Mrs.  Matthews,  to  the  efiect  that  she  had,  afier 
this  tragedy,  on  the  morning  of  6th  January,  emptied  the  ctmtenls 
and  thrown  the  bottle  itself  away.  But  her  story  was 
this.  She  said  that  her  relations  with  her  husband  had 
not  been  pleasant  relations ; that  there  had  been  no 
sexual  intercourse  between  them  for  a considerable  period 
of  time;  that  he  had  himself,  in  conversation,  spoken  to  her 
as  if  contemplating  his  own  death,  and  in  that  case  making  her 
over  to  Dyson;  that  when  after  his  illness,  to  which  I have  adverted, 
he  was  returning  to  health,  with  returning  health  he  seemed  to 
have  manifested  some  desire  to  renew  sexual  intercourse  with  her ; 
that  she  did  not  desire  this;  that  she  desired  to  prevent  it  ; and 
that  she  considered  that  she  had  been  made  over  in  the  future  to 
Dyson,  and  ^e  did  not  desire  to  allow  her  husband  to  have  any 
intercourse  with  her ; but  that,  when  he  was  manifesting,  with  re- 
turning health,  a desire  to  renew  that  intercourse,  she  desired  to 
have  the  chloroform  for  the  purpose  of  waving  it  before  his  face, 
lulling  him  into  a kind  of  stupor,  and  so  prevent  him  giving 
efiect  to  his  sexual  passion.  That  is  the  story  she  tells. 

Gentlemen,  she  did  not  appear  before  the  coroner  at  the 
coroner's  inquiry.  She  was  there,  but  she  did  not  tender  herself 
to  give  evidence  or  any  explanation;  but  I would  not,  of  course, 
have  you  at  all  to  understand  from  that  fact  that  any  inference  is, 
or  ought  to  be,  drawn  against  her.  1 only  wish  that  you  should 
understand  exactly  how  the  matter  was. 

Mr.  Dyson  did  come  before  the  coroner's  jury,  and  did  make 
a lengthened  statement.  If  he  were  on  his  trial  with  the  prisoner 
.at  the  bar  that  statement,  of  course,  could  be  read  before  you, 
and  would  be  evidence  in  the  case  against  Him.  As  it  is,  that 
S8 


Opening  Statement  for  the  Crown. 

The  Attorney^General 

Statement,  so  far  as  it  has  any  bearing  on  the  serious  question 
you  will  hereafter  have  to  determine,  will  be  made  by  him  in 
the  witness-box  on  his  oath,  face  to  face  with  the  prisoner,  before 
you  and  my  lord,  and  under  conditions  that  will  insure,  by  the 
cross-examination  of  my  learned  friend,  every  test  which  my 
friend's  experience  and  ingenuity  can  suggest  as  to  its  truth. 
It  is  not  my  duty  to  say  anything  here,  or  in  this  connection,  in 
relief  of  Mr.  Dyson  so  far  as  concerns  the  question  of  indiscretion 
and  of  culpability.  When  you  have  heard  the  witness  you  will  be 
able  to  judge  whether  indiscretion  and  culpability  of  that  meaning 
and  kind  can  be  or  not  properly  attributed  to  him. 

Now,  gentlemen,  in  the  result  the  coroner’s  jury  found  a 
verdict  of  wilful  murder.  Since  that,  it  has,  of  course,  been  the 
duty  of  those  who  represent  the  Crown,  desiring  to  see  nothing 
done  but  justice,  to  inquire  into  the  facts  and  circumstances  of 
the  case,  with  the  result  that  they  have  felt  bound  to  take  the 
course  that  they  have  announced  as  necessary  to  take  at  the  begin- 
ning of  this  trial. 

I now  come  to  the  question  which  you  probably  will  find  is 
the  real  question  in  this  case.  For  the  reasons  which  I have  already 
given,  you  will  probably  have  no  difficulty  in  coming  to  the  con- 
clusion that  the  deceased  died  from  the  effects  of  chloroform,  which 
chloroform  found  its  way  somehow  or  other  to  his  stomach.  How 
did  it  get  there?  So  far  as  I know,  there  are  only  three  ways  in 
which  it  could  have  got  there.  The  first  of  those  ways  is  that  the 
deceased  himself  should  have  intentionally  taken  it  with  the  view 
of  destroying  his  life.  I submit,  when  you  have  heard  the  facts, 
that  you  will  find  nothing  in  the  circumstances  of  the  case  to 
support,  or  even  to  lend  an  air  of  plausibility  to,  that  suggestion. 
He  was  in  returning  health,  in  improved  spirits,  and,  as  I have 
told  you,  he  had  gone  to  his  bed  on  that  night  having  made 
arrangements  as  to  what  he  should  desire  for  breakfast  next  morn- 
ing. 

As  to  the  second  possible  suggestion — ^that  he  took  it  acci- 
dentally— ^that  is  to  say,  that  he  had  no  intention  of  taking  the 
thing  to  injure  himself,  but  that  he  took  it  accidentally,  you 
will  be  told  by  those — ^your  own  common  experience  may  perhaps 
enable  you  to  judge  that — ^but  you  will  be  told  by  those  who  know 
the  qualities  of  this  particular  thing — ^the  chloroform — ^that  it  is 
in  the  highest  degree  improbable  that  a man,  if  he  accidentally 
poured  out  into  a glass  or  tumbler  this  liquid,  would  not  at  once 
perceive  the  mistake  he  had  made  even  before  it  was  raised  to  his 
lips,  but  that  the  moment  it  touched,  he  must  become — ^he  could 
not  fail  to  become  (provided  always  that  it  reaches  his  lips  when  he 
was  in  the  act  of  consciousness) — ^he  could  not  have  failed  to  notice 
that  it  was  something  which  he  ought  not  to  take.  But,  further, 
gentlemen,  it  will  be  shown  to  you  by  evidence  (as  to  the  reliability 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


The  Atiomey^General 

of  it  you  nxuBt  judge)  th&t  if  it  was  taken  with  the  intention  of 
committing  suicide  or  if  taken  accidentally,  then  the  ^ect  of  the 
lihing  itself  taken  by  the  throat  into  the  stomach,  the  pain  it  causes 
is  so  acute  that  no  amount  of  self-control  which  any  one  could 
suppose  to  exist  could  restrain  the  paroxysms  that  would  follow  of 
pain,  followed  by  contortion  and  by  outcry  and  by  exclamation, 
which  could  not  have  failed  to  attract  attention.  That  the  great 
probability  is  that  if  taken  accidentally— and  probably,  not  to  put 
it  higher  than  that — if  taken  intentionally,  the  person  who  ad- 
ministered it  to  himself  could  not  restrain  the  strong  expression  by 
voice  and  by  moan  of  the  pain  and  agony  which  the  administration 
of  it  had  caused. 

There  remains  in  the  opinions  of  the  medical  men  only  one 
other  mode.  You  will  say,  of  course,  that  if  it  was  administered 
by  any  third  person  the  physical  effect  would  be  the  same ; that 
there  would  be  the  same  outcry,  the  same  acute  pain,  and  so  forth ; 
and  you  would  be  quite  right,  provided  that  the  administration 
into  the  stomach  was  not  preceded  by  some  external  application 
of  chloroform  which  might  lull  into  a stupor  or  a semi-stupor; 
and  in  that  condition  it  might  be  possible — and  in  that  condition 
of  things  alone,  as  the  medical  men  think,  probable — ^that  it  could 
be  conveyed  to  the  stomach  without  it  being  followed  by  eircuin- 
stances  and  occurrences  which  must  have  attracted  attention 
I need  not  warn  you — I think  I need  not  warn  you — of  two 
things.  First,  to  dismiss  from  your  minds  anything  that  you 
have  heard  of  this  case  before  you  came  into  Court,  and  I ask 
you  to  apply  your  minds — as  I am  sure  you  are  anxious  to  <lo — ^to 
the  candid  consideration,  the  thorough  consideration,  of  the  evi- 
dence to  be  presented  to  you  here.  The  next  thing  that  I would 
ask  you  to  do  is  to  bear  in  mind  that  it  is  for  tke  Crown  to  make 
out  the  case  of  guilt ; that  suspicion  will  not  do ; that  probability 
of  itself  will  not  do ; that  you  ought  not  to  find  the  prisoner  guilty 
unless  the  result  of  the  evidence  against  her,  dispassionately 
weighed,  dispassionately  considered,  brings  home  to  your  minda 
conviction  of  guilt  beyond  any  reasonable  doubt  which  would 
influence  your  minds  in  any  of  the  ordinary  affairs  of  life. 

Gentlemen,  I think  I have  now  discharged  my  task  so  far  as  it 
is  to  be  discharged  at  this  stage  of  the  inquiry,  and  I would  ask 
you  now  to  bring  to  the  consideration  of  the  evidence  which  my 
learned  friends  will  assist  me  in  placing  before  you,  a fair  and 
careful  attention. 

Mr.  Poland — My  lord,  it  would  be  a great  convenience  if  you 
would  allow  me  to  prove  the  illness  of  Dr,  Green,  as  the  medical 
man  who  is  to  prove  it  is  anxious  to  get  away. 

Mr.  JtJSTioB  Wills — Certainly. 


90 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 


Evidence  for  the  Prosecution. 

William  Heniit  Broadbent,  examined  by  Mr.  Poland — am  a 
physician,  and  reside  at  34  Seymour  Street,  Portman  Square.  1 
know  Thomas  Heniy  Green,  physician,  of  Charing  Cross  Hospital. 
He  resides  at  74  Wimpole  Street.  On  the  6th  of  this  month  he 
was  taken  seriously  ill,  and  I saw  him  on  the  7th.  I have  been 
attending  him  ever  since.  I saw  him  yesterday.  He  was  confined 
to  his  bed,  and  it  would  be  quite  impossible  for  him  to  attend.  He 
is  quite  unfit  to  travel  or  come  into  Court,  and  I think  he  will  be 
unfit  for  at  least  a month.  1 know  his  signature.  (Shown  deposi- 
tion of  Thomas  Henry  Green) — The  signature  to  that  deposition  is, 
I believe,  Dr.  Green's  signature. 

Edwin  Bartlett,  examined  by  Mr.  Poland — Thomas  Edwin 
Bartlett,  the  deceased,  was  my  son.  I am  a carpenter  and  builder, 
living  at  44  Chancellor  Road,  Herne  Hill.  My  son  was  forty  years 
of  age  on  8th  October  last.  He  was  a grocer  and  provision  dealer, 
and  carried  on  business  in  partnership  with  Mr.  Baxter.  At  the 
time  of  his  death  he  and  his  partner  had  six  shops  altogether. 
There  were  two  in  Herne  Hill,  one  **  The  Exchange/'  at  Lordship 
Lane,  Dulwich ; then  there  was  the  Group  Mart  in  Lordship  Lane, 
and  at  33  Milkwood  Road,  Loughborough  Junction,  and  the  corner 
of  Chaucer  Road,  the  West  Hill  Park  Supply  Stores.  As  far  as  I 
could  judge,  he  was  in  a prosperous  way  of  business.  The  prisoner 
was  his  wife.  In  his  marriage  certificate  he  is  described  as  Thomas 
Edwin  Bartlett,  and  the  prisoner  as  Adelaide  de  la  Tremoille.  My 
son  was  a bachelor  when  he  married  the  prisoner.  The  prisoner 
is  described  in  the  certificate  as  a spinster,  aged  nineteen. 

I first  knew  the  prisoner  just  before  she  was  married ; she  came 
to  my  house  with  my  son.  I knew  she  had  been  living  at  Richmond. 
Afterwards  I knew  she  had  been  living  at  one  of  my  son’s,  Charles, 
at  Kingston,  for  a short  time.  My  son,  Thomas'  Edwin,  the  de- 
ceased, first  became  acquainfod  with  her  there.  When  she  was 
first  introduced  to  me  she  was  called  Blanche.  I was  not  present 
at  the  wedding,  but  I know  that  after  the  wedding  she  went  to  a 
school.  Miss  Dodd’s,  at  Stoke  Newington,  and  resided  there. 
During  the  holidays  she  lived  in  furnished  apartments  with  my  son, 
her  husband.  Afterwards  I believe  she  went  abroad  to  a convent 
school  in  Belgium.  My  son  used  to  go  from  time  to  time  to  see 
her.  About  the  middle  of  1877  she  returned,  and  resided  with 
her  husband  at  2 Station  Road,  Herne  Hill.  At  that  time  that 
was  one  of  my  son’s  shops.  On  the  death  of  my  wife  I went  to 
live  with  them  there.  I lived  with  them  for  about  five  or  six  years. 
He  offered  me  a home  for  life  on  the  death  of  my  wife.  During 
all  that  time  they  lived  together  as  man  and  wife,  occupying  the 
same  room  and  the  same  bed. 


91 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Edwin  Bartlett 

I remember  the  birth  of  a child,  but  I really  do  not  rem^bei 
the  date;  I think  it  was  about  two  years  after  they  were  married — 
about  two  years  after  she  came  to  reside,  I should  say.  I really 
cannot  fix  the  date  any  nearer  than  that.  It  was  a stillborn  child, 
I understood.  The  witness  Annie  Walker  attended  to  her  at  that 
time.  There  was  also  a Mrs.  Purse;  she  came  down  once. 

There  was  no  doctor,  I think.  Dr.  Woodward  was  called  in 
at  last.  My  son  told  me  that  he  resided  in  Dulwich  Road.  1 
believe  the  prisoner  suffered  a great  deal  at  the  birth.  After  she 
got  over  it  she  continued  to  live  in  the  ordinary  way  with  my  son. 
After  that  they  changed  their  residence  and  went  to  live  at  The 
Exchange,  Lordship  Lane.  They  were  there  about  twelve  months, 
and  1 believe  they  lived  in  the  same  way  there.  I visited  them 
once  or  twice.  There  was  no  room  for  me  in  that  house,  so  1 went 
elsewhere.  From  Lordship  Lane  they  went  to  The  Cottage,  Merton 
Abbey,  about  two  miles  from  Wimbledon.  They  resided  there 
about  a year  and  nine  months,  I think.  I visited  them  frequently. 
They  were  living  together  then  in  the  ordinary  way  as  man  and 
wife.  From  there  they  went  on  1st  September  last  for  a month 
to  Dover,  my  son  taking  a season  ticket.  They  returned  from 
Dover  on  the  last  day  of  September,  and  I believe  they  then  went 
for  a few  days  to  a hotel  in  the  Strand.  My  son  told  me  they 
were  staying  at  a hotel.  Afterwards,  in  October,  they  went  to 
live  at  86  Claverton  Street,  in  St.  George's  district.  I believe 
they  also  lived  there  as  man  and  wife  in  the  usual  way.  Up  to 
that  period  they  had  lived  together  as  man  and  wife  on  affectionate 
terms,  as  far  as  I know ; I know  nothing  to  the  contrary. 

Up  to  that  time  my  son  had  always  enjoyed  very  strong 
health.  He  was  regularly  attending  to  his  business,  and  was  a 
very  hard-working  man.  About  thirteen  years  ago  my  son  had  a 
doctor  attending  him.  He  had  had  a slight  bilious  attack,  and 
Dr.  Barraclough  was  called  in.  My  son  was  not  laid  up  at  that 
time;  I believe  he  had  insured  his  life  in  1880  or  1881.  I know 
what  the  policy  was  worth,  but  I dc^not  know  all  the  particulars. 
Besides  that  bilious  attack,  on  one  other  occasion  my  son  over- 
worked himself,  and  he  went  a voyage  on  the  sea.  It  was  in  con- 
nection with  his  business  and  a little  carpenter  work  that  he  was 
doing  (he  laid  a floor  in  the  house)  that  he  overworked  himself. 
On  that  occasion  when  he  went  to  sea  he  was  away  for  a week  or  a 
fortnight. 

^ I used  to  visit  at  86  Claverton  Street.  Up  to  the  time  of 
Aeir  going  to  Claverton  Street  I did  not  know  anything  of  the 
Re^  Mr.  Dyson.  I had  never  seen  him.  It  was  in  the  beginning 
of  D^ember  last  that  I first  heard  of  my  son's  illness.  About  the 
first  day  after  he  was  taken  ill  he  complained  to  me  of  mercurial 
poison  in  his  mouth,  and  then  after  that  I went  to  see  him.  The 
prisoner  was  present  when  he  spoke  about  mercurial  poisoning;  he 
said  the  doctor  had  told  him  he  was  suffering  from  mercurial 

dS2 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 


Edvrin  Bardelt 

poisoning.  lie  was  in  the  front  drawing-room  when  he  told  me 
that.  The  bedroom  was  at  the  back.  He  was  lying  on  a sort  of 
chair  bed  at  the  time,  and  was  partially  undressed.  He  appeared 
to  me  as  if  he  was  labouring  under  a narcotic. 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills — ^He  appeared  rather  dazed;  he  did  not 
appear  so  fresh  and  sharp  as  he  used  to  be. 

Examination  continued — 1 called  to  see  him  perhaps  six  or 
seven  times  during  his  illness,  and  I saw^  him  on  three  occasions. 
I really  cannot  give  the  date  of  my  second  visit ; I think  it  was  on 
the  Saturday;  1 was  then  refused  to  see  him.  The  second  occasion 
on  which  I did  see  him  was  a Saturday,  and  the  first  occasion,  I 
think,  was  on  the  Wednesday  of  his  first  illness.  The  third  time 
I saw  my  son  was  when  I was  invited ; the  letter  is  in  Court.  I 
saw  the  prisoner  on  two  occasions,  but  I cannot  remember  the  dates. 
The  first  time  I saw  her  would  be  about  eight  or  nine  days  after  my 
first  visit.  I saw  her  in  the  house,  in  the  downstairs  room — ^the 
back  room  or  smoking-room.  She  then  told  me  that  my  son  was 
too  ill  to  see  me.  We  then  spoke  about  mercurial  poisoning,  and 
there  was  something  said  about  verdigris  poisoning.  I do  not 
remember  what  that  was  exactly,  only  I understood  her  to  say  that 
the  doctor  had  said  there  Avere  symptoms  of  verdigris  poisoning. 
She  did  not  tell  me  who  the  doctor  was  that  was  attending  him, 
only  that  it  was  a doctor  up  the  street.  I asked  particularly  who 
the  doctor  was,  but  I was  not  told.  During  this  illness  the 
prisoner  wrote  to  me  from  time  to  time  informing  me  how  my  son 
was.  (Shown  letters) — These  are  the  letters  I received;  they  are 
signed  by  the  prisoner.  The  first  letter  is  addressed  from  85 
Claverton  Street  and  reads  as  follows: — “Dear  Father, — The 
doctor  was  very  angry  that  I had  permitted  Edwin  to  see  visitors 
last  night,  as  it  caused  his  head  to  be  so  bad ; and  he  says  no  one 
is  to  be  admitted  unless  he  gives  permission.  Edwin  is  slightly 
better  this  morning.  1 will  write  to  you  every  day  and  let  you 
see  and  know  how  Edwin  is.  I can  see  myself  how  necessary  it  is 
that  he  should  be  kept  caJm.  With  love,  Tours,  Adelaide. “ 
Addressed  to  “ Mr.  Bartlett,  1 Saint  David^s  Mews,  Oxford 
Street.”  Postmark,  “ 12th  December,  1885.” 

The  second  letter  is  without  date  and  reads — “ Dear  Mr. 
Bartlett, — Edwin  is  up ; he  seems  to  have  stood  his  tooth-drawing 
very  well.  Please  do  not  trouble  to  come  all  this  distance;  it  is 
not  right  to  have  visitors  in  a sickroom,  and  I don’t  feel  it  right 
to  leave  Edwin  so  long  alone  while  I was  downstairs  talking  to 
you.  When  he  wishes  to  see  you  I will  write  and  let  you  know. — 
Yours,  Adelaide.” 

The  third  one  reads — “ Dear  Father, — I fancy  Edwin  is 
slightly  better  this  morning;  the  dysentery  has  left  him,  and  he 
is  certainly  stronger.  The  doctor  said  last  night  there  was  a slight 
improvement  in  him. — Tours  sincerely,  Adelaide,” 

The  fourth  one,  which  is  also  in  the  prisoner’s  handwriting, 


Adelaide  Bardett. 


Edwin  Bardett 

reads— “ Dear  Mr.  Bartlett,— Edwin  is  slightly  better,  and  is 
sleeping  tolerably  well. — ^Yours,  Adelaide.’^ 

The  fifth  one  is  in  her  handwriting  also,  also  the  envelope, 
and  reads — “ Dear  Father, — ^Edwin  seems  slightly  better,  and  has 
passed  a restful  night.  I am  expecting  another  doctor,  so  you 
must  excuse  this  note. — ^Tours  sincerely,  Adelaide.’’  That  is 
dated  “ 2lBt  December,  1886.” 

The  sixth  one  reads — Dear  Mr.  Bartlett, — Edwin  is  not  so 
well,  he  has  passed  a bad  night. — ^Yours,  Adelaide  Bartlett.  A 
merry  Christmas.”  This  was  undated. 

Mr.  Clabks — I think  it  would  be  very  desirable  if  your  lord- 
ship  would  note  the  dates  of  the  week  at  this  time,  the  21st  is  the 
last  postmark  given,  and  that  is  Monday. 

Mr.  Justice  Wills — ^And  the  1st  would  be  Saturday? 

Mr.  Claeke — ^Yes. 

Examvnation  conti/rmed — The  seventh  letter  is  also  in  ihe 
priaonjer’s  handwriting,  and  it  reads — ” 85  Olavei’ton  Street, 
Sunday  night.  Dear  Mr.  Bartlett, — ^Edwin  will  be  very  pleased  to 
see  you  on  Monday  evening  from  six  to  eight.  He  is  still  very 
weak,  and  cannot  bear  visitors  for  long  at  a time.  — Yours, 
Adelaide.” 

The  eighth  is  also  in  her  handwriting  — ” Sunday  night. 
Dear  Mr.  Bartlett, — I hear  that  you  are  a little  disturbed  because 
Edwin  has  been  too  ill  to  see  you.  I wish,  if  possible,  to  be 
friends  with  you,  but  you  must  place  yourself  on  the  same  footing 
as  other  persons — ^that  is  to  say,  you  are  welcome  here  when  I 
invite  you,  and  at  no  other  time.  You  seem  to  forget  that  I have 
not  been  in  bed  for  thirteen  days,  and  consequently  am  too  tired 
to  speak  to  visitors.  1 am  sorry  to  speak  so  plainly,  but  I wish 
you  to  understand  that  I have  neither  forgotten  nor  forgiven  the 
past,  Edwin  will  be  pleased  to  see  you  on  Monday  evening  any 
time  after  six.”  The  postmark  looks  like  the  28th.  After  getting 
that  letter  1 went  on  the  Monday,  the  28th.  That  was  the  Monday 
before  my  son’s  death.  I went  about  half-past  six  in  the  evening. 

I saw  the  prisoner  there.  My  son  was  in  the  front  drawing-room 
lying  on  a couch  when  I first  saw  him — on  the  same  little  iron 
bed.  He  was  in  a dressing  gown.  I was  with  him  for  two  hours 
and  a half.  The  prisoner  said  that  he  was  better,  and  he  al^ 
said  he  was  better,  and  he  hoped  soon  to  be  in  business  again 
and  enjoy  the  evenings  we  had  had  before.  I had  been  in  the 
habit  of  s^ing  him  at  his  place  of  business  every  evening,  with 
few  exceptions.  I used  to  come  down  to  the  station,  and  I always 
called  in  before  I went  home.  My  son  seemed  to  be  better,  a good 
deal  stronger,  on  that  occasion.  He  got  up  and  walked  about  the 
room.  I think  he  said  something  about  having  worms  on  that 
occasion.  I believe  the  prisoner  also  said  so  too.  He  said  Aey 
were  crawling  all  up  him,  and  Mrs.  Bartlett  said,  We  call  them 
94 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 


Edwin  Bartlett 

snakes  ’ ’ I believe  that  was  the  time  that  conversation  took  place. 

I said  it  was  strange,  and  my  son  said,  A good  job  she  has  doc- 
tored the  dogs  to  clear  away  the  worms,  because  she  knew  I had 
worms.”  There  was  something  said  about  taking  croton  oil  at 
one  time,  but  whether  that  was  the  time  the  conversation  took 
place  or  not  I cannot  say.  At  one  visit  I remember  their  saying 
they  had  called  in  a physician,  because  I had  wanted  to  send 
them  a physician  from  London.  I had  spoken  to  the  prisoner 
about  it  some  time  previous;  I said  that  we  had  better  have  a 
physician,  as  Edwin  did  not  seem  to  get  any  better.  I said  1 
would  send  one  down  from  London,  and  she  said,  ” No,  we  cannot 
ahbrd  it.”  I said,  ” Nonsense,  Adelaide;  not  afford  it,  indeed!  ” 
“ Well,”  slie  said,  ” we  cannot.”  I said,  ” You  had  better.” 
” No,”  she  said,  ” we  cannot  afford  it,  and  he  is  going  on  very 
well.”  I did  not  say  anything  more  to  her  on  that  subject  then. 
On  the  Monday  she  told  me  she  had  had  a physician,  but  she  did 
not  say  who  he  was.  She  said  my  son  had  had  some  teeth  drawn  ; 
he  also  spoke  of  that  himself,  and  said  he  had  had  some  stumps 
out.  That  is  all  I recollect  that  he  said.  It  would  be  somewhere 
about  half-past  eight  when  I left  the  house  that  Monday  night — 
or  it  might  be  nearer  nine.  He  seemed  much  better  in  his  spirits 
that  night.  He  spoke  then  about  going  down  to  Poole  or  Bourne- 
mouth, or  somewhere  down  in  Dorsetshire.  I think  he  spoke  about 
going  on  the  following  Tuesday.  I then  went  away,  and  that  was 
the  last  time  I saw  him  alive.  I said  good-night  to  him  and  the 
prisoner,  as  1 always  had  done.  I parted  with  the  prisoner  on 
the  best  of  terms.  I kissed  her  and  shook  hands  with  her  and 
wished  her  good-night. 

There  is  one  allusion  in  this  letter,  I do  not  know  what  it 
means  exactly.  ” I am  sorry  to  speak  so  plainly,  but  1 have  not 
forgotten  or  forgiven  the  past  ”? — Is  it  necessary  for  me  to  say 
that  there  had  l^en  an  unpleasantness?  Some  six  years  ago  my 
youngest  son  had  to  go  to  America. 

That  is  sufficient,  I think  it  related  to  an  old  matter.  I think 
you  next  received  a telegram  informing  you  of  your  son's  death  ? — 
Yes.  (Shown  telegram) — I knew  he  was  dying  before  I received 
that.  The  telegram  reads — **  To  Mr.  Bartlett, — ^Edwin  is  dead, 
come  at  once. — -Bartlett.”  The  postmark  is  ” 1st  January, 
1886.  Handed  in  at  9.36  in  the  morning.”  I took  that  telegram 
out  of  the  letter-box  after  Mr.  Baxter  had  called  on  me  to  say 
that  he  was  dead.  I went  down  to  85  Claverton  Street.  I think 
it  was  something  like  half-past  twelve  when  I got  there,  but  1 
cannot  remember  exactly,  for  1 was  dreadfully  cut  up  at  the  time. 
I saw  the  prisoner  in  the  drawing-room.  My  son  was  lying  dead 
there.  I hardly  remember  what  she  said  when  I went  in.  She 
said  Edwin  was  dead.  Mr.  Baxter  was  in  the  room,  and  he  and 

95 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Edwin  Bartlett 

I went  up  together,  I do  not  think  I saw  anything  of  Mrs, 
Matthews  at  that  time. 

Now,  what  passed  between  you  and  the  prisoner  about  your 
son's  death  when  you  first  saw  her? — I saw  him  lying  on  the 
couch,  and  1 went  and  kissed  him  and  smelt  his  mouth,  1 thought 
he  might  have  been  poisoned  with  prussic  acid,  and  1 smelt  to 
find  it,  but  I did  not  detect  any  smell  of  the  kind,  1 then  turned 
to  the  mantelpiece.  1 believe  Dr.  Leach  was  there  as  well.  1 
said,  ‘‘We  must  have  a post-mortem  examination;  this  cannot 
pass."  I did  not  smell  anything  when  I kissed  him.  I did  not 
kiss  his  mouth;  I kissed  his  for^ead.  I believe  1 was  admitted 
into  the  room  at  once  when  I went.  I do  not  think  I saw  anybody 
else  but  Dr.  Leach.  He  was  in  the  room ; 1 fancy  he  came  in  after 
me  Dr.  Leach  first  mentioned  Dr.  Green  and  another  doctor, 
and  Dr.  Dudley  and  himself  for  the  post-mortem,  and  I said  there 
must  be  one.  Dr.  Leach  said  that  he  could  not  give  a certificate 
without  a post-mortem.  I suggested  another  doctor,  but  I did 
not  mention  any  particular  name.  I said,  “ I want  another," 
and  Dr.  Leach  said,  “ I will  get  you  one."  I said,  ‘‘  No,  I will 
get  you  one,  not  one  that  was  in  the  case  or  the  neighbourhood." 
I afterwards  went  down  with  Dr.  Leach  and  selected  Dr.  Cheyne 
in  Mandeville  Place.  He  was  suggested  to  attend  the  post-mortem 
on  my  behalf.  I went  up  again  in  the  evening,  and  my  son  was 
put  in  the  coffin.  I said  to  the  prisoner,  ‘‘  Tou  won't  have  him 
put  in  the  coffin."  She  said,  ‘‘  Dr.  Leach  has  to  see  to  that; 
it  has  nothing  to  do  with  me  or  you."  When  I saw  him  in  the 
coffin  I said  the  undertaker  had  no  business  to  put  him  in  the 
coffin;  the  post-mortem  would  have  to  be  held  first.  Nothing 
further  passed  about  my  son's  death,  except  that  she  said  what 
a generous  man  he  was. 

What  did^  she  say  more  about  it?  How  came  she  to  say 
that  ? — She  said  what  a kind-hearted  man  he  was.  She  was 
speaking  about  how  he  died,  and  said,  ‘‘  He  died  with  my  arm 
round  his  foot;  he  always  liked  to«have  my  hand  on  his  foot," 
and  she  showed  me  how  she  sat  at  the  foot  of  the  bed  when  he 
died. 

Just  describe  how  it  was? — She  said  she  was  sitting  with  her 
arm  round  his  foot,  and  she  supposed  she  had  been  asleep,  for 
she  awoke  with  cramp  in  her  arm,  and  she  then  went  and  called 
Mr.  Doggett.  That  was  all;  she  said  very  little  about  it.  She 
described  how  she  was  sitting.  (Shown  model  produced) — The 
little  iron  bedstead  was  near  the  window,  with  the  side  wall  of 
the  house  at  the  head  of  the  bed. 

The  post-mortem  was  held  the  following  day,  the  2nd.  I 
went  there  a little  after  two,  and  I waited  outside  on  the  pavement 
till  I saw  Dr.  Green  coming  out  of  the  house.  I then  went  into 
the  house,  and  I saw  the  prisoner.  There  was  very  little  said  by 
96 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 


Edwin  Bardelt 

her,  or  in  her  presence,  about  the  post-mortem.  I saw  her  in  the 
back  smoking-room  on  the  ground  floor.  She  was  speaking  there 
to  Mrs.  Matthews,  I believe.  There  was  very  little  conversation 
with  me.  I did  not  hear  anything ; I do  not  recollect  any  con- 
versation. I had  not  heard  the  result  of  the  post-mortem  by 
then.  We  went  upstairs  and  heard  the  result.  The  prisoner  was 
with  me.  We  went  into  the  front  room.  Dr.  Dudley  and  Dr. 
Leach  were  present.  I think  Mr.  Baxter  also  went  up  with  me. 
I think  it  was  said  by  one  of  the  doctors  that  they  found  no  cause 
of  death  in  him.  Dr.  Dudley  put  his  hand  on  my  shoulder  and 
said,  He  has  no  business  lying  there,  a strong  man  like  that.^' 
1 do  not  know  that  I gave  that  in  my  evidence  before.  The 
prisoner  was  in  the  room  at  that  time.  She  did  not  have  her  hat 
on.  Her  dressing  bag  was  lying  on  the  table.  I left  the  house 
after  the  prisoner.  I wished  her  good-bye,  when  she  was  told  to 
go  out  of  the  hoiise,  and  kissed  her.  Some  of  the  doctors  had 
said  she  could  not  remain  there.  She  did  not  take  her  bag  away 
with  her;  it  was  left  on  the  table.  She  took  her  cloak  only. 
Mr.  Wood,  the  solicitor,  was  in  the  room  at  the  time.  1 had 
known  Mr.  Wood  before,  and  my  son  had  known  him  also  for 
years  before.  It  was  suggested  that  I should  take  charge  of  the 
room,  and  I said,  No;  Mr.  Wood,  he  is  a solicitor,  he  will  be 
the  best  man  to  take  charge  of  it.''  I left  in  that  way.  I think 
Dr.  Leach  was  left  in  the  room. 

(At  this  stage  William  Montgomery  Waterton,  a clerk  in  the 
Probate  Registry  of  Somerset  House,  produced  what  purported  to 
be  a will  made  by  the  deceased,  Thomas  Edwin  Bartlett.  The 
witness  was  then  shown  the  document.) — I cannot  swear  whether 
that  is  my  son's  writing.  The  signature  is  something  like  this. 

To  the  best  of  your  belief,  is  that  his  signature;  have  you  any 
real  doubt  ? — It  is  so  very  different  to  what  I have  seen  him  write. 
I cannot  swear  it  is  his  signature.  The  signature  is  very  strange 
for  his  signature. 

To  the  best  of  your  belief,  is  that  his  signature? — ^It  is  not,  to 
the  best  of  my  belief.  I have  seen  that  document  before  at  Somer- 
set House.  The  signatures  of  the  two  persons  who  witnessed  it 
are  H.  Eustace  and  A.  Brook.  I do  not  know  their  handwriting. 
I know  that  these  two  persons  were  in  my  son's  employment  at 
Herne  Hill.  They  were  the  first  and  second  hands  there.  The  docu- 
ment is  written  on  paper  and  is  stamped. 

Mr.  Poland — ^It  is  on  printed  paper,  half  of  a letter,  and  it 
has  on  it  the  address  **  The  Cottage,  Phipps  Bridge,  Merton 
Abbey,  S.W." 

Mr.  JusTiOB  Wills — I suppose  there  will  be  no  difficulty  in 
proving  this? 

Mr.  Poland— Oh,  no,  my  lord;  I shall  call  the  witnesses. 

ExamMiation  contvnAied — I have  got  some  of  my  son's  ordinary 

H g7 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Edwio  Bartlett 

handwriting  with  his  ordinary  signature.  (Shown  letter^ — That 
is  his  ordinary  signature^  and  the  body  of  the  letter  is  in  his  hand- 
writing. 

(Shown  will) — ^What  is  your  belief  about  the  body  of  that  wxln 
— It  does  not  look  like  his  writing  to  me.  I cannot  swear  it. 

Mr.  Poland — ^Before  reading  the  will  I should  like  to  call  the 
two  witnesses. 

Herbert  Eustace,  examined  by  Mr.  Poland — I was  in  the 
employment  of  the  firm  of  Baxter  & Bartlett,  of  Herne  Hill.  I 
know  Arthur  Brook,  who  was  also  employed  in  the  same  business. 
I remember  one  afternoon  Mr.  Bartlett,  the  deceased,  calling  me 
into  his  office  at  Herne  Hill.  1 cannot  give  the  exact  date,  but  it 
was  about  the  beginning  of  September.  It  was  in  the  afternoon. 
Brook  and  I were  called  in  together.  We  signed  a document. 
(Shown  will) — ^That  is  the  document  we  signed.  When  we  signed  it 
I did  not  know  what  it  was.  I saw  Mr.  Bartlett  sign  it.  He  said, 
**  I want  you  to  witness  my  signature.”  I signed  first.  Mr. 
Bartlett  signed  it  in  the  corner  of  the  paper.  We  were  all  three 
together  at  the  time.  I did  not  know  what  it  was.  It  was  folded 
up  at  the  time.  (Witness  indicated  how  the  document  was  folded). 
Mr.  Bartlett  was  staying  at  Dover  at  the  time,  and  used  to  come  up 
day  by  day.  Mr.  Brook  signed  it  after  me  in  my  presence. 

Arthdb  Brook,  examined  by  Mr,  Poland — ^I  was  in  the  ser- 
vice of  Baxter  & Bartlett,  Herne  Hill.  (Shown  will) — That  is  my 
signature.  I remember  signing  that  document.  I saw  Mr.  Bart- 
lett signing  it  first.  I witnessed  his  signature.  I did  not  know 
what  it  was  when  I signed  it.  The  writing  was  turned  away 
from  me  so  that  I could  not  see  it. 

(At  this  stage  the  will  was  read  by  the  Clerk  of  Court  as 
follows : — " Herne  Hill,  S.E.,  September  3,  1886.  I,  Edwin 
Bartlett,  will  and  bequeath  all  my  property  and  everything  I am 
possessed  of  to  my  wife  Adelaide,  for  her  sole,  use,  and  appoint 
George  Dyson,  B.A.,  Wesleyan  Minister,  and  Edward  Wood,  Esq., 
of  66  Gresham  Street,  to  be  my  executors.  (Signed)  Edwin 
Bartlett.  Witnesses  to  my  signature,  Herbert  Eustace  and  Arthur 
Brook.”) 

Mr.  Justice  Wills — ^If  I look  at  the  document  I cannot  say 
that  the  handwriting  of  the  body  of  it  is  even  like  that  of  the 
signature.  It  is  unlike  it,  because  it  seems  to  have  been  written 
inclined  backwards  instead  of  forwards. 

The  Foreman — ^Will  you  ask,  my  lord,  whether  Mr.  Bartlett 
wrote  in  that  wayl 

Mr.  Justice  Wills  (to  the  Witness)— Did  you  ever  see  him 
write  in  .that  sort  of  upright  writing i— I have  seen  him  often 
98 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 


Edwin  Bartlett 

write  in  several  different  hands.  You  could  never  depend  on  his 
writing  to  be  the  same  a second  time. 

(The  Court  adjourned  for  a short  time.) 

Mr.  Bartlett,  recalled,  cross-examined  by  Mr.  E.  Clarke — 
Mr.  Bartlett,  1 believe  you  were  not  present  at  your  son's  mar- 
riage with  the  defendant? — I was  not. 

Did  you  disapprove  of  that  marriage? — ^No,  I did  not;  I was 
not  asked. 

Not  asked  to  the  marriage,  or  not  asked  whether  you 
approved? — I was  not  asked  whether  I thought  she  was  suitable  or 
not. 

As  a matter  of  fact,  did  you  disapprove  of  the  marriage? — 
Well,  no,  not  particularly  disapproved  of  it.  I certainly  did  not 
much  approve  of  it,  but  I did  not  disapprove  of  it.  I said 
nothing  to  my  son  about  it. 

Were  you  asked  to  the  marriage? — was  not,  because  they 
knew  I was  busy. 

At  the  time  of  the  marriage  and  afterwards,  where  did  your 
son  reside? — ^At  Herne  Hill,  after  the  prisoner  came  back  from 
Belgium. 

Will  you  observe  that  is  not  the  question  I ask  you?  At  the 
time  of  the  marriage,  I ask  you,  where  did  your  son  reside?— 
At  Herne  Hill. 

At  the  time  of  the  marriage? — ^Yes. 

After  the  marriage,  did  she  go  to  a school  in  London? — She 

did. 

For  how  long? — Something  nearly  a twelvemonth,  I believe. 

And  did  you  say  that  during  the  holidays  she  would  come  to 
live  with  your  son  ? — She  did,  ultimately. 

When  you  say  ultimately,  will  you  tell  me  at  what  interval 
after  the  marriage  itself  you  are  able  to  say  that  she  first  came 
to  live  with  your  son? — Something  between  two  and  three  years. 

We  have  got  the  date  of  the  marriage  as  being  in  1875.  "^at 
year  xras  it  you  went  to  live  with  your  eon  yourself? — I really  do 
not  know.  It  was  1877  or  1878,  I fancy.  It  was  the  year  my 
wife  died,  but  I am  sure  I cannot  say  to  a year — ^it  was  1877  or 
1878. 

I can  help  you  to  fix  the  date,  I think,  by  a question  to  which 
you  can  answer  yes  or  no.  Did  you  go  to  live  with  him  before 
or  after  you  wrote  an  apology? — Some  time  before  that. 

Do  you  undertake  to  say  that  the  defendant  never  lived  with 
your  son  before  the  beginning  of  the  year  1878?— I would  not.  I 
have  not  booked  it  down.  I know  the  month  I went  was  some- 
thing like  June,  but  which  year  I cannot  say. 

It  may  have  been  June,  1878? — ^Yes. 

Will  you  undertake  to  say  that  the  defendant  ever  lived  with 

99 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Edwin  Bartlett 

your  son  before  1878  ? — What,  at  his  house,  sir  ? I will  not.  It 
was  either  in  1877  or  1878;  I will  not  say  which  year. 

I think  you  have  said  that  your  son  promised  to  give  you  a 
home  for  life? — ^Tes,  he  did.  That  was  his  words  on  the  death  of 
my  wife.  He  said,  Where  I have  a home  you  shall  have  one.” 

When  did  your  wife  die? — She  died  on  the  2Sth  of  May — 
either  1877  or  1878.  I am  not  prepared  to  say.  One  of  tho.se 
years.  I think  it  was  1877. 

Do  you  say  you  cannot  remember? — I do  not  remember  the 
date  of  the  year. 

You  do  not  remember  the  year? — I do  not.  I have  not 
refreshed  my  memory,  or  else  I might  have  answered. 

Now,  do  you  tell  the  jury  that  you  enjoyed  the  complete  con- 
fidence  of  your  son  and  his  wife  after  that  time? — We  lived  on 
most  friendly  terms  together. 

Do  you  say  you  enjoyed  the  complete  confidence  of  your  son 
and  his  wife? — believe  so. 

In  the  year  1878,  very  soon  after  Mrs.  Bartlett  came  to  live 
with  your  eon,  did  you  have  to  write  an  apology  for  things  you 
had  said  about  her? — I did.  I signed  an  apology,  but  I -knew  it 
to  be  false.  ^ I knew  it  to  be  the  truth  what  I saii  at  the  time. 

What,  sir? — ^When  I signed  it,  it  was  to  make  peace  with  my 
son.  He  begged  me  to  sign  it,  because  it  would  make  peace  with 
him  and  his  wife  if  I did. 

You  say  now  you  signed  the  apology,  knowing  it  to  be  false, 
because  it  would  make  peace  with  your  son? — ^Yes;  and  Mr.  Wood 
knew  it  to  be  false  when  I signed  it  in  his  office. 

Was  38  Berkeley  Square  the  place  where  you  were  carrying 
on  business? — No,  I do  not  work  there.  Why  he  should  put  38 
I do  not  know. 

You  were  working  at  38  Berkeley  Square  in  December,  0.878? 
— Yes. 

Let  me  read  this  to  you — ^you  remember  it  well — ''  38  BerkeW 
Square,  W.,  December  31,  1878.  ^Having  made  statements  re- 
flecting on  the  character  of  Mrs.  Adelaide  Bartlett,  the  wife  of  my 
son,  Mr.  Edwin  Bartlett,  junior,  which  statements  I have  dis- 
covered to  be  unfounded  and  untrue,  I hereby  withdraw  all  stich 
statements,  and  express  my  regret  for  having  made  them.  I also 
apologise  to  the  said  Mrs.  Adelaide  Bartlett  and  Mr.  Edwin  Bart- 
lett, junior,  and  acknowledge  that  all  such  statements  are  altogether 
unfounded  and  untrue.  I authorise  Mr.  Edwin  Bartlett,  junior, 
^ make  what  use  he  pleases  of  this  apology.— (Signed)  Enwi!^ 
Bartlett,  Senr.”  Was  that  the  apology  you  signed?— That  was 
the  apology  I signed,  knowing  it  to  be  false.  I signed  it  to  make 
peace  with  my  son.  That  was  all. 

Do  you  know  your  son  did  make  use  of  that  apology,  and  had 
xt  printed?— Yes,  I do,  at  her  suggestion. 

I should  think  so  1— -Yes;  and  Mr.  Wood  asked  me  to,  because, 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 


EdwiD  Bartlett 

my  son  being  in  America,  he  asked  me  whether  I thought  she  had 
had  letters  from  my  son. 

Do  you  mean  to  say  that  the  suggestion  you  had  made  against 
Mrs,  Bartlett  was  also  a suggestion  against  your  son? — ^Against 
my  son  Fred.  If  witnesses  are  wanted  to  prove  it,  they  can  be 
had  even  now. 

How  long  were  you  living  under  the  same  roof  with  your  son 
and  his  wife? — Somewhere  about  five  or  six  years. 

Do  you  say  your  son  promised  to  give  you  a home  for  the  rest 
of  his  life? — He  did. 

He  did  not  keep  that  promise,  did  he? — ^Because  they  removed 
to  Lordship  Lane,  and  there  was  not  room  for  me  there. 

Has  he  made  you  any  allowance  in  lieu  of  giving  you  a home  ? 
— ^He  was  going  to  on  the  Ist  of  this  year. 

Has  he  ever  made  you  any  allowance  in  lieu  of  giving  you  a 
home? — No,  he  has  not;  but  I have  had  from  him  what  money  I 
wanted.  He  was  the  kindest  of  sons. 

You  were  asked  a question  about  his  having  insured  his  life? 
— ^Yes. 

And  you  answered  that  in  a way  which  makes  me  ask — did 
you  know  during  his  lifetime  that  he  had  insured  his  life? — 
knew  he  had  insured  it  during  his  lifetime. 

But  did  you  know  during  his  lifetime  ? — I did. 

How  soon  after  insuring  his  life  did  you  know  it? — ^Well,  I 
have  heard  the  prisoner  and  him  talk  about  it  in  my  presence.  I 
should  think  I had  known  it  all  two  years,  if  not  more. 

By  hearing  conversations  between  them? — ^Yes,  and  me,  of 
course— altogether  as  we  were. 

And  you  joined  in  those  conversations? — ^Yes,  certainly. 

When  that  will  was  put  before  you  just  now,  you  said  to  the 
best  of  your  belief  it  was  not  your  son's  signature? — said  that 
1 could  not  swear  that  it  was. 

You  said,  to  the  best  of  your  belief,  it  was  not  his  signature  ? 
— To  the  best  of  my  belief,  I had  not  seen  him  write  in  that  hand 
before. 

You  had  examined  it  before  at  Somerset  House? — ^Yes. 

With  whom  did  you  go  to  Somerset  House  to  examine  it? — ^Mr. 
Hooper,  of  Clifiord's  Inn. 

What  is  he? — lawyer,  I believe. 

You  have  entered  a caveat  against  that  will,  I believe? — 
have. 

You  told  the  Attorney-General  your  son  was  always  very 
strong? — He  was  from  a child. 

Never  had  any  illness? — ^Never  that  I know  of. 

Some  years  ago  he  had  a considerable  number  of  teeth  sawn 
o&  at  some  time?— Yes,  because  he  wanted  a false  set;  and  1 was 
in  the  house  at  the  time  he  had  them  done. 

Where  was  it  th^  were  done? — believe  they  were  done  at 

101 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Edwb  BuUaU 

Herne  Hill,  but  I would  not  sayj  Mr.  Beilin,  a dentisit,  sawed 

*^”\ou  do  not  know  if  they  were  sound  teeth,  and  he  had  ^em 
oft  preferring  artificial  ones  1— Mr.  Beilin  said  they  were  all  stuck 
toeether,  and  he  could  not  put  the  others  in.^ 

Had  no  doctor  attended  him  up  to  that  tune?  ^To  my  know- 
ledge I do  not  know  they  had;  I am  not  sure.  ^ 

'^That  was  about  the  year  1878  or  1879.  I believe  1—1  believe 

WAS 

Now  about  the  year  1881  he  broke  down  through  overwork, 
did  he  not? — Just  through  laying  a floor  he  exerted  himself  too 

He  exerted  himself,  you  say,  through  laying  a floor,  but  it 
involved  a nervous  breakdown  necessitating  his  going  a sea  voyage  ? 
— Tes,  the  doctors  recommended  a sea  voyage,  and  he  came  back 

wholly  restored.  . , « tt  xu* 

Having  been  away  a week  or  a fortnight? — Yes,  something 

like  that. 

He  went  to  Scotland?— Yes,  he  went  to  Balmoral — ^went 
because  he  simply  had  a holiday,  that  was  all. 

Who  was  attending  him  then  ? — do  not  know.  He  went  to 
a physician  in  London;  I do  not  know  who  it  was. 

You  know  he  went  to  a physician? — He  told  me  he  went  to  a 
physician. 

Can  you  tell  me  the  date  that  Dr.  Barraclough  attended  him? 
— Some  twelve  years  ago  he  attended  him,  once  for  a bilious 
attack,  somewhere  between  twelve  and  thirteen  years  ago.  At 
least  he  did  not  attend  him ; he  simply  came  and  saw  him  once, 
and  gave  him  a bottle  of  medicine. 

Did  you  know  of  your  son’s  having  any  exceptional  ideas  on 
this  subject  of  married  life? — No;  he  used  to  chaff  and  joke  about 
such  things — ^that  was  all.  I never  knew  him  to  have  any  solid 
ideas  about  anything  different  to  other  people. 

What  used  he  to  say? — He  said  one  ought  to  have  two  wives, 
one  to  take  out  and  one  to  do  the  work. 

When  used  he  to  say  that? — ^When  I was  living  with  him  I 
heard  him  make  the  remark. 

Was  that  the  first  time  you  heard  him  make  the  remark? — 
Tes,  I think  so,  as  I heard  a man  say  last  night  he  should  like  i.o 
have  forty  wives  just  in  the  same  way. 

Keep  your  mind  on  the  subject  we  are  inquiring  into.  It 
was  when  you  were  living  with  him  you  heard  him  make  that 
remark?— Yes;  other  remarks  as  well. 

Other  remarks  of  the  same  kind  ? — I do  not  know. 

With  reference  to  the  same  subject? — do  not  know;  he  may 
have  done  so. 

In  conversation? — ^He  may  have. 

Did  he? — Only  once — only  once  I heard  him  make  that  remark 
102 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Edwin  Bartlell: 

— ^whether  that  was  at  Herne  Hill  or  somewhere  else,  I do  not 
know.  He  used  to  joke  about  it. 

He  used  to  chafi  and  joke,  you  said? — Yes;  he  was  a very 
merry  man. 

When  you  said  “ chaff  and  joke,’'  did  you  mean  he  only 
said  it  once? — He  only  once  said  it — ^them  words. 

With  regard  to  that  subject,  did  he  mention  it  more  than 
once,  and  before  his  wife? — He  did  before  his  wife,  but  only  that 
once  1 call  to  mind. 

Then  it  caught  your  attention? — I just  recollect. 

Did  you  think  it  was  a very  curious  observation? — Certainly 
not,  only  a passing  observation. 

And  you  attached  no  importance  to  it? — ^No,  I did  not  write 
it  down. 

And  you  have  remembered  it  ever  since? — Certainly;  as  I 
remember  a remark  the  prisoner  made  just  in  the  same  passing 
manner,  1 remember  this. 

Did  you  know  of  your  son  having  any  book  on  that  subject? 
— Never  to  my  knowledge. 

Do  you  know  the  name  of  Dr.  Nichols  at  all? — I never  heard 
of  it  until  I saw  him  in  Court. 

You  never  saw  Dr.  Nichols’  book? — I never  heard  of  him 
till  I saw  him  in  Court,  and  never  heard  his  name. 

I am  asking  about  the  book  now;  did  you  ever  see  a book 
of  Dr.  Nichols’? — I did  not. 

Now,  was  your  son  a believer  in  mesmerism? — ^Not  to  my 
knowledge. 

Did  he  ever  speak  to  you  about  mesmerism? — ^Never  in  his 

life. 

You  never  heard  from  him  of  his  being  mesmerised? — ^Never. 

Or  his  mesmerising  anybody  else? — ^No,  never;  he  was  nothing 
but  business — always  in  business. 

His  aspect  with  you  wa^  always  business — ^nothing  but  busi- 
ness?— ^Nothing  but  business ; he  was  wrapped  up  in  his  business. 

Now,  you  visited  him  at  Putney  in  1876,  did  you? — He  never 
lived  at  Putney. 

At  Merton? — ^Yes.  1 constantly  visited  him  at  Merton. 

Did  you  ever  go  to  see  him  at  Dover  ? — I went  once  or  twice. 

Twice  I suggest  to  you? — Once  or  twice,  and  spent  a very 
happy  day  there. 

Did  you  on  that  occasion  hear  anything  of  Mr,  Dyson? — I 
did  not. 

You  did  not  happen  to  hear,  then,  your  son  had  offered  Mr. 
Dyson  a season  ticket  to  go  to  Dover  ? — I never  heard  Mr.  Dyson’s 
name  mentioned. 

Shall  I take  it  you  never  heard  anything  of  Mr.  Dyson  nor  saw 

103 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Edwin  Bartlett 


him  until  after  your  son’s  death? — No,  I would  not  say  that. 
I think  I heard  of  him  during  my  son’s  illness. 

From  whom? — Whether  from  my  son  or  from  whom  I cannot 
say.  I believe  I only  heard  his  name  once,  and  only  once,  till 
after  the  death. 

How  long  was  it  before  you  heard  from  Mr.  Baxter  of  your 
son’s  illness  that  you  had  seen  him? — I saw  him  on  Monday,  I 
believe,  and  he  complained  of  neuralgia  in  his  mouth. 

Of  neuralgia  in  his  mouth?  Now,  Monday  would  be  7lli 
December.  We  know  he  went  home  ill  from  business  on  8th 
December — ^then  on  Monday  you  went  to  see  him? — Not  on  the 
Monday. 

On  the  Wednesday,  I mean?^ — ^Yes,  on  the  Wednesday  I went 
to  see  him. 


The  Wednesday  was  the  9th,  Thursday  the  lOLh;  then  between 
the  9th  and  the  28th  of  December,  that  was  nineteen  days,  you 
had  been  six  or  seven  times  to  Claverton  Street? — Something 
about  that. 

Do  you  undertake  to  say  these  letters  produced  to-day  are 
all  the  letters  you  received  during  that  time? — I produced  all  the 
letters  I received,  I believe.  I did  not  tear  any  up,  and  I had  no 
reason  to  keep  any  back. 

You  have  produced  all  in  your  possession? — ^Yes,  all  in  niy 
possession. 


Do  you  say  they  are  all  you  received  during  the  illness? — 
They  are  all,  I believe — ^they  are  all  the  letters — ^there  might  liave 
been  a postcard. 

You  say  to-day,  the  first  day  you  saw  him  he  appeared  suffer- 
ing from  some  narcotic  ? — ^He  did. 

Did  the  impression  that  he  was  suffering  from  some  narcotic 
continue  during  the  whole  of  his  illness?— He  did  not  appear  as 
bright  as  he  had  formerly  been. 

At  any  period  of  his  illness?— At  any  period  he  did  not 
appear  bright. 

On  every  occasion  you  saw  him  did  he  appear  to  be  in  what 
you  call  a cross  state  and  not  inclined  for  talking?— Not  inclined 
for  talking  much.  The  last  time  I saw  him  he  talked  more  than 
he  did  before,  and  he  appeared  stronger  and  better. 

^ tim,  what  time 
thi®  evening,  I believe,  to 

the  best  of  my  recollection. 

Did  he  complain  of  his  head  on  that  day?— Not  particularly- 
he  appeared  very  averse  to  talking. 

Kd  he  oomplaia  of  hie  head  on  that  dayl— Rather,  I believe. 

recollect  all  this 

\ ^ “ — °°°^  to  ah.  « I A<mld  u™ 


104 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 


Edwin  Bartlett 

Tell  me  what  you  recollect  he  said  about  his  head? — Some 
more  about  having  mercurial  poisoning;  that  is  what  he  said. 

What  did  he  say  about  his  head? — He  said  he  had  got  a 
headache.  He  did  not  make  any  great  comment  about  his  head. 

You  say  he  complained  of  mercurial  poisoning — ^you  say  the 
first  occasion  you  went  to  see  him  he  mentioned  that  to  you? — 
He  did. 

You  have  said  to-day,  on  another  occasion  Mrs.  Bartlett  also 
mentioned  it  to  you? — She  did,  or  it  might  be  on  that  occasion 
she  and  Edwin  both  together  mentioned  it. 

You  were  examined  before  the  coroner  first  on  7th  January,  I 
think? — ^Yes. 

When  all  these  matters  were  very  fresh  in  your  recollection? — 
They  were  then. 

You  say  you  saw  him  on  the  28th,  which  was  the  last  time 
you  saw  him  before  his  death? — did. 

And  did  you  say,  “ He  said  he  was  getting  very  much  better, 
and  he  thought  that  he  would  be  at  business  again ; he  did  not 
' appear  to  be  quite  himself.  I was  there  for  two  and  a half  hours; 
he  then  told  me  he  had  passed  a quantity  of  worms.  He  told  me 
^he  had  been  poisoned  with  mercury;  the  doctor  had  told  him 
•so.  It  was  only  in  a slight  degree,  too  slight  to  have  been 
developed.  I said  to  him,  ‘ You  could  not  get  mercury  in  any 
way,  could  you?  ^ He  said  that  if  it  was  lead  poisoning  he 
toight  have  got  it  in  opening  tea-chests  **  ? Now,  I ask  you  whether 
phe  first  time  poison  by  mercury  or  by  lead  was  mentioned  between 
rou,  was  not  it  on  that  2Sth  of  December,  the  last  time  you 
law  him? — No;  it  had  been  mentioned  before,  no  doubt. 

! Did  you  say  before  the  coroner  that  that  was  the  time  on 
which  that  conversation  took  place? — I may  have  done  so. 

1 You  saw  him  on  Wednesday  and  you  saw  him  again  on  Satur- 
day, I think? — I went  to  see  him  on  Saturday.  I will  not  say 
"T  saw  him  on  Saturday. 

You  told  my  lord  this  morning  you  saw  him  on  Saturday? — 
I went  to  see  him  on  Saturday;  I will  not  say  I saw  him.  I 
really  could  not  go  into  the  date  of  every  day  when  I saw  him. 

I did  not  put  it  down. 

1 am  aware  of  that.  I want  you  to  tell  us  when  you  saw 
him,  giving  us  the  conversations  that  happened  at  different  inter- 
views. The  first  occasion  when  you  saw  him  was  the  Wednesday? — 
I think  on  Wednesday. 

Did  Mrs.  Bartlett  then  tell  you  they  had  called  in  a doctor  ? — 
I believe  she  did,  and  she  told  me  the  doctor  up  the  street. 

Did  you  ask  her  hm  name? — I did  not;  she  did  not  tell  me, 
and  I did  not  ask  her  his  name;  she  seemed  reluctant  to  say  much 
about  the  doctor. 

What  did  you  say  about  it — ^tell  me  what  you  asked  her? 

106 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Edwin  Bnctlett 

I did  not  ask  her  anything.  I said,  either  then  or  some  time 
after,  I thought  she  had  better  have  a physician  from  London. 

We  will  come  to  that  presently.  Now,  on  the  Saturday,  the 
second  time  you  saw  him,  did  you  have  a conversation  with  him  ? — 
Yes;  very  little  at  that  time,  very  little  indeed. 

Was  he  worse  then  1 — ^He  appeared  worse. 

Did  you  suggest  to  him  having  another  doctor  ? — I do  not  know 
whether  1 suggested  it  to  him  or  to  the  prisoner,  but  they  were 
both  in  the  room  at  the  time. 

So  that  he  would  hear  the  conversation  about  having  the 
doctor? — ^Yes,  he  would  hear,  but  he  was  very  reluctant  to  speak 
apparently. 

Was  he  lying  on  the  bed? — ^Yes;  half  lying  down  on  the  iron 
bedstead. 

With  half-closed  eyes? — ^Yes;  he  appeared  to  shut  his  eyes 
and  open  them  again. 

Dull  and  dazed? — ^Yes;  he  certainly  appeared  labouring  under 
something. 

Now,  when  you  first  saw  him,  was  that  about  the  mercury  or 
verdigris,  the  only  thing  stated  as  being  the  matter  with  him? 
— The  only  thing  that  I recollect  being  mentioned  by  him. 

What? — That  was  the  only  thing  that  I recollect  that  was 
stated  by  him  at  that  time. 

Are  you  positive  about  that? — No,  I am  not  positive;  in 
general  conversation  you  do  not  remember  every  word. 

I ask  you  about  the  conversation  when  you  went  to  see  your 
son  when  he  was  ill.  What  was  mentioned  about  his  being  ill—* 
about  being  the  matter  with  him? — That  the  doctor  said  there 
was  a slight  mercurial  poisoning. 

When  you  came  before  the  coroner  did  you  say,  About  a 
month  ago  I heard  from  Mr.  Baxter — ^his  partner — that  my  eon 
was  ill,  and  went  to  see  him,  and  I found  him  queer,  but  I could 
not  make  out  what  was  the  matter  with  him.  He  said  he  was 
suffering  from  dysentery  "'?  Did  you  say  that? — I did. 

Was  it  true? — He  told  me  so,  that  he  was  suffering  from 
dysentery. 

Why  did  not  you  toll  us  so  to-day? — do  not  know;  1 was 
not  asked  particularly.  I do  not  come  here  to  keep  anything 
back.  I come  here  to  speak  the  truth  and  nothing  else. 

Observe,  Mr.  Bartlett,  I asked  you  just  now  whether,  when 
you  first  saw  him,  anything  was  complained  of  except  the  poison- 
ing with  mercury  or  verdigris.  You  said  distinctly.  No.  Now 
you  tell  me  it  is  because  you  were  not  asked  that  you  did  not 
mention  the  dysentery.  I ask  you  now  who  was  it  who  told  you 
anything  about  dysentery? — Either  the  prisoner  or  Edwin.  They 
were  talking  about  it  in  general  conversation. 

In  his  presence?— -Yes. 

106 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 


Edwin  Bartlett 

Was  that  the  matter  that  was  mentioned  as  being  wrong 
with  him  when  you  first  saw  him? — do  not  know  if  dysentery 
was  mentioned  when  1 first  saw  him.  I cannot  say. 

Try  and  remember.  1 have  reminded  you  how  long  ago  you 
gave  your  evidence  before  the  coroner? — It  is  simply  my  memory, 
and  1 have  had  lots  through  my  head  since  then. 

Let  me  read  this  letter  to  you  which  you  received  from  Mrs. 
Bartlett,  and  ask  you  to  tell  me  if  you  can  at  what  date  that 
came — “ Dear  Father, — fancy  Edwin  is  slightly  better  this  morn- 
ing; the  dysentery  has  left  him,  and  he  is  certainly  stronger.  The 
doctor  said  last  night  there  was  a slight  improvement.'^  Do 
you  remember  how  soon  after  you  first  saw  him  you  had  that 
letter? — Does  it  say  “ Dear  Father  "? 

Yes? — Yes,  that  is  shortly  after  I saw  him  on  the  Wednesday 
if  it  is  “ Dear  Father,"  because  it  was  “ Dear  Mr.  Bartlett  " 
afterwards. 

What? — The  address  dropped  ofi  to  “Dear  Mr.  Bartlett" 
afterwards. 

You  tell  the  jury  the  letters  afterwards  dropped  ofi  to  “ Dear 
Mr.  Bartlett  "? — ^Yes;  there  they  are,  you  can  see  them. 

Here  is  a letter  on  21st  December,  according  to  the  arrange- 
ment of  the  envelopes — “ Dear  Father, — ^Edwin  seems  slightly 
better,  and  has  passed  a restful  night."  Here  is  the  third  letter — 
“ Dear  Father, — The  doctors  are  very  angry  that  I permitted 

him  ." — ^Yes,  that  was  shortly  after  I had  seen  him.  The 

letters  have  very  likely  got  into  the  wrong  envelopes.  I did  not 
keep  them  in  the  right  envelopes.  I did  not  think  anything  of 
them,  that  I should  have  had  to  produce  them  here,  or  I would 
have  kept  them  in  their  right  envelopes. 

This  one  about  the  dysentery  having  left  him  was  shortly 
after  you  saw  him  the  first  time,  was  it? — ^It  must  have  been  soon 
after  that. 

Now,  the  next  time  you  saw  him  was  on  a Sunday,  was  it 
not?  I am  not  speaking  of  the  last  visit;  you  saw  him  again  on 
the  Sunday? — 1 went  to  see  him  on  Sunday,  and  was  refused  ad- 
mission to  him.  I question  whether  1 saw  him  on  Sunday.  I 
know  I went  on  Sunday.  1 came  up  from  Croydon  to  see  him, 
and  was  refused  admission  to  him. 

Will  you  undertake  to  say  you  did  not  see  him? — will  not. 

Now,  then,  here  is  a later  letter,  in  which  Mrs.  Bartlett  says, 
“ I am  expecting  another  doctor,  so  you  must  excuse  this  note  "? 
— ^Yes. 

Was  that  letter  before  or  after  you  had  suggested  seeing  a 
physician? — Well,  I suppose  after. 

Do  you  remember? — do  not. 

When  you  saw  Mrs.  Bartlett  soon  after  that  letter,  did  you 
ask  if  the  doctor  bad  been? — They  told  me  he  had  been. 


10*7 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Edwin  Bartlett 

Did  you  ask  his  name? — did  not,  and  I am  not  sure  whether 
Mrs.  Bartlett  told  me  or  not. 

It  was  Dr.  Dudley,  was  it  not? — ^Yes,  Dr.  Dudley.  I would 
not  undertake  to  say  whether  I was  told. 

You  would  not  undertake  to  say  whether  she  told  you  the 
name  or  not? — ^No,  I will  not. 

You  did  not  ask  the  name,  you  were  refused? — ^Noj  I was 
refused  generally.  I thought  I told  you  what  doctors  came  and 
who  they  had. 

It  would  have  fixed  itself  on  your  mind  if  they  had  not? — 
Well,  I do  not  know. 

Now,  I notice  in  these  letters  that  Mrs.  Bartlett  says  several 
times — she  speaks  of  Edwin  having  passed  a restful  night;  says 
he  has  passed  a bad  night;  and  in  another  letter  speaks  about  his 
sleeping  better,  and  so  on.  Did  you  know  he  suffered  from  sleep- 
lessness?— He  told  me  so. 

Did  he  tell  you  ho  was  taking  anything  for  that? — Oh,  yes; 
he  told  me  they  were  injecting  morphia  into  him  for  it. 

Can  you  remember  about  when  it  was  that  he  told  you  that? 
— ^I  do  not. 

Now,  you  know  that  his  teeth  became  very  troublesome?— 
He  told  me  they  were  troublesome. 

And  painful? — He  told  me  so. 

Here  is  another  letter  which  contains  another  matter  by  which 
we  shall  be  able  to  fix  the  date — “ Edwin  seems  to  have  stood  his 
teeth-drawing  very  well.''  Were  you  aware  that  he  had  had  a 
number  of  teeth  drawn? — ^Yes,  they  told  me  he  had. 

A number  of  stumps? — ^Yes,  they  told  me  so. 

Did  he  tell  you  he  had  taken  gas? — ^No,  he  did  not. 

Did  he  complain  of  pain?-^Yes. 

Was  he  subject  to  curious  bursts — ^fits  of  low  spirits? — ^Not 
before  that  time.  He  appeared  in  low  spirits  then,  but  previous 
to  his  illness  he  was  not. 

But  he  appeared  in  low  spiritsp? — He  appeared  in  low  spirits. 

Have  you  noticed  him  from  time  to  time  bursting  out  crying? 
— ^I  have  seen  him  then,  and  I was  very  much  surprised. 

How  many  times  do  you  think  you  saw  him? — ^I  saw  him 
orying  once. 

Only  once;  was  that  the  last  time  you  saw  him,  or  earlier?— 
No,  earlier;  he  was  much  better  the  last  time  I saw  him— very 
much. 

Did  he  tell  you  how  often  he  had  had  morphia  injected?— 
No,  he  did  not ; but  from  his  conversation  I thought  he  had  had 
it  before  he  told  me. 

What? — ^I  Ihought  ho  had  had  it  injected  once  before  the 
time  he  was  Eqpeaking  of  then. 

You  thought  he  had  had  it  injected  once? — Once  before  the 
time  he  told  me.  He  said  " I have  had  xnorphia  injected  again/’' 
lOB 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 


Edwin  Bartlett 

Yes,  you  gatliered  that  the  day  on  which  he  spoke  to  you  was 
the  day  on  which  he  had  had  it  injected  for  the  second  time? — 
cannot  say  the  second,  but  he  said,  “ I have  had  morphia  injected 
again/' 

Did  he  tell  you  that  on  two  successive  days  he  had  had  morphia 
injected,^  and  that  his  condition  was  so  bad  that  on  the  third  day 
he  had  it  injected  twice  in  one  day? — do  not  recollect  he  told 
me  so. 

You  do  not  remember  hearing  that? — do  not  remember  his 
telling  me. 

Did  he  tell  you  that  he  was  taking  sleeping  draughts? — He 
did. 

He  told  you,  you  say,  he  felt  worms  crawling  up  him,  thus 
(showing  him) — ^was  that  the  action  he  used? — ^Yes,  and  the 
prisoner  said,  “ We  call  them  snakes."  He  said,  " They  are 
crawling  all  up  here  " ; that  was  the  feeling. 

Did  he  tell  you  he  had  passed  worms  also? — No,  he  did  not  j 
the  prisoner  told  me  he  had  passed  worms. 

In  his  presence? — ^Yes,  but  he  did  not  contradict  her. 

Did  he  ever  tell  you  he  thought  he  felt  a worm  crawling  up 
his  throat? — ^No,  I do  not  remember. 

Are  you  sure? — I would  not  be  sure.  When  worms  were 
talked  about,  he  might  have  said  so,  but  I do  not  recollect;  he 
said  he  had  worms  in  his  throat. 

He  might  have  said,  as  far  as  you  remember,  that  he  had 
worms  crawling  up  him,  and  that  he  had  passed  worms,  and  also 
that  he  felt  a worm  in  his  throat? — No,  he  never  told  me.  The 
prisoner  told  me  he  had  passed  worms. 

But  in  his  presence? — ^Yes,  in  his  presence. 

Did  you  ever  hear  mention  made  by  him  or  in  his  presence 
about  his  being  likely  to  die? — ^Never — ^never  mentioned — ^never 
the  least  idea  of  it. 

You  say  that? — do;  he  was  not  a dying  man. 

Did  not  he  ever  say  to  ycfu  he  thought  no  man  could  be  worse 
than  he  was  and  alive? — ^No,  never. 

Nothing  of  the  kind? — ^Nothing  of  the  kind. 

Did  any  other  members  of  the  family,  as  far  as  you  know, 
visit  at  that  house? — Of  my  family? 

Of  your  family? — ^Not  that  I know  of. 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills — ^Were  there  other  members? — ^Yes. 

Grass-examinatiofb  continued — You  say  on  the  last  occa- 
sion you  saw  him,  the  28th,  he  mentioned  about  worms  crawling 
up  him? — ^Not  that  day;  I do  not  think  it  was  on  the  last  day. 

You  told  us  to-day  it  was? — ^It  might  have  been;  I do  not 
think  it  was  the  last  day,  because  he  was 

Take  plenty  of  time;  try  and  recollect.  Do  yourself  justice. 
Try  and  recollect  accurately.  You  have  described  to-day  the  inter- 

109 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Edwin  Bartlett 


view  on  28th  December,  which  was  from  half -past  six  or  six  in 
the  evening  till  perhaps  nearly  nine? — ^Yes. 

Ton  have  told  us  he  said  worms  were  crawling  all  up  him — 
yon  have  told  us  you  think  he  mentioned  croton  oil,  that  he  had 
had  a physician,  and  spoke  about  his  teeth? — ^Tes,  but  1 did  not 
mean  it  for  that  day,  he  might  have  some  other  day — ^that  would 
pass  in  conversation  during  the  time  I had  been  with  him. 

To  the  best  of  your  recollection  and  belief  was  it  not  on  28th 
December  that  was  said  ? — It  might  have  been ; 1 think  it  was  said 
before. 

Tou  have  said  it  was.  Do  you  believe  it  was? — ^Yes. 

How  came  he  to  mention  croton  oil  ? — I do  not  know  i I cannot 
tell  you  that;  he  certainly  mentioned  it,  and  I believe  he  said 
Dr.  Leach  was  giving  him  croton  oil  for  the  worms. 

Did  he  tell  you  Dr.  Leach  had  been  trying  all  he  could  to 
rouse  his  bowels  to  action,  and  that  the  croton  oil  was  given  for 
that  purpose? — ^No,  he  did  not. 

Did  he  tell  you  that  on  the  previous  Saturday  Dr.  Leach  had 
not  only  given  him  two  purgative  draughts,  but  he  also  gave 
him  two  globules  of  croton  oil,  and,  that  failing,  he  applied 
galvanism  to  the  abdomen? — ^No,  he  never  told  us  about  galvanism; 
he  only  said  about  croton  oil. 


Did  he  tell  you  about  the  galvanism  at  all? — No,  he  did  not. 
He  did  not  tell  you,  then,  that  previous  Saturday,  all  those 
remedies  had  been  tried  and  had  all  failed,  and  that  Dr.  Loach 
had  given  it  up  in  despair  ? — He  did  not  tell  me  so. 

There  is  one  thing  you  may  be  able  to  fix  about  the  time  at 
which  it  was  said— you  have  told  us  to-day  you  wanted  to  send  a 
physician,  and  said  to  Mrs.  Bartlett,  “ You  had  better  have  a 
physician,  as  Edwin  does  not  get  better  I did. 

Does  that  reason,  you  say  you  gave,  help  you  to  say  how 

Irag  after  you  saw  him  ill? — ^That  was  on  my  second  visit,  to  the 
best  of  my  belief.  , ’ 

fi  Saturday?— I do  not  know.  I would  not 

^ only  allowed 
him.  That  was  on  the  second  visit. 

New,  you  had  a telegram  informing  you  of  the  death  but 

dav  post-box  until  late  in  the 

was  It  you  actually  received  the  telegram  your- 
»lf?— I actually  rweived  it  myself  about  half-past  twelve,  after 

dTop  ^ Square  then. 

till  llwf  *?®  ‘olog'^un  ^as  delivered 

nil  later? — Yes,  that  is  how  it  came  to  be  later 

“ the  afternoon  that  you 
gofc^to  Clavorton  Street?— Before  that;  we  took  a hansom  oab  and 


Evidence  for  Prosecution 


Edwin  Bartlett 

went  down  directly.  It  must  have  been  between  twelve  and  one, 
I think. 

Did  you  not  say  before  the  co-roner,  **  It  was  about  four 
o’clock  in  the  afternoon  Mr.  Baxter  and  I went  home  together; 
we  went  to  85  Claverton  Street  about  4 p.m.”? — ^Yes;  I must 
say  I made  a mistake  about  the  two  o’clock  between  Saturday 
and  Friday  in  the  dreadful  sorrow  of  my  son’s  death.  It  was  on 
Saturday  we  went  at  four  o’clock,  not  on  Friday. 

Friday  was  the  1st  of  January? — ^Yes. 

You  went  with  Mr  Baxter? — ^Yes. 

You  went  in  at  once? — ^Yes. 

You  went  up  with  him? — ^Yes,  that  is  again  a mistake  1 have 
made  between  those  two  days.  1 must  ask  the  indulgence  of  the 
Court  for  that. 

I only  want  to  get  the  facts.  You  went  in  with  Mr.  Baxter 
and  went  up  with  him? — ^Yes. 

Have  you  told  us  all  that  passed  on  that  day? — ^All  that  I 
happen  to  recollect,  I believe. 

Did  Mrs.  Bartlett  say  anything  of  a kindly  fashion  to  you 
on  that  day? — ^Yes,  she  told  me  on  the  Saturday  when  I was 
going  upstairs  after  the  post-mortem  examination 

I am  asking  you  about  the  Friday  now? — I do  not  think  she 
said  anything  on  the  Friday. 

Mr.  Baxter  was  not  there  on  the  Saturday,  was  he? — ^No,  he 
was  not. 

Now,  is  this  the  case — “ She  placed  her  arm  round  my  neck, 
and  she  said,  ' My  dear  father,  do  not  fret ; it  shall  make  no 
odds  to  you.  I will  see  you  never  want.  It  shall  be  just  the 
same  as  if  Edwin  were  alive.’  That  was  just  at  the  bottom  of 
the  stairs;  in  fact,  on  the  stairs.  Mr.  Baxter  was  following  us 
up  ”? — There  I made  the  mistake.  It  was  Saturday  that  took 
place,  not  on  Friday. 

Then  Mr.  Baxter  was  not  there? — ^No;  there  is  where  I am  in 
error  which  was  on  the  Saturday  when  they  called  us  up  to  see 
the  post-mortem. 

I am  referring  you  now  to  the  evidence  given-  by  you  on  19th 
February? — I know,  and  I corrected  my  mistake  as  soon  as  possible 
at  the  Treasury. 

You  were  examined  both  before  the  coroner’s  jury  and  then 
before  the  magistrate  in  February? — ^Yes. 

Did  you  say  when  you  described  that  conversation,  **  That 
was  just  at  the  tettom  of  the  stairs;  in  fact,  on  the  stairs.  Mr. 
Baxter  was  following  us  up  ” ? — Yes,  that  was  my  error.  Mr. 
Baxter  was  not. 

He  was  not  following  you  up? — ^No. 

No,  he  was  not  there  at  all? — ^No;  I made  that  mistake  between 
Friday  and  Saturday. 


Ill 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Edwin  Bardett 


Whether  it  was  Friday  or  Saturday,  why  have  you  not  told 
us  that  to-day 3 — 1 was  not  examined  on  it;  1 was  not  asked. 

It  was  said? — 1 was  not  asked. 

Was  it  said  by  Mrs.  Bartlett  to  you  ? — It  was  not ; it  was  on 
the  Saturday  it  was  said,  not  on  the  Friday. 

Very  well,  then;  we  have  got  that  fact  quite  clear.  Now,  Mr. 
Bartlett,  when  you  went  on  Friday  you  went  upstairs  to  the 
drawing-room,  and  there  you  saw  Mrs.  Bartlett? — ^Yes. 

And  then  on  the  following  day,  the  Saturday,  you  waited 
outside? — I did. 

Until  the  post-mortem  examination  was  over? — ^Yes,  I did. 

Then  you  went  in? — ^Yes. 

And  then  you  saw  Mrs.  Bartlett  in  the  smoking-room,  did  you  ? 
— ^Yes,  in  the  smoking-room.  We  waited  there  something  like 
twenty  minutes,  I should  think,  before  I went  upstairs. 

You  say  when  we  were  summoned  upstairs  ; who  sum- 
moned you  upstairs? — One  of  the  doctors  told  us  we  could  go 
upst^rs,  and  I,  Mrs.  Bartlett,  and  Mr.  Dyson  went  up  together. 
Mr.  Dyson  followed  behind  us,  I believe,  to  the  best  of  my  recol- 
lection. 


You  have  a clear  recollection  that  the  doctors  were  upstairs, 
and  that  one  of  the  doctors  summoned  you  upstairs? — I believe  so. 

Is  that  to  the  best  of  your  recollection  ?— Yes,  to  the  best  of 
my  recollection. 

‘‘  Some  one  came,*'  you  said,  and  summoned  us  upstairs,” 
that  summons  being  addressed  to  Mrs.  Bartlett  and  to  all  those 
who  were  waiting? — Yes. 

You  went  up  directly  you  were  summoned  upstairs,  and  you 
saw  that  there  was  Mrs.  Bartlett's  bag  there,  did  you? — I did. 
m which  room? — In  the  front  room,  on  the  table. 

Did  you  say  before  that  it  was  on  the  dressing-table? — I <lo 
not  recollect.  I said  it  was  on  the  dressing-table— there  was  no 
dressing-table  in  the  front  room. 

Just  try  and  remember.  You  do  not  remember  about  the 
dr^mg-table?  There  'sras  no  dressing-table  in  the  front  room!— 
remember  a dressing-table  being  mentioned. 

They  did* away? 

mo  sud  that?— I do  not  know;  one  of  the  doctors. 

n *'®“®“i^r?  — I cannot  — whether  it  was  Dr 

Dudl^  I would  not  undertake  to  say.  And  then  theT  said 
must  not  have  her  cloak.  I said,  “ Tes  Adelaida  v 

cloak;  there  is  no^iM  in  it,  no  pockete  in  it.”  S?Uid* 

he  answerable  for  it“  ’ ^ '"'i” 


You  would  be  answerable  for  iti Yes 

Did  you  feel  in  the  pookets?-No;  I knew  there  were  none, 


Old  Bailey  Court— Mr.  Bartlett  being  cross-examined  by  Mr.  Edward  ClarKe.  Q.C. 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 


Edwin  Bartlett 

Before  the  coroner  did  you  not  say,  ‘‘  I will  be  answerable 
for  the  cloak,  and  I gave  it  to  her  after  feeling  in  the  pockets  ” ? — 
No,  not  in  the  pockets;  there  were  no  pockets.  After  feeling 
for  the  pockets,^’  1 might  have  said. 

Who  told  Mrs.  Bartlett  to  go  out  of  the  house? — I cannot  say. 

She  was  inclined  to  take  nothing — she  did  not  want  the  cloak 
even  ? — ^Yes, 

You  said  you  would  be  answerable  for  it? — ^Yes. 

She  said  she  would  not  take  it? — Yes. 

She  had  the  cloak? — ^Yes. 

And  nothing  else? — ^Yes. 

And  left  the  house? — ^Yes. 

When  you  went  in  the  first  time  on  1st  January  you  went  to 
smell  the  mouth  for  prussic  acid? — I did. 

Did  you  suspect  poison? — I did. 

Have  you  told  the  jury  now  substantially  all  you  can  remember 
of  the  conversations  that  took  place  during  the  illness? — ^Yes,  I 
have,  I believe. 

Is  there  anything  else  that  you  have  not  told  us  that  took 
place  in  conversations  in  Mr.  Bartlett’s  presence,  in  your  son’s 
presence,  which  suggested  to  you  the  idea  of  poison  ? — No,  nothing. 

Re-examined  by  Mr.  Poland — ^My  learned  friend  reminded 
you  that  the  prisoner  said  to  you,  My  dear  father,  do  not  fret; 
it  will  make  no  odds  to  you.  I will  see  you  never  want.  It  shall 
be  just  the  same  as  if  Edwin  were  alive.”  When  do  you  say  that 
was  said  ? — On  the  Saturday  evening,  going  up  the  stairs,  when 
going  out  of  the  drawing-room,  and  we  were  just  at  the  foot  of 
the  stairs. 

Was  that  on  your  visit  on  Saturday,  or  when  your  son  was 
ill? — No;  on  the  day  of  the  post-mortem  examination. 

It  was  on  the  Saturday  after  the  death? — ^Yes;  and  after  the 
post-mortem  examination. 

Now,  my  friend  Mr.  Clarke  has  referred  to  your  having  to 
sign  this  apology  on  31st  Deceniber,  1878.  What  had  the  apology 
reference  to  which  you  sipied? — ^It  was  something  very  bad. 

Having  made  something  reflecting  upon  the  character  of  Mrs. 
Bartlett? — Must  I state  it? 

I think  you  must  state  what  it  was  you  had  to  apologise  for. 
What  charge  had  you  made? — Well,  Adelaide  ran  away,  and  was 
away  for  some  week  or  more,  and  Edwin  and  me  thought  she  had 
gone  along — ^we  almost  knew  she  had  gone  with  Fred  Bartlett,  the 
brother,  and  we  were  after  her. 

By  Mr.  Clarkb — Is  Fred  in  England? — He  appeared  in 
Glaverton  Street. 

Is  he  here  now? — ^He  was  at  Glaverton  Street  three  days  after 
his  brother’s  death,  according  to  Mr.  Doggett. 

Does  that  witness  pretend  to  have  seen  Fred  Bartlett  there  ? — 
I 113 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Edwin  Bartlett 

No,  the  elder  Doggett;  and  he  announced  himself  as  the  brother 
of  the  deceased  man. 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills — ^You  are  speaking  of  something 
Doggett  told  you? — ^Yes. 

Re-exami7Uition  continued — How  long  was  she  away? — Some- 
thing less  than  a week  on  this  occasion.  She  had  been  away  on 
other  occasions. 

On  this  occasion? — ^About  a week. 

How  long  was  that  before  this  apology? — It  must  have  been 
some  months  before  that. 

Then  did  she  return? — ^Yes. 

What  was  the  date  of  that? — 31st  December,  11878.  Then 
Fred  ran  away  to  America  in  the  June. 

All  I ask  you  is,  do  you  mean  the  June  previous  to  your 
signing  this  apology? — ^Yes;  the  June  previous  to  my  signing  that 
apology. 

Then  how  long  before  he  went  away  was  it  that  Adelaide  was 
away  with  him? — Only  a day  or  two,  because  Fred  flew  directly  it 
was  found  out. 

Your  son  Fred  went  to  America,  you  know? — I have  scores  of 
letters  from  him. 

So  you  know  he  went  to  America? — ^Yes. 

How  long  was  he  away? — He  has  not  been  back,  only  I heard 
he  turned  up  on  the  6th.  I sent  him  something  to  come  home, 
and  his  brother  was  going  to  give  him  a manager’s  place  in  one 
of  the  establishments. 

Have  you  seen  him  since  his  return  ? — ^I  have  not. 

But  you  sent  him  money  to  return  ? — I sent  him  £60  one  year 
in  order  to  come  home. 

When  was  that?— The  year  he  went  away — ^the  following  year. 

Did  you  send  him  money  recently  to  come  back? — No,  not 
recently. 

This  apology,  you  say  you  signed  it  in  the  oflBce  of  Mr.  Wood, 
the  solicitor  ? — ^Yes,  I did. 

Is  that  the  gentleman  in  Court? — ^Yes. 

Whose  solicitor  was  he? — ^He  was  then  my  son’s  solicitor.  I 
recommended  him  to  my  son  some  years  ago. 

^ apology  was  drawn  up  and  you  signed  it? — 

Yes.  Edwin  begged  of  me  to  sign  it  to  make  peace. 

Now,  you  have  told  my  learned  friend  that  your  son  spoke 
about  having  two  wives,  one  to  take  out  and  one  to  do  the  work. 
You  say  the  prisoner  made  some  remark? — Yes. 

What  was  that— ^n  that  subject?— No,  not  on  that  subject.  I 
was  peaking  of  passing  remarks  made  in  conversation. 

Can  you  remember  the  date  when  your  son  went  to  Scotland? 
He  went  by  sea  and  came  back  by  sea?— Yes ; somethinar  like  four 
years  ago— over  four  years  ago.  ® 

Was  your  son  a temperate  man?— Very,  indeed. 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 


Edwin  Barllelt 

My  friend  has  spoken  to  you  about  the  morphia  having  been 
injected;  we  are  told  what  that  was  fori — ^No.  I do  not  know, 
only,  I take  it,  to  produce  sleep. 

Who  had  injected  it? — ^Dr.  Leach,  I understood,  injected  it. 

Edwards  Baxter,  examined  by  Mr.  Moloney — live  at  34 
Deronda  Road,  Herne  Hill.  1 was  a partner  with  the  deceased 
Bartlett  for  thirteen  years.  I have  known  him  for  over  twenty 
years.  I never  knew  him  to  be  laid  up  by  illness  before  his  last 
illness,  with  the  exception  of  one  occasion,  when  he  went  away 
for  the  benefit  of  his  health.  He  was  away  for  about  a fortnight 
for  the  benefit  of  his  health  after  he  had  been  doing  some  hard 
work— carpentering — ^which  was  rather  out  of  his  way.  On  that 
occasion  he  did  not  have  to  keep  his  bed  at  all.  I was  not  at  his 
marriage.  I recollect  Mrs.  Bartlett  coming  to  live  with  the 
deceased  at  Station  Road.  They  lived  at  Station  Road  for  about 
five  years.  They  lived  at  the  Exchange  for  about  twelve  months. 

had  frequent  opportunities  of  seeing  them  when  they  were 
living  over  the  shop,  and  seeing  the  terms  on  which  they  lived. 
So  far  as  I knew,  they  lived  there  as  man  and  wife. 

We  had  six  shops  at  the  time  of  Mr.  Bartlett’s  death.  Our 
business  at  the  time  of  his  death  was  a prosperous  business;  it 
was  a business  that  had  been  made  by  m^  partner  and  myself. 
The  one  at  Station  Road  had  been  in  existence  for  about  three 
years  when  I went  there,  but  all  the  other  shops  were  opened  by 
my  partner  and  myself. 

1 recollect  the  deceased  going  home  ill  from  business  in 
December.  I think  it  was  the  8th  December.  I received  a letter 
from  him  on  the  10th.  (Shown  letter) — That  is  the  letter  I 
received.  I could  not  say  what  was  the  cause  of  his  going  away 
on  that  occasion.  It  was  not  overwork.  In  that  letter  the 
deceased  says,  If  you  wish  to  see  me,  come  here  and  we  can 
arrange  about  Friday,  Edwin.'’  On  the  Sunday  following  I 
called  to  see  him.  I am  not  (aertain  whether  I called  to  see  him 
during  the  week.  When  I saw  him  on  the  Sunday  he  appeared 
very  ill  indeed.  He  did  not  say  what  was  the  matter  with  him; 
he  was  scarcely  able  to  speak.  The  deceased  had  been  in  the 
habit  of  mixing  teas.  I did  not  mix  teas,  but  I tasted  the  teas 
along  with  him.  I have  never  found  any  ill  consequences  from 
the  tasting  of  the  teas.  I perhaps  was  not  in  the  habit  of  tasting 
tea  as  much  as  the  deceased  was.  I called  on  the  deceased  the 
Sunday  after  I received  his  letter,  and  I called  again  on  the  fol- 
lowing Sunday.  On  that  occasion  he  was  better.  When  I saw 
him  on  the  20th  he  said  he  felt  ill,  and  hoped  he  would  very  soon 
be  better,  that  he  was  gradually  improving.  The  prisoner  was 
pr^ent  on  that  occasion.  I really  forget  whether  anything  was 
said  about  what  he  was  suffering  from.  As  I have  already  said, 
on  the  following  Sunday,  the  27th,  he  appeared  very  much  better. 

115 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Edwards  Baxter 

I saw  him  again  on  the  following  Wednesday.  On  that  occasion 
he  seemed  quite  cheerful — very  much  better — ^getting  on 
nicely  then.  I stayed  about  two  hours  on  the  Wednesday  night. 
The  prisoner  was  present  on  that  occasion.  There  was  something 
said  on  that  occasion  about  his  going  to  the  seaside,  hoping  that 
the  change  of  air  would  prove  beneficial,  and  that  he  would  be  able 
in  the  course  of  a week  or  two  to  resume  business.  Bournemouth 
or  Torquay  were  the  two  places  mentioned.  I told  the  deceased 
that  we  were  getting  on  very  nicely  in  the  business  There  was 
nothing  further  said,  except  that  he  hoped  to  be  back  again  in 
the  course  of  a short  time.  I did  not  see  the  deceased  again 
until  after  his  death.  (Shown  note) — ^That  note  is  in  Mrs.  Bart- 
lett’s handwriting;  the  date  is  my  handwriting,  the  date  when  I 
received  it,  30th  December.  It  came  by  post,  and  it  reads, 
" Dear  sir, — ^With  the  other  things  will  you  please  send  a bottle 
of  brandy  called  Lord's  Extra,  a bottle  of  Colonel  Skinner’s  mango- 
chutney,  a bottle  of  walnuts,  and  a nice  fruit  cake)  I know  these 
things  are  not  fit  for  Edwin  to  eat,  but  he  fancies  them.  You 
can  see  Edwin  on  Wednesday,  A very  happy  New  Year.”  I 
took  the  things  referred  to  in  that  letter  to  Claverton  Street  on 
the  Wednesday  night,  the  30th.  I never  saw  Mr.  Dyson  on  any 
of  the  occasions  I visited  Claverton  Street.  On  New  Year’s  Day 
I received  a telegram,  and  I went  to  Claverton  Street.  I subse- 
quently saw  Mr.  Bartlett,  senior,  on  that  same  morning,  the  1st 
January.  • 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills — received  the  telegram  about  a 
quarter-past  nine  at  Station  Road,  Herne  Hill.  I went  to 
Claverton  Street  first,  and  I saw  Mrs.  Bartlett  there. 

Examvnation  conivrmtd — went  up  to  the  drawing-room  on 
that  occasion.  The  prisoner  was  in  the  drawing-room  then. 

Did  she  say  anything  to  you) — Yes. 

What  did  she  say) — That  I am  unable  to  state.  The  sudden 
decease  was  so  much  that  really 

By  Mr-  Justice  Wills — ^You  mean  you  have  forgotten  it) — 
Yes,  my  lord. 

You  have  no  distinct  recollection) — ^No  distinct  recollection 
at  all. 

Examination  contirmed — ^Did  you  see  the  father  soon  after ) — 
I fetched  the  father,  and  he  and  I went  upstairs. 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills — ^What  time  did  you  see  the  father) — 
1 should  think  about  half-past  eleven.  I went  from  Claverton 
Street  to  Berkeley  Square  for  Mr.  Bartlett,  senior,  and  then  I 
went  back  with  him  at  once. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  E.  Clasee — Had  Mr.  Bartlett  been 
working  very  hard  indeed  while  staying  at  Dover? — ^Not  parti- 
cularly so. 

■V^at  time  did  he  get  to  Herne  Hill  in  the  morning? — The 
time  varied;  sometimes  as  early  as  six  o’clock, 

116 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Edward*  Baxter 

What,  from  Dover  ? — ^Yes. 

He  would  come  up  from  Dover  so  early  as  to  get  to  Herne 
Hill  at  six? — ^Yes,  by  the  boat  express. 

Did  he  often  do  that? — Sometimes, 

Do  you  mean  several  times  a week? — Two  or  three  times  a 
week,  perhaps. 

On  other  days  what  time  would  he  get  there? — Come  by  a 
later  train;  I think  between  ten  and  eleven  there  is  one. 

Did  he  leave  business  very  late? — Sometimes  he  would — are 
you  alluding  to  the  time  he  was  staying  at  Dover  ? 

Yes? — Sometimes  he  would  leave  at  four  o’clock,  and  some- 
times, again,  by  the  eight  o’clock  train. 

He  had  some  dogs  he  was  proud  of,  had  he  not,  at  Herne 
Hill? — He  had  some  dogs. 

And  on  8th  December,  I think,  he  washed  those  dogs,  or  one 
of  them — it  was  going  to  a show  next  day? — ^Previous  to  the  8th. 
I think  they  were  washed  on  the  4:th. 

Did  you  connect  that  with  his  illness  at  all — ^that  he  got  a 
chill  or  anything  of  that  kind? — ^No. 

You  did  not  know  any  cause  for  his  illness? — ^Not  at  all. 

On  the  8th  he  complained  of  feeling  ill,  and  went  away? — 

Yes. 

Did  Mrs.  Bartlett  write  to  you  constantly  during  his  illness? 
— ^Nearly  every  morning  I had  a short  note. 

Did  you  keep  those  notes? — did  not. 

Just  notes  to  tell  you  how  he  was  getting  on? — Just  Hot 

quite  so  well,’'  or  sometiiing  of  that  sort. 

I don’t  know  whether  you  saw  him  before  Sunday,  the  13th  ? — 
I don’t  think  so ; 1 cannot  call  to  mind. 

Had  Mrs.  Bartlett  asked  you  to  call  on  the  13th?  Did  she 
say  in  a letter  he  would  be  glad  to  see  you  on  that  Sunday?—! 
don’t  think  so.  I might  have  said,  perhaps,  when  I had  written, 
I would  call  on  Sunday  afterncron. 

There  was  no  special  reason  for  your  going  that  day? — ^Oh, 
no. 

Then  on  the  13th,  I think  you  said,  you  found  him  very  ill 
indeed  ? — ^Yes. 

Was  he  much  depressed  and  low? — ^He  appeared  so,  for  he 
was  scarcely  able  to  speak. 

And  do  you  know  that  the  doctor  visited  him  three  times  that 
day? — I do  not. 

I suppose  at  the  time,  perhaps  at  the  time  you  went,  he  had 
only  been  twice,  but  have  not  you  been  told  he  was  coming  more 
than  once  a day? — I believe  they  told  me  he  had  been  more  than 
once. 

Did  he  complain  of  sleeplessness? — ^Yes. 


117 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Edwards  Baartar 

Tou  understood,  did  you  not,  thoroughly  from  Mrs.  Bartlett 
that  he  was  sleepless  and  restless  1 — ^Yes. 

And  on  the  nest  Sunday  when  you  saw  him — on  20th  Decem- 
ber— did  you  hear  the  doctor  was  giving  him  sleeping  draughts  ? 
— believe  they  told  me  to  that  efiect. 

Now,  on  the  27th — ^the  following  Sunday — ^you  saw  him  again  ? 
— Yes. 

Was  he  in  a very  bad  state  then? — ^No,  sir,  very  much  better. 

Was  it  on  that  day  he  told  you  something  about  worms? — 
Yes,  I believe  it  was  on  that  date  he  alluded  to  them. 

Did  he  tell  you  that  he  had  passed  worms,  and  that  he  could 
feel  them  wriggling  up  in  his  throat? — ^Yes. 

Had  you  known  anything  of  his  ideas  about  mesmerism? — 
Not  at  all. 

Nor  had  you,  I suppose,  known  anything  about  his  excep- 
tional ideas  of  marriage? — ^No,  not  at  all. 

He  had  never  made  a confidant  of  you  in  that  way  at  all,  I 
suppose? — ^No,  not  at  all. 

What  was  about  his  income  from  the  business,  Mr.  Baxter, 
do  you  think?  Can  you  tell  me  what  he  used  to  draw? — ^About 
£300  a year. 

Do  you  know  anything  about  whether  he  had  any  property 
at  all? — ^No;  I am  not  aware  he  had  any. 

Frbdbkick  Horace  Doggbtt,  examined  by  Mr.  Poland — I live 
along  with  my  wife  at  86  Claverton  Street.  I am  Registrar  of 
Birlbs  and  Deaths  for  the  district.  86  Claverton  Street  is  my 
private  address.  In  the  early  part  of  October  last  I had  the 
drawing-room  floor  to  let.  It  consists  of  two  rooms,  communicat- 
ing with  folding-doors,  the  front  room  being  the  sitting-room  and 
the  back  the  bedroom.  The  deceased,  Mr.  Bartlett,  and  Mrs.  Bart- 
lett took  those  apartments,  and  they  continued  to  occupy  them 
down  to  the  date  of  his  death.  Ais  far  as  I knew,  they  lived  as 
man  and  wife.  During  the  time  they  were  living  there  I saw  Mr. 
Dyson  on  two  or  three  occasions.  He  was  a friend  of  theirs,  ami 
used  to  come  there. 

On  the  morning  of  1st  January  of  the  present  year  I was 
called  up  by  the  prisoner  about  four  o^clock  in  the  morning,  as 
near  as  I can  remember.  I knew  that  the  deceased  had  been  ill 
for  some  time.  I never  saw  the  deceased  to  speak  to  during  his 
lifetime.  About  four  o'clock  in  the  morning  I heard  a knock  at 
the  door,  and  I went  to  the  door  and  found  the  prisoner  at  the 
door.  She  asked  me  to  come  down.  She  said,  “ Come  down,  I 
th^  Mr.  Bartlett  is  dead."  I had  never  spoken  to  the  prisoner 
^ore  I at  once  got  up.  I put  on  my  dressing-gown  and  went 
down  to  her  room.  She  had  gone  down  before  me.  It  was  then 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Frederick  H.  Donrtt 

about  ten  past  four  hy  the  clock  on  the  drawing-room  mantelpiece. 

I went  into  the  front  drawing-room.  The  prisoner  was  there. 
She  asked  if  1 thought  Mr.  Bartlett  was  dead.  1 saw  him  lying 
on  the  bed  in  the  room,  in  the  corner  of  the  room  next  to  the 
fireplace.  I at  once  went  up  to  him.  He  was  lying  on  his  back 
with  his  left  hand  on  his  breast.  I put  my  hand  on  his  breast. 
His  nightshirt  was  pulled  back  and  his  breast  was  bare.  I found 
him  perfectly  cold.  I put  my  hand  over  the  region  of  his  heart, 
Mrs.  Bartlett  asked  me  if  1 thought  he  was  dead,  and  1 said, 
“ Yes,  he  must  have  been  dead  some  two  or  three  hours.  He  is 
perfectly  cold.'’  She  then  said,  1 had  fallen  off  to  sleep  with 
my  hand  round  his  foot,  and  I woke  up  with  a pain  in  my  hand," 
or  “ arm,"  I do  not  know  which,  “ and  found  him  lying  on  his 
face.  I put  him  in  the  position  in  which  you  saw  him,  and  tried 
to  pour  brandy  down  his  throat — nearly  half  a pint."  I do  not 
recollect  whether  Mrs.  Bartlett  said  that  he  had  swallowed  any 
of  it  or  not.  After  that  I think  Dr.  Leach  came.  My  wife  came 
down  before  Dr.  Leach  arrived.  1 noticed  the  deceased’s  eyes. 
They  were  closed.  1 asked  the  prisoner  whether  she  had  closed 
his  eyes,  and  she  said,  Yes,"  and  had  put  him  in  the  position 
in  which  he  then  was.  His  jaw  was  dropping.  Dr.  Leach  had 
been  sent  for  before  my  wife  came  down.  The  servant  went  for 
him.  I noticed  a strong  smell  when  I went  into  the  room;  it 
struck  me  as  being  chloric  ether.  1 did  not  smell  anything  else. 
1 looked  round  the  room.  There  was  a tray  with  some  tumblers 
on  it,  and  a glass  jug  containing  water  on  the  table. 

What  else? — I fancy — I am  not  quite  certain,  but  I think  there 
was  a bottle  on  the  tray  containing  some  white  powder.  I also 
saw  a wineglass.  The  wineglass  was  on  the  mantelboard.  It  was 
three-quarters  full. 

\^at  did  it  smell  like? — ^Evidently  brandy,  with  some  other 
drug  in  it ; it  smelt  like  ether  or  paregoric.  1 put  it  back  where 
1 found  it.  The  wineglass  w^  on  the  mantelpiece  at  the  corner 
nearest  the  bed.  That  was  all  1 noticed  that  I can  call  to  mind. 
The  only  bottle  1 noticed  was  the  one  on  the  tray  with  the  white 
powder.  I looked  round  the  room  for  the  purpose  of  seeing  what 
was  there  when  Dr.  Leach  came. 

And  are  you  able  to  say,  on  looking  round  the  room  in  that 
way,  whether  there  was  any  other  bottle  on  the  mantelpiece,  or 
table,  or  any  other  part  of  the  room? — ^None  that  I saw. 

After  Dr.  Leach  came  in  did  he  speak  to  the  prisoner,  and 
did  you  afterwards  leave  the  room? — did. 

Did  Mrs.  Bartlett  remain  or  not? — ^1  suggested  that  she  diould 
leave  the  room,  but  she  remained  with  Dr.  Leach.  They  had 
some  conversation  in  a corner  of  the  room.  Before  I left  1 
assisted  Dr.  Leach  to  tie  up  the  deceased’s  jaw  and  put  his  legs 

119 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Frederick  H.  Docgetl 

straight.  His  legs  were  cold,  and  the  left  leg  was  slightly  drawn 
up.  Dr.  Leach  examined  the  deceased’s  body  while  I was  present, 
and  said  he  could  find  nothing  to  account  for  death.  I did  not 
notice  how  the  prisoner  was  dressed;  I did  not  pay  particular 
attention.  When  I went  into  the  room  I think  she  had  a skirt  or 
an  underskirt  on,  and  a loose  sort  of  jacket.  There  was  a large 
fire  in  the  grate.  It  had  evidently  been  tended  within  a very 
diort  time  of  my  coming  into  the  room.  After  assisting  Dr. 
Leach  I went  downstairs,  and  shortly  afterwards  Dr.  Leach  came 
down — about  a quarter  of  an  hour  afterwards.  After  that  I went 
back  to  my  room,  and  my  wife  and  I went  to  bod.  Wo  left  the 
prisoner  in  the  back  room  where  the  bed  was.  On  the  following 
morning  I saw  the  prisoner  writing  out  some  telegrams.  It  would 
be  about  a quarter  to  nine. 

There  is  a matter  which  I passed  over.  I ought  to  have  asked 
you — before  you  left  the  room  that  night  did  you  see  any  Condy’s 
fluid? — ^Yes.  I rather  think  it  was  on  ttie  tray.  There  was  more 
than  half  a tumblerful  poured  out. 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills — When  did  you  notice  that? — The 
same  night.  I had  noticed  it  before  I went  to  bed  that  morning. 

Exarn/im^Uon  contimitd — ^I  did  not  see  any  other  bottle.  The 
next  morning — or  rather  later  the  same  morning — ^before  I saw 
the  prisoner  writing  the  telegrams  I saw  a small  bottle  inverted 
in  the  tumbler  of  Condy’s  fluid.  It  had  been  brought  down  by 
the  servant  on  the  tray.  It  was  an  ounce  bottle;  ’^ere  was  no 
label  on  it.  I handed  the  tumbler  in  which  the  bottle  was  in- 
verted to  the  coroner’s  officer,  Ralph.  After  that  the  telegrams 
were  written  and  sent  off,  one  to  the  father,  one  to  the  partner, 
and  one  to  some  lady  at  Dulwich.  The  bottle  and  the  contents  of 
the  tumbler  were  both  handed  to  Ralph.  The  contents  were  put 
in  the  bottle  by  myself,  and  Ralph  and  I sealed  it  with  my  seal, 
and  the  coroner’s  officer  took  charge  of  it.  (Shown  bottle) — ^That 
is  something  like  the  size  of  the  bottle. 

Mr,  Justice  Wills — A.  2-ouncd  bottle? 

Mr.  PoLAim — ^Tes,  my  lord,  I believe  we  shall  trace  it  that 
that  is  the  bottle. 

Examination  contimied — Afterwards  I heard  of  the  post- 
mortem examination. 

You  know  the  bed  where  the  man  was  lying  near  the  mantel- 
piece. Have  you  been  on  the  bed  and  tried  it  yourself  ? — ^Yes. 

If  you  are  lying  on  your  back  on  the  bed,  can  you  reach  the 
mantelpiece? — ^I  can  just  reach  it. 

Anybody  leaning  on  the  bed  could  easily  reach  the  mantel- 
piece ? — ^Undoubtedly. 

Or  sitting  up  even?— It  would  be  rather  more  difficult  sitting 
up,  I can  just  reach  it  sitting  up. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  Clahkb — The  head  of  the  bedstead 
120 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Frederick  H.  Dosiett 

was  near  the  mantelpiece;  was  the  foot  of  the  bed  towards  the 
middle  of  ■^e  room? — ^It  was  lengthways. 

But  not  actually  level  with  the  front  wall  of  the  room? — ^Yes. 

Was  not  it  turned  round  a little? — No,  it  was  horizontal,  or 
rather  longitudinal,  with  the  front  wall  of  the  room. 

My  learned  friend  asked  you  more  than  once  whether  Mr. 
and  Mrs.  Bartlett  lived  there  as  man  and  wife;  you  knew  that 
they  were  man  and  wife  when  the  rooms  were  let,  did  you  not? — 
I presumed  so. 

But  as  far  as  their  manner  of  living  with  you,  you  had  not 
seen  them? — I had  only  seen  Mr.  Bartlett  one  night  to  speak  to. 

Tou  have  mentioned  something  about  the  fire  to  which  I wish 
to  direct  your  attention.  You  were  examined  before  the  coroner 
on  4th  February? — ^Yes,  I was. 

When  you  were  examined  on  4th  February  at  some  length 
you  did  not  mention  the  fire  at  all  ? — could  not  say  from  memory 
whether  I did  or  not. 

The  .first  time  you  were  examined  you  did  not  say  a syllable 
about  the  fire,  did  you? — ^That  I cannot  recollect. 

Don’t  you  recollect  on  4th  February,  after  your  wife  had 
been  examined,  you  were  recalled,  and  the  express  question  was 
put  to  you  about  the  fire — ^you  were  asked  about  the  fire  and  about 
nothing  else? — ^Yes. 

And  when  you  went  into  the  room,  did  you  smell  a smell 
which  you  say  was  something  like  chloric  ether? — ^Yes. 

That  was  the  smell  you  traced  to  the  glass  on  the  mantel- 
piece?— ^No. 

You  saw  a glass  on  the  mantelpiece  6 inches  from  the  corner, 
did  you  not? — I did  not  say  6 inches  from  the  corner;  it  was  close 
to  the  end  of  the  mantelpiece;  I don’t  think  I said  6 inches. 

When  you  saw  that  glass,  you  say  it  was  three-quarters — 
you  have  said  two-thirds — ^full  of  the  liquid  which  you  took  to 
be  brandy? — ^Yes. 

And  when  you  smelt  it  you  smelt  the  same  smell  which  you 
smelt  on  coming  into  the  room? — ^Hardly. 

You  say,  **  a wineglass,  containing  some  coloured  liquid 
which  I took  to  be  brandy,  about  two-thirds  full.  I took  it  up 
and  smelt  it;  it  smelt  very  like  the  odour  which  pervaded  the 
room — chloric  ether”? — think  I said  it  smelt  like  paregoric. 

Mr.  JnsTioB  Wills — You  said  paregoric  before  the  coroner. 

CT0S8~6tB(iinin<ition  You  said  chloric  ether  before 

the  magistrate,  but  you  said  when  you  went  to  that  glass  and 
smelt  it,  it  smelt  very  like  the  odour  which  pervaded  the  room? 
—Yes. 

You  took  it  up  and  smelt  it  and  replaced  it  on  the  mantel- 
piece, did  you? — Yes, 


121 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Frederick  H.  Dogcelft 

Did  it  remain  there  till  Dr.  Leach  came? — ^Tes. 

It  stood  there  while  you  were  all  looking  about  the  room  ? — 

Tea. 

And  it  was  brought  down  by  your  servant  on  the  tray  in  the 
same  condition  in  the  morning?  Was  the  liquid  still  in  it? — ^Tes. 

You  saw  the  tray  when  it  had  come  down,  and  you  took  the 
inverted  bottle  and  the  glass  of  liquid  and  handed  them  over  to 
Ealph,  the  coroner's  representative? — No,  not  exactly;  when  the 
tray  was  brought  down  I saw  it  by  accident  in  the  morning;  I 
saw  the  bottle  sticking  out  of  the  liquid,  and  I took  it  out  with 
my  fingers  and  locked  it  up  in  a cupboard,  and  I afterwards  gave 
it  to  Ealph. 

You  bought  it  would  be  right  that  the  bottle  should  be  taken 
care  of? — I did. 

It  did  not  occur  to  you  to  do  the  same  with  regard  to  the 
wineglass  ? — ^No. 

When  Dr.  Leach  came,  you  looked  about  the  room;  did  you 
see  any  bottle  on  the  mantelpiece  at  all? — ^No. 

May  there  not  have  been  a bottle  on  the  mantelpiece  without 
your  having  seen  it? — I don’t  think  so. 

This  is  not  a very  long  mantelpiece,  is  it? — ^It  is  rather  a 
long  mantelpiece.  There  is  a mantelboard  on  the  mantelpiece 
which  makes  it  longer. 

There  is  a looking-glass,  is  there  not,  with  a little  sort  of  a 
shelf  at  the  end? — ^Not  that  I am  aware  of. 

Is  there  not  a little  sort  of  a shelf  by  the  looking-glass  on 
which  bottles  might  be  put?  You  had  not  been  in  the  room 
before? — ^Yes,  I have. 

Not  while  Mr.  Bartlett  was  there? — ^No. 

Perhaps  the  looking-glass  being  stood  on  a mantelboard  would 
constitute  a sEelf,  and  come  a little  farther  out  from  the  looking-- 
glass ? — Certainly. 

There  is  a clock  in  the  middle  of  the  mantelboard,  I believe? 
—Yes. 

Was  there  a photograph  there,  did  you  notice? — ^I  think 
there  was;  I would  not  swear  that. 

There  were  two  photographs  in  frames  on  the  mantelpiece,  I 
believe? — There  were  photographs. 

There  were  two  small  vases,  one  on  each  side  of  the  clock, 
which  stood  in  the  middle? — ^Yes. 

And  at  each  end  of  the  mantelboard  was  there  a tolerably 
large  vase,  say  7 inches  wide  and  16  inches  high — a pair  of  large 
vases? — ^I  don't  know  the  exact  size;  they  are  large  vases. 

In  your  examination  before  the  coroner,  did  you  not  say, 
**  The  doctor  and  myself  examined  the  glass  and  also  the  bottles 
in  the  room  "? — The  bottle,  the  only  bottle  I saw,  was  the  one  on 
the  tray  which  contained  some  white  powder. 

122 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Frederick  H.  DosaeU 

I have  it  copied  “ bottles  — possibly  it  may  be  a mistake 
in  copying.  I have  it,  **  The  doctor  and  myself  then  examined 
the  glasses  and  also  all  the  bottles  in  the  room,  and  there  vras  no 
bottle  on  the  mantelpiece  1 — There  was  the  bottle  of  Condy's  fluid  5 
that  is  the  only  bottle  1 examined  with  the  doctor — it  was  on  the 
floor — it  was  a wine-bottle,  three  parts  full  of  Condy's  fluid. 

Then,  although  this  was  taken  down,  it  is  not  what  you  said — 
“ Also  all  the  bottles  in  the  room  — There  was  one  on  the  tray, 
and  one  of  Condy's  fluid. 

One  on  the  tray  and  one  on  the  floor — ^two  bottles? — Yes, 
that  is  all  I saw. 

By  Mr.  Jubtiob  Wills — ^You  say,  one  of  Condy's  fluid  on 
the  floor  ? — ^Yes. 

By  Mr.  Clarke — You  were  telling  us  what  Mrs.  Bartlett  said 
to  you;  you  used  the  word  “ pain  ; did  she  say  she  felt  cramp 
in  the  hand? — “ Cramp.'*  I think  that  was  so. 

Did  Mrs.  Bartlett  tell  you  her  husband  had  breathed  heavily 
in  the  evening? — ^Yes. 

Mrs.  Caroline  Dogqbtt,  examined  by  Mr.  Wright — am 
the  wife  of  the  last  witness,  Mr.  Doggett,  and  I live  with  him  at 
86  Claverton  Street.  I remember  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Bartlett  coming 
to  lodge  there  on  3rd  October.  I remember  Mr.  Dyson  coming 
there.  The  first  time  he  came  was  within  a week  after  3rd  October. 
He  did  not  come  often  at  first.  The  arrangement  with  the  deceased 
was  that  he  was  to  come  to  dinner  once  a week.  The  deceased 
arranged  that  when  he  took  the  rooms ; He  said  a gentleman  would 
dine  once  a week — Mr.  Dyson. 

Did  he  mention  the  name  ? — ^No,  but  Mrs.  Bartlett  said  it  was 
only  a clergyman.  He  came  twice  and  three  times  a week,  and 
sometimes  more.  He  came  at  all  times.  He  has  been  as  early 
as  half-past  nine  in  the  morning. 

How  long  used  he  to  stav? — ^He  has  stayed  all  day.  The 
deceased  went  out  in  the  morning  at  from  eight  to  half-past  eight, 
and  he  returned  to  dinner  between  five  and  six. 

When  Mr.  Dyson  came  early  in  the  morning  did  he  stay  till 
Mr.  Bartlett  came  back? — Sometimes. 

Did  he  have  lunch  with  Mrs.  Bartlett? — ^Yes. 

Did  Mr.  Dyson  and  Mrs.  Bartlett  go  out  together? — Some- 
times. 

How  was  Mr.  Dyson  dressed  when  you  saw  him  in  the  house? — 
Twice  I saw  him  in  a lounge  coat.  1 don’t  know  the  material  it 
was  made  of ; it  was  a blue  coat — a serge  coat.  It  was  kept  in 
the  house — I believe  for  his  use.  There  was  also  a pair  of  slippers 
left  for  him  in  the  house.  I remember  Mr.  Bartlett  becoming  ill 
about  the  beginning  of  December,  but  I cannot  fix  the  date.  I 
think  he  was  not  well  two  or  three  mornings  before  Dr.  Leach  was 

123 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Caroline  Dossett 

called  in.  He  kept  his  room  from  the  very  first  day  of  Dr. 
Leach’s  coming.  Mr.  Dyson  used  to  go  up  to  his  room  on  some 
occasions,  but  not  always.  When  he  called  he  would  see  Mrs. 
Bartlett  downstairs. 

On  the  last  day  of  December — ^the  day  Mr.  Bartlett  died — 
he,  Mr.  Bartlett,  went  out  in  the  evening.  Before  that  he  had 
dined  at  home  about  three  or  half-past  three.  He  had  jugged 
hare  for  dinner.  He  had  tea  that  night  about  nine  o’clock.  That 
was  after  1 had  seen  him  and  after  he  had  been  out  in  the  evening. 
He  had  been  out  to  have  his  tooth  taken  out.  I saw  him  when  he 
came  back.  I went  into  his  room  and  sat  down.  1 had  seen 
him  very  much  worse  than  he  was  that  night.  He  told  me  he 
thought  the  worst  was  over,  and  he  would  get  better.  Mrs.  Bart- 
lett was  there  at  the  time.  Mr.  Bartlett  told  me  that  Dr.  Leach 
had  given  him  orders  to  go  to  the  seaside  for  a change — I think 
he  said  Torquay.  Mrs.  Bartlett  said  that  she  thought  the  journey 
would  be  too  long.  After  that  Mrs.  Bartlett  asked  me  if  I had 
ever  taken  chloroform.  1 said  that  I had  years  ago.  She  then 
asked  me  if  it  was  a nice  or  a pleasant  feeling.  I said  I did  not 
think  I knew  very  much  about  it.  Mrs.  Bartlett  said  that  Mr. 
Bartlett  was  in  the  habit  of  taking  some  sleeping  drops;  ten  was 
a strong  dose,  but  she  should  not,  or  did  not,  hesitate  in  giving 
him  twelve.  She  told  me  what  the  drops  were,  but  I do  not 
remember  the  name.  Mr.  Bartlett  then  thanked  me  for  his  dinner, 
and  said  he  had  enjoyed  it.  He  said  that  he  had  eaten  all  that 
was  sent  up,  and  he  had  so  enjoyed  it  that  he  would  eat  three 
dinners  a day.  He  also  said  that  the  mornings  were  getting 
lighter,  and  he  should  get  up  an  hour  earlier  the  next  day.  Mr. 
Bartlett  had  a tea  supper  that  night;  he  had  half  a dozen  oysters, 
and  bread  and  butter,  and  cake.  I do  not  know  whether  he  also 
had  some  chutney.  After  that  conversation  I went  out  of  the 
room. 

I was  called  early  next  morning,  about  four  o’clock.  I went 
into  Mr.  Bartlett’s  room  and  saw  Wm  lying  dead.  I asked  Mrs. 
Bartlett  if  she  had  given  him  these  drops,  and  she  said,  I have 
giym  him  nothing.”  My  husband  was  in  the  room  when  she 
said  that,  but  he  was  looking  round  the  room,  and  I was  by  the 
side  of  the  bed.  I noticed  that  the  fire  was  a very  good  fire.  I 
remember  having  a conversation  with  Mrs.  Bartlett  that  same 
morning  about  a will.  That  was  on  the  1st  of  January.  I went 
up  to  ask  her  if  she  would  come  down  to  the  dining-room  to  have 
a little  breakfast,  as  she  had  not  rung  for  it,  and  then  she  said 
how  strange  it  was  that  Mr.  Bartlett  had  not  long  made  his  will. 

Anything  else?-— I said,  ” Are  you  thinking  about  money?  ” 
She  remied,  It  is  necessary,”  as  her  money  whi<^  she  had 
Mfore  she  was  married  was  in  the  business,  and  it  was  before  the 
Married  Women’s  Property  Act. 

124 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Caroline  Dosaett 

Was  there  anything  said  at  that  time? — No;  Mrs.  Matthews 
came  in  at  that  time  and  I went  downstairs. 

Cross-examined  hy  Mr.  Claekb — ^You  had  kindly  gone  up  to 
see  if  you  could  get  her  to  take  some  breakfast  ? — ^Yes. 

Her  own  breakfast  had  gone  up  and  had  not  been  touched? — 
No;  she  had  not  rung  for  any  breakfast. 

And  then  she  mentioned  that  about  the  will? — ^Yes. 

All  her  means  of  livelihood  had  come  from  the  business?-— I 
understood  from  her  that  the  money  she  had  before  she  was  married 
was  in  the  business. 

It  had  gone  into  the  business? — ^Yes. 

You  thought  that  her  thought  was  she  was  dependent  upon  the 
business,  and  the  business  man  was  dead? — Unless  there  was  a will 
she  could  not  have  his  money,  because  it  was  before  the  Married 
Women’s  Property  Act. 

Did  she  come  down  and  have  breakfast  with  you? — No;  Mrs. 
Matthews  came  in,  and  I left  her  in  the  front  drawing-room. 

Has  it  ever  been  your  sad  lot  to  watch  in  a sickroom  at  night  ? 
— ^Yes,  I have. 

Do  you  know  very  well  that  that  night  the  hre  was  made  up 
for  the  night  and  packed? — ^Yes;  but  the  bed  was  so  near  the  fire 
it  would  have  been  too  hot  for  Mr.  Bartlett;  and  the  gas  was 
alight. 

You  know  perfectly  well  that  at  night,  with  a view  not  to 
disturb  anybody,  the  fire  is  packed  for  ^e  night? — ^Yes. 

And  if  after  several  hours  you  touch  it  and  break  it,  it 
becomes  a strong  fire? — ^Yes. 

The  fire  you  saw  was  a strong  fire,  was  it  not? — ^It  had  been 
attended  to ; it  had  not  Burnt  hollow  at  all. 

So  that  either  fresh  coal  had  not  lately  been  put  on,  or  a 
well-packed  fire  had  been  disturbed  by  the  poker  ? — Yes ; but  there 
was  a bright  light;  the  coals  were  quite  lighted. 

That  would  be  the  result  of  stirring  with  the  poker ; a well- 
made  fire,  was  it  not  ? — should  think  so. 

With  regard  to  that  conversation.  Mrs.  Bartlett  was  reading, 
was  she  not,  while  you  and  her  husband  were  talking? — ^Yes,  she 
was  reading  a book. 

You  know  he  had  been  out  that  day  to  have  his  tooth  operated 
upon? — ^Yes;  he  told  me  about  the  tooth,  and  said  it  was  a sound 
one. 

Did  he  tell  you  thkt  he  had  taken  gas? — ^No. 

Was  nothing  said  about  gas? — ^Not  by  Mr.  Bartlett;  not  to  me. 

By  anybody? — never  heard  it. 

Pray  ^ careful.  Mr.  Bartlett  had  been  out  that  day;  do 
you  know  now  as  a fact  that  he  had  taken  nitrous  oxide  gas? — 
From  Dr.  Leach. 

Mr.  Bartlett  talked  to  you  about  the  tooth? — ^Yes;  but  not 
that  he  had  taken  anything. 


125 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Candine  Dossett 

He  talked  to  you  about  the  tooth  that  had  been  taken  out  an 
hour  or  two  before? — ^About  two  hours  before. 

What  did  he  say  about  the  tooth? — ^He  said  it  was  a sound 
tooth. 

Did  he  say  anything  about  the  pain  in  having  it  pulled  out  ? 
* — That  is  what  he  said;  the  worst  was  over,  and  he  thought  he 
was  getting  better. 

Did  he  say  anything  about  the  pain  in  having  it  taken  out  ? — 
Not  that  night,  but  the  other  operation  he  had.  He  had  seven 
taken  out  one  day,  and  he  said  they  had  frozen  his  gums,  and  he 
did  not  feel  very  much  pain,  and  two  days  before  that  he  had  had 
thirteen  out. 

Was  it  on  that  evening  on  which  tlie  conversation  took  place 
that  he  told  you  about  the  thirteen  and  the  seven  ? — Each  time. 

On  each  occasion? — ^Tes. 

When  he  had  the  seven  taken  out  he  told  you  that  they  had 
frozen  his  gums? — ^Tes. 

Did  he  say  it  was  by  ether  spray? — ^No;  that  was  all  he  said. 

Did  not  he  tell  you  how  they  had  frozen  his  gums? — No. 

Did  not  you  ask  how  they  had  frozen  his  gums? — No;  he 
began  saying  that  it  was  very  wonderful,  after  going  through  the 
operation,  he  could  eat  some  of  Mrs.  Bartlett's  hot  buttered  toast — 
he  smelt  it,  and  he  asked  for  some. 

On  which  occasion  was  that? — ^When  he  had  the  seven  out. 

And  on  that  occasion  he  told  you  that  they  had  frozen  his 
gums,  and  that  it  was  wonderful  he  could  eat  the  buttered  toast, 
did  he? — ^Tes. 

Did  he  say  that  the  result  of  freezing  his  gums  was  that  he 
did  not  feel  pain? — fes. 

On  another  day  he  had  no  less  than  thirteen  stumps  taken 
out,  had  he  not? — ^That  was  the  first  operation — ^the  thirteen. 

On  that  occasion  did  ho  tell  you  about  their  freezing  his 
gums? — ^No;  I did  not  see  him  then. 

Do  you  mean  that  they  froze  his  gums  twice? — ^Ho  said  that 
that  was  what  they  did  on  both  occasions;  he  had  had  his  gums 
frozen,  and  therefore  did  not  feel  much  pain. 

By  Mr.  Jitstiob  Wills — ^He  had  his  gums  frozen  on  each  of 
these  two  occasions? — ^Tes. 

contvMUtd-^rj  and  recollect ; on  this 
evening,  the  last  evening  before  his  death,  when  he  spoke  to  you 
about  having  one  taken  out,  did  you  ask  him  if  he  had  had  his 
gums  frozen  again? — No. 

Did  he  say  anything  about  it? — ^No;  he  began  telling  me  that 
Dr.  Leach  had  said  he  ought  to  go  away  for  a change. 

Did  he  tell  you  anything  about  having  the  tooth  out,  and  that 
instead  of  having  his  ^ms  frozen  he  had  had  nitrous  oxide? — ^No. 

You  do  not  remember  all  the  conversation,  do  you?~It  was 
126 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Carolina  Dogvott 

rery  late;  the  boy  brought  the  medicine,  and  I had  to  leave  the 
room. 

You  do  not  remember  the  name  of  the  medicine? — ^No. 

But  the  name  was  mentioned? — ^Tea,  by  Mrs.  Bartlett. 

Was  it  spoken  of  as  a placebo— ten  drops  of  a placebo? — Ten 
drops  is  considered  a strong  dose. 

You  say  you  cannot  remember  the  word ; was  it  a placebo  ? — 
1 don’t  know  what  name  she  said. 

Did  she  say  that  Dr.  Leach  had  given  a prescription  for  ten 
drops  to  be  given  if  the  pain  was  urgent,  or  if  sleep  was  required, 
or  anything  of  that  kind? — No. 

The  Court  adjourned. 


Second  Day—Tuesday,  13th  April,  1886. 
Evidence  for  the  Prosecution— continued. 


Alice  Fulcher,  examined  by  Mr.  Poland — I am  servant  to 
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Doggett,  86  Claverton  Street.  I remember  Mr.  and 
Mrs.  Bartlett  coming  to  live  there  some  time  in  October.  1 waited 
upon  them.  The  first  week  after  they  came  I saw  Mr.  Dyson 
there.  He  used  to  come  once  or  twice  a week,  and  then  about  a 
fortnight  or  three  weeks  before  Mr.  Bartlett’s  illness  he  came 
three  or  four  times  a week.  I have  known  him  to  be  there  as 
early  as  nine  or  half-past  nine,  and  sometimes  later.  Mr.  Bart- 
lett sometimes  went  to  business  about  eight  or  half-past  eight, 
and  returned  between  five  and  six  in  the  evening.  He  sometimes 
went  out  again.  Sometimes  Mr.  Dyson  stayed  till  dinner  time 
and  dined  with  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Bartlett.  The  usual  time  for  dinner 
was  between  five  and  six  o’clock.  Mr.  Dyson  had  an  old  coat 
that  he  used  to  put  on  which  was  kept  in  the  back  drawing-room. 
He  had  also  a pair  of  slippers  there.  I have  sometimes  gone  into 
the  room  while  Mr.  Dyson  and  Mrs.  Bartlett  were  together. 

Have  you  noticed  anything  about  the  room  when  you  have 
gone  in? — ^Yes,  I have  seen  the  window  curtains  pulled  together 
and  then  pinned. 

Have  you  seen  when  Mrs.  Bartlett  and  Mr.  Dyson  have  been 

there  anything  to  attract  your  attention  when  you  went  in? 

I have  seen  them  sitting  on  the  sofa  together,  and  I have  also 
seen  them  sitting  on  the  floor  together. 

In  what  position  on  the  floor? — I have  seen  Mr.  Dyson  sitting 
on  a low  chair  and  Mrs.  Bartlett  sitting  on  the  floor  with  her 
head  on  Mr.  Dyson’s  knee.  I do  not  remember  when  that  was  nor 
could  I say  how  long  it  was  before  Mr.  Bartlett’s  death.  I do 
not  know  what  I went  into  the  room  for.  I never  found  the 
door  locked. 


When  you  went  in  and  saw  Mrs.  Bartlett  with  her  head 
resting  on  Mr.  Dyson’s  knee,  did  they  do  anything  at  all  when 
you  went  in?— No. 


j.  — ^No,  they  still  sat  as  they  were.  I think 

that  was  the  only  occasion  that  I noticed  anything  of  that  kind 
when  I went  into  the  room.  Sometimes  Mr.  IHson  would  stav 
and  have  lunA  with  Mrs.  Bartlett  between  twelve  and  one,  and 
leave  before  Mr.  Bartlett  came  home.  I do  not  think  there  was 
anything  else  that  I noticed.  ® 

Bartlett’s  death  I took  up  the  dinner 
about  half.past  two  or  three  o’clock.  I had  seen  hL  from  tSe 
128  " ^ 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Alice  Fulcher 

to  time  during  his  illness.  He  had  been  out  that  day.  The  dinner 
consisted  of  jugged  hare.  Later  on  in  the  day  he  had  tea.  He 
had  for  luncheon  at  twelve  o'clock  half  a dozen  oysters,  bread 
and  butter,  and  tea  and  cake.  I did  not  hear  him  say  anything 
about  himself  while  Mrs.  Bartlett  was  with  him  and  I was  in  the 
room.  His  appetite  appeared  to  be  pretty  good. 

Was  there  any  chutney  with  the  supper  or  dinner? — The 
plates  had  been  used  for  chutney  at  supper  both  by  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
Bartlett.  Mrs.  Bartlett  gave  me  orders  for  breakfast  for  next 
day  when  I cleared  away  the  things;  he  asked  me  to  get  him  a 
large  haddock. 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills — ^Do  you  mean  after  tea  or  after  supper  ? 
— ^There  was  tea  and  supper  both  together.  It  was  after  the  last 
meal. 

Examination  continued — ^The  order  was  given  when  I was  clear- 
ing the  things  away  and  he  said  that  he  should  get  up  an  hour 
earlier  at  the  thought  of  having  it.  He  sat  up  at  the  table 
and  took  his  meals.  He  was  walking  round  the  room  when  he 
gave  me  the  order.  The  last  time  I went  up  to  the  room  was  at 
twenty-five  minutes  to  eleven,  when  1 was  taking  coals  in.  Mrs. 
Bartlett  asked  me  to  take  the  coals  up  for  the  night,  and  she 
put  her  finger  up  and  told  me  not  to  go  into  the  room  again. 
She  told  me  to  take  a basin  up  for  the  beef  tea,  and  to  put  it 
on  the  table  outside  on  the  stair  landing.  The  basin  I put  on 
the  table  was  empty.  Mrs.  Bartlett  had  Liebig’s  essence  in  the 
room. 

As  a rule,  used  you,  while  Mr.  Bartlett  was  ill,  to  take  in  the 
basin  the  last  thing? — ^Tes,  always.  I went  to  bed  that  night 
some  time  past  twelve,  and  I was  wakened  about  four  in  the 
morning  by  Mrs.  Bartlett  coming  to  my  room.  I got  up  and  she 
asked  me  to  go  for  Dr.  Leach.  She  said,  Alice,  1 want  you  to 
go  for  Dr.  Leach,  1 think  Mr.  Bartlett  is  dead.”  I think  that 
is  all  she  said.  I replied,  ” Don’t  say  that!  ” but  she  made  no 
reply.  She  had  a light-coloured  dress  on.  She  was  not  wearing 
that  dress  when  1 left  her  overnight.  1 got  up  and  at  once  left 
the  house  and  went  for  Dr.  Leach — about  five  or  ten  minutes’ 
walk.  I roused  him  and  told  him  what  was  the  matter,  and 
brought  him  back.  Mrs.  Doggett  opened  the  door  to  me.  I had 
not  seen  any  one  except  Mrs,  Bartlett  before  I left  the  house  to 
fetch  Dr.  Leach.  1 had  to  stand  knocking  for  Dr.  Leach  for 
some  time,  and  1 could  not  say  what  time  elapsed  between  the 
time  Mrs.  Bartlett  came  to  me  and  the  time  that  Dr.  Leach  came 
back  with  me  to  the  house.  When  Dr.  Leach  arrived  he  went 
into  the  room  upstairs.  I went  into  the  room — ^the  drawing-room 
— about  half -past  five  or  six  o’clock  in  the  morning.  1 saw  a 
lot  of  things  on  the  table  in  the  room.  The  tray  was  there.  I 
did  not  remove  any  of  the  things  at  that  time.  1 left  the  tray 
E 129 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 

Alice  Fulcher 

till  about  half -past  eight  or  nine  o’clock.  It  had  several  glasses 
on  it,  and  I took  them  downstairs  to  the  ante-room,  the  smoking- 
room,  and  left  them  there.  I washed  them  all  except  one. 

What  sort  of  glasses  were  they? — Some  were  tumblers  and 
some  wineglasses.  I noticed  that  one  wineglass  was  about  half- 
full  of  something  which  I thought  was  brandy,  judging  from  the 
■smell  and  the  colour.  I washed  it  away.  The  glass  that  I did  not 
wash  was  given  to  the  coroner’s  officer;  it  was  a tumbler  con- 
taining some  liquid  with  a bottle  turned  downwards  in  it.  The 
coroner’s  officer,  Ralph,  took  charge  of  that.  That  same  morning 
Mrs.  Bartlett  gave  me  some  letters  to  post;  one  was  addressed 
to  Mr.  Dyson  and  one  to  Mr.  Wood.  I think  I posted  these  in 
the  morning,  but  I am  not  quite  sure  whether  it  was  in  the  morning 
or  night.  I did  not  take  any  telegram.  I saw  Mr.  Dyson  the  next 
day,  Saturday,  the  2nd.  He  came  to  the  house  in  the  morning 
while  Mrs.  Bartlett  was  in.  He  went  up  into  the  room  where 
Mrs.  Bartlett  was.  I do  not  know  whether  I showed  him  up  or 
whether  he  just  went  up.  Mrs.  Bartlett  had  slept  in  the  house. 
I did  not  hear  anything  that  passed  between  Mr.  Dyson  and  Mrs. 
Bartlett  on  the  Saturday.  Mrs.  Bartlett  left  the  house  after  that, 
on  the  Saturday,  while  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Doggett  were  out.  The  next 
time  I saw  her  was  on  Wednesday,  6th  January.  Mrs.  Matthews 
came  with  her.  She  came  for  some  of  her  things. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  Clabkb — -Can  you  remember  when  it 
was  that  you  say  you  saw  the  curtains  pinned  together? — No. 

How  long  before  Mr.  Bartlett’s  death? — I could  not  say. 

You  cannot  say  whether  it  was  a week  or  a month  or  three 
months? — ^No,  I could  not. 

These  were  long  white  curtains,  were  they  not,  that  came 
down  to  the  ground? — ^Yes. 

And  generally  hung  close  together? — ^Yes. 

From  top  to  bottom? — ^Yes. 

That  was  their  usual  condition,  was  it? — -Yes. 

Then  they  would  hang  close  and  cover  the  window  whether 
they  were  pinned  or  not? — ^Yes,  sir! 

Can  you  tell  me  how  long  it  was  that  Mr.  Bartlett  was  sleep- 
ing on  the  iron  bedstead  in  the  front  room? — ^From  the  beginning 
of  his  illness. 

From  the  very  first  time  that  Dr,  Leach  came  to  attend  to 
hinij  I suppose?^ — ^Yes. 

And  after  that  time  did  you  know  that  Mrs.  Bartlett  was 
on  the  sofa  or  chair  in  the  front  room  where  he  was? — 
■’Yes, '/.sir.  ■ . 

She  did  not  use  the  bed  in  the  back  room  ? — ^No. 

But  dsed  to  be  in  the  front  room,  and,  as  you  know  or  believe, 
attend  to  himy  make  beef  tea  for  him,  and  so  on  ?— Yes. 

And  he  slept  on  a little  low  iron  bedstead?— Yes, 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 


Alice  Fnldier 

Was  that  bed  near  the  fireplace? — ^Yes. 

And  was  there  often  a stool  or  chair  at  the  bottom  of  the 
bedstead? — ^No,  sir;  the  piano  was  mostly  there  at  the  foot  of 
the  bed. 

The  piano  was  at  the  other  window  when  you  went  in  at  the 
door.  The  front  room,  the  drawing-room,  had  two  windows 
When  you  went  into  it  from  the  staircase  there  was  a window 
opposite  you? — ^Yes. 

And  then  the  fireplace  was  to  your  right? — ^Yes. 

The  room  stretched  away  to  the  right? — ^Yes. 

The  bed  was  by  the  fireplace? — ^Yes. 

And  the  piano  was  in  the  corner  of  the  room  on  the  left-hand 
side  as  you  went  in? — Mrs.  Bartlett  moved  it  against  the  foot 
of  the  bed  along  the  side. 

When  do  you  say  it  was  moved? — I do  not  know  when  it  was 
moved,  but  it  was  moved. 

Just  remember ; there  was  a bookcase  between  the  windows? — 
Yes,  and  Mrs.  Bartlett  moved  that,  too,  to  the  other  side  of  the 
room. 

There  were  folding  doors  between  the  two  rooms,  I think? — 

Yes. 

And  the  sofa  that  1 have  mentioned  was  a heavy  sofa,  I think, 
against  the  folding  doors? — ^Yes. 

So  that  it  kept  them  closed? — Yes. 

And  Mrs.  Bartlett,  going  from  one  room  to  the  other,  would 
have  gone  out  on  to  the  staircase? — ^Yes. 

Do  you  know  about  the  washing  basin  in  the  back  room, 
whether  it  was  often  used  quite  late  at  night  by  Mrs.  Bartlett? — 
Yes. 

1 do  not  know  whether  you  drew  the  inference — ^perhaps  you 
would — ^that  before  settling  herself  for  the  night  she  would  go 
into  the  back  room  and  wash? — Sometimes. 

She  would  sometimes,  would  she? — ^Yes. 

You  knew  that  the  basin  was  used  ? — ^Yes. 

Whether  it  was  or  was  not  used  on  the  night  of  the  death,  I 
think  you  do  not  remember  ? — ^No,  sir,  I do  not. 

Now,  just  one  word  with  regard  to  this  matter,  about  finding 
Mr.  Dyson  sitting  on  a chair  and  Mrs.  Bartlett  with  her  head 
on  his  knee.  When  you  went  into  the  room  on  that  occasion  you 
had  been  summoned  to  the  room  by  Mrs.  Bartlett? — 1 do  not  know 
what  I went  up  for — ^whether  I went  up  to  take  letters  or  not. 

You  were  examined  with  regard  to  this  two  months  ago  nearly 
at  the  Police  Court? — Yes. 

Did  you  say  this — ''  I believe  it  was  in  the  afternoon  when 
I saw  Mrs.  Bartlett’s  head  on  Mr.  Dyson’s  knee.  I could  not  say 
the  time;  1 would  have  been  rung  for  at  the  time  for  dinner. 
1 do  not  recollect  that  I was  rung  for,  whatever  was  the  cause. 

131 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Alice  Fuldier 

I had  been  sent  for  by  Mrs.  Bartlett  1 — Did  you  say  that  ? — ^Yes. 
Well ; I oould  not  say  whether  I had  been  rung  for  or  not  now. 

Were  there  books  on  the  tabled — ^Yes. 

Was  Mr,  Dyson  sitting  near  the  table? — ^He  was  sitting  in 
front  of  the  fire — ^that  is,  near  the  table. 

You  usually  took,  I think,  a supply  of  coals  for  the  night 
late  in  the  evening? — ^Yes. 

And  on  this  evening  Mrs.  Bartlett  told  you  to  bring  up 
the  coals  and  to  bring  the  empty  basin? — ^Yes. 

Just  try  and  recall  this.  Did  she  tell  you  at  one  and  the 
same  time  about  bringing  the  coals  and  about  bringing  the  basin? 
— Yes. 

Can  you  remember  how  long  it  was  before  you  took  the  coals 
up? — ^Well,  I think  1 went  for  Mr.  Bartlett's  breakfast  before  I 
took  the  coals  up. 

You  did  not  take  the  coals  and  the  basin  up  together? — ^Yes, 
I did. 

Are  you  sure — just  try  and  remember;  when  you  took  the 
coals  up  you  went  into  the  room? — Yes;  and  I think  I left  the 
basin  outside  until  Mrs.  Bartlett  told  me,  and  then  1 took  it  in. 

Do  try  and  remember.  I do  not  think  you  quite  mean  that. 
You  think  you  left  the  basin  outside  until  Mrs.  Bartlett  told  you  ? 
— No.  I took  the  coals  up,  and  then  Mrs.  Bartlett  told  me  to 
take  the  basin  and  not  to  take  it  into  the  room. 

That  is  what  I was  trying  to  remind  you  of.  Mrs.  Bartlett 
told  you  about  the  coals  and  the  basin  at  the  same  time.  Is  it 
not  a fact  that  you  took  up  the  coals  without  the  basin? — ^Yes; 
and  I went  for  the  basin. 

Having  been  told  to  bring  up  the  coals  and  the  basin,  you 
brought  them  up  and  took  the  coals  into  the  room? — ^Yes. 

But  you  had  not  brought  the  basin? — ^No. 

At  that  time  Mr.  Bartlett  had  not  gone  to  bed? — ^When  I took 
the  coals  up  Mr.  Bartlett  was  in  l^d. 

Then  it  was  when  you  were  told  about  the  coals  and  the 
basin  that  he  was  walking  about,  was  it? — ^When  I was  clearing 
away  the  tea  I said  Mr.  Bartlett  was  walking  about. 

Then  you  took  the  coals  and  you  went  into  the  room  while  he 
was  in  bed? — ^Yes. 

And  not  having  brought  the  basin  in  with  you,  Mrs.  Bartlett 
told  you  that  you  might  put  it  on  the  table  and  not  come  in  again? 
— Yes. 

And  you  would  pass  the  basin  in  the  ordinary  course  of  things 
as  you  went  up  to  your  bedroom  ? — ^Yes. 

You  did  put  the  basin  on  the  table? — ^Yes. 

And  you  found  it  there  untouched  the  next  morning  ?— Yes. 

Do  you  remember  when  it  w^  you  put  the  basin  t&re?  Was 
it  when  you  went  up  to  bed? — ^Before. 

m 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 


Alice  Fuldier 

You  did  not  so  up  to  bed  for  some  time  aiterwards,  I think?— 
No. 

Did  Mrs.  Bartlett  usually  go  out  in  the  daytime  at  some  time 
or  other  for  a walk? — ^Tes. 

And  she  had  been  out  with  her  husband  that  day  to  the 
dentist's,  had  she  not  ? — I do  not  know. 

Well,  in  the  evening  when  you  were  there  they  were  having 
supper,  and  she  had  a walking  dress  on,  had  she  not? — ^Yes. 

And  when  she  came  to  call  you  at  four  o'clock  in  the  morning 
she  had  a light  and  looser  dress  on? — ^Yes,  sir. 

Was  it  a sort  of  loose  jacket? — It  was  the  dress  she  used  to 
go  out  for  a walk  in  sometimes. 

Are  you  sure  of  that  ? — ^Yes. 

Be  careful;  you  have  said  she  went  out  with  a walking  dress 
in  the  evening? — ^Yes. 

And  you  said  she  had  a looser  dress  in  the  morning? — ^Yes; 
but  she  had  been  out  for  a walk  in  that  dress. 

How  long  before? — Several  times. 

How  long  before? — Not  the  same  night. 

Was  that  a looser  dress? — It  was  the  same  as  any  other  dress, 
only  a difierent  colour. 

You  have  been  asked  about  the  length  of  time  that  elapsed 
before  you  brought  back  Dr.  Leach.  I suppose  you  jumped  up  as 
quickly  as  you  could? — ^Yes. 

And  went  as  quickly  as  you  could  for  him  ? — ^Yes. 

And  brought  him  back  as  quickly  as  you  could  get  him  ? — ^Yes. 

I do  not  know  whether  you  went  to  bed  again  after  that  or 
not? — ^No;  I did  not. 

Then  you  took  the  glasses  down  and  Mr.  Domett  saw  them 
before  anything  was  done  with  them,  did  he  not?— ^es. 

Did  you  help  pack  Mrs.  Bartlett's  boxes  when  she  went  away? — 
Yes,  sir. 

You  did  not  see  any  medicine  chest  or  anything  of  that  kind, 
did  you? — ^No,  sir.  • 

Ahn  Boulter,  examined  by  Mr.  Moloney — I am  a charwoman, 
and  live  at  1 Great  Peter  Street,  Westminster.  I am  sometimes 
employed  by  an  undertaker.  I went  to  85  Claverton  Street  on 
New  Year’s  Day,  between  seven  and  eight  in  the  morning,  and  I 
washed  and  laid  out  a dead  body,  with  the  assistance  of  Mrs. 
Bartlett.  I noticed  that  the  legs  were  tied.  I asked  Mrs.  Bartlett 
if  he  had  had  a fit,  and  she  a&ed  why  I asked  that. 

What  did  you  say? — I thought  he  might  have  struggled,  as 
his  legs  were  tied.  Mrs.  Bartlett  said,  No,  poor  dear,  he  suf- 
fered very  much  with  his  head,  also  his  teeth  for  some  time." 
She  remarked  it  was  curious  or  funny  that  he  should  make  his 
will  a day  or  two  previous  to  his  death.  I remarked  how  odd  that 
it  was  so,  and  asked  if  it  was  in  her  favour,  and  she  said  " Yes." 

133 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Ann  Bouker 

Gross-examined  by  Mr.  Clabee — Is  that  all  she  said  to  you 
about  his  illness  1 — ^Yes. 

That  his  head  had  been  bad,  and  that  he  had  suffered  very 
much  with  his  teetii  ? — Tes. 

Did  you  notice  the  teeth  at  all? — ^No,  I did  not;  his  mouth 
was  closed. 

The  body  was  covered  up  when  you  went  in,  I suppopi 
Did  you  call  her  attention  to  the  fact  of  his  legs  being  tied 
together? — I did. 

Was  there  more  conversation  than  you  have  told  us? — No,  1 
think  not. 

Are  you  quite  sure  she  said  two  or  three  days,  and  not  two 
or  three  months? — ^No;  that  was  all  she  said  to  me. 

Are  you  quite  sure  she  said  two  or  three  days? — “ A day  or 
two  previous  to  his  death  is  what  she  said. 

Do  you  know  that  while  you  were  there  a letter  came  for 
Mr.  Bartlett? — ^Tes. 

Did  Mrs.  Bartlett  open  it? — ^Tes. 

Did  die  say  where  it  had  come  from? — I understood  her  to 
say  it  was  from  his  brother — ^the  deceased’s  brother. 

Where  from? — do  not  know  where  from. 

She  did  not  say? — ^No. 

Did  she  say,  **  Oh,  how  cruel  1 ” or  “ This  is  cruel  ’*? — ^Tes. 
sir. 

And  did  you  ask  her  what  she  meant? — I asked  her  what  was 
cruel. 

And  did  she  say? — It  was  a letter  from  his  brother. 

That  a letter  had  just  come  from  his  brother  wishing  him  a 
happy  New  Year  ? — Yes,  sir. 

And  she  said  how  cruel  it  was? — ^Yes;  that  was  what  made  me 
notice  her.  I thought  it  was  strange  to  make  that  remark. 

That  the  letter  should  arrive  while  he  was  lying  dead? — Yes, 
while  I was  washing  the  body. 

Re-examined  by  Mr.  Moloney— She  did  not  say  from  which 
brother? — ^No,  she  did  not — ^from  his  brother,  I understood  her 
to  say. 

William  Clapton,  examined  by  Mr.  Poland — ^I  am  a Fellow 
of  the  Royal  College  of  Surgeons,  and  reside  at  27  Queen  Street, 
City.  I am  one  of  the  medical  officers  to  the  British  Equitable 
Insurance  Company.  In  the  month  of  November,  1880,  I 
examined  Thomas  Edwin  Bartlett  for  the  purpose  of  insuring  his 
life.  The  insurance  was  effected.  It  was  a policy  for  £400, 
and  on  the  usual  premium — a first-class  life.  1 examined  him  in 
the  ordinary  way  to  ascertain  whether  his  was  a good  life  to  take. 

At  that  time  did  you  find  that,  as  far  as  you  could  judge, 
he  was  a sound  man,  suffering  from  no  illness? — ^No  ailment  what- 
134 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

William  aaptOD 

ever.  1 passed  him  as  a first-class  life.  The  policy  describes  him 
as  a grocer,  of  Herne  Hill,  and  the  exact  date  of  it  is  3rd 
December,  1880  j I examined  him  on  16th  November,  1880. 

Rev.  GaoRGB  Dtson,  examined  by  Mr.  Poland — I am  a Wes- 
leyan minister.  At  the  beginning  of  this  year  1 was  living  at  18 
Parkfield,  Putney,  and  had  been  there  since  the  beginning  of  Sep- 
tember. I first  made  the  acquaintance  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Bartlett 
about  twelve  months  last  January  or  February.  They  were  then 
living  at  The  Cottage,  Merton  Abbey,  and  I was  in  charge  of  a 
small  chapel  in  the  High  Street,  Merton.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Bartlett 
attended  the  services.  After  seeing  them  in  my  chapel  1 called 
upon  them  as  members  of  my  congregation,  and  that  was  how  I 
made  their  acquaintance.  They  continued  to  attend  until  they 
left  the  neighbourhood.  My  second  call  upon  them  was  in  the  fol- 
lowing June,  when  I had  tea  with  them  at  The  Cottage,  Merton 
Abbey.  After  that  I called  on  them  frequently. 

Was  there  any  reason  for  that?  Had  anything  been  said 
when  you  took  tea  with  them  on  that  occasion  about  calling  again  ? 
— That  same  evening  Mr.  Bartlett  requested  me  to  call  oftener 
than  1 had  done  previously.  I believe  I called  on  the  following 
Wednesday,  and  spent  the  evening  with  them.  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
Bartlett  left  The  Cottage  at  Merton  Abbey  about  the  end  of  August 
or  the  beginning  of  September.  I was  in  Dublin  for  about  a 
week  in  June,  and  1 took  the  degree  of  Bachelor  of  Arts  at 
Trinity  College  there.  On  my  return,  Mr.  Bartlett  told  me  that 
he  would  like  Mrs.  Bartlett  to  take  up  her  studies  again,  and  he 
requested  me  to  take  the  supervision  of  them.  In  consequence  of 
that,  I called  upon  her  from  time  to  time  and  gave  her  lessons 
in  Latin  and  history,  and  also  in  geography  and  mathematics. 
Besides  calling  on  Mrs.  Bartlett  in  that  way,  she  called  on  me  at 
Wimbledon,  or,  rather,  I should  say  that  I took  her  to  my  apart- 
ments with  her  husband's  knowledge.  I came  to  be  on  very  inti- 
mate terms  with  both  Mr.  and*  Mrs.  Bartlett. 

I remember  their  going  from  Merton  Abbey  to  Dover  at  the 
beginning  of  September.  They  were  away  there  for  about  a month. 
Mr.  Bartlett  requested  me  to  go  down  and  see  them  there,  and 
he  took  me  with  him,  paying  my  fare.  I went  down  twice,  but  I 
believe  that  on  the  second  occasion  1 paid  my  fare  myself.  Of 
course,  1 knew  him  as  a man  of  business,  well  to  do  in  business. 
All  the  time  that  I knew  them,  and  at  Dover,  they  lived  together 
as  man  and  wife,  as  far  as  1 could  judge,  '^ile  I was  at  Dover 
Mr.  Bartlett  wrote  to  me,  and  I think  I replied  to  his  letter. 
(Shown  two  letters)— One  of  these  is  Mr.  Bartlett's  letter  to  me  and 
the  other  is  my  reply.  They  are  as  follows: — ‘"14  St.  James 
Street,  Dover,  Monday.  Dear  George, — Permit  me  to  say  1 feel 
great  pleasure  in  thus  addressing  you  for  the  first  time.  To  me 

135 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Rev.  George  Dyaon 

it  is  a privilege  to  think  that  I am  allowed  to  feel  towards  you  as 
a brother,  and  I hope  our  friendship  may  ripen  as  time  goes  on, 
without  anything  to  mar  its  future  brightness.  Would  that  1 
could  find  words  to  express  my  thankfulness  to  you  for  the  very 
loving  letter  you  sent  Adelaide  to-day.  It  would  have  done  any- 
body good  to  see  her  overflowing  with  joy  as  she  read  it  whilst 
walking  along  the  street,  and  afterwards  as  she  read  it  to  me.  I 
felt  my  heart  going  out  to  you.  I long  to  tell  you  how  proud  I 
feel  at  the  thought  I should  soon  be  able  to  clasp  the  hand  of  the 
man  who  from  his  heart  could  pen  such  noble  thoughts.  Who 
can  help  loving  you?  I felt  that  I must  say  two  words,  ‘ Thank 
you,'  and  my  desire  to  do  so  is  my  excuse  for  troubling  you  with 
this.  Looking  towards  the  future  with  joyfulness,  1 am,  yours 
affectionately,  E dwin . ' ’ 

“ 18  Parkfields,  Putney,  September  23,  1886.  My  dear 
Edwin, — Thank  you  very  much  for  the  brotherly  letter  you  sent 
me  yesterday.  I am  sure  I respond  from  my  heart  to  your  wish 
that  our  friendship  may  ripen  with  the  lapse  of  time,  and  I do  so 
with  confidence,  for  1 feel  that  our  friendship  is  founded  on  a 
firm,  abiding  basis — ^trust  and  esteem.  I have  from  a boy  been 
ever  longing  for  the  confidence  and  trust  of  others.  I have  never 
been  so  perfectly  happy  as  when  in  possession  of  this.  It  is  in 
this  respect,  among  many  others,  that  you  have  shown  yourself  a 
true  friend.  You  have  thanked  me,  and  now  I thank  you,  yet 
I ought  to  confess  that  I read  your  warm  and  generous  letter  with 
a kind  of  half  fear — a fear  lest  you  should  ever  be  disappointed 
in  me  and  find  me  a far  more  prosy,  matter-of-fact  creature  than 
you  expect.  Thank  you,  moreover,  for  the  telegram ; it  was  very 
considerate  to  send  it.  I am  looking  forward  with  much  pleasure 
to  next  week.  Thus  far  I have  been  able  to  stave  off  any  work, 
and  trust  to  be  able  to  keep  it  clear.  Dear  old  Dover,  it  will  ever 
possess  a pleasant  memory  for  me  in  my  mind  and  a warm  place 
in  my  heart.  With  very  kind  regards,  believe  me,  yours  affec- 
tionatdy,  George."  ** 

On  leaving  Dover,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Bartlett  went  to  88  Claverton 
Street.  I was  then  living  at  18  Parkfields,  Putney.  I had  a 
season  ticket  from  Putney  to  Waterloo,  which  was  given  to  me  by 
Mr,  Bartlett.  At  this  time  I had  a fresh  chapel  at  Putney,  larger 
than  the  one  I was  in  before.  My  name  was  put  up  as  the  minister 
on  the  notice  board  in  front  of  the  chapel.  I do  not  think  that 
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Bartlett  came  over  to  that  chapel,  but  I used  to 
visit  them  at  Claverton  Street  from  time  to  time. 

Upon  your  first  visit  there,  do  you  remember  some  conversa- 
tions that  you  had  with  Mrs.  Bartlett  about  her  husband.  Just 
apply  your  mind  and  state  fuUy  everything  you  remember  she 
said? — ^I  remarked,  I remember,  how  her  husband  seemed  to 
throw  us  together,  and  asked  how  it  was.  I thought  it  was  re- 
markable. She  told  me  that  his  life  was  not  likely  to  be  a Iona: 

136  .r  © 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Rev.  Geo^se  Dycon 

one,  and  that  he  knew  it,  and  she  repeated  what  he  had  told  me 
himself,  that  his  friends  were  not  kind  to  her — ^that  they  did  not 
understand  her,  being  a foreigner;  that  he  had  confidence  in  me 
and  affection  for  me — am  giving  the  words  as  near  as  I can 
recollect — and  that  he  wished  me  to  be  a guardian  her.  He 
knew  I should  be  a friend  to  her  when  he  was  gone. 

I want  you  to  state,  if  you  can  remember,  more  in  detail 
what  she  said  about  her  husband’s  state. 

Mr.  Clabkb — ^What  he  has  given  us  is  repeating  what  he  has 
heard  from  Mr.  Bartlett. 

Bxwnymation  continued — want  all  she  said.  You  had  heard 
it  before  from  Mr.  Bartlett,  you  sayl  Just  repeat  all  you  can 
remember  what  she  said  about  Mr.  Bartlett’s  illness,  and  what  was 
the  matter  with  him? — I do  not  know  whether  it  was  then  or  later. 
I asked  her  what  was  shortening  his  life,  and  she  told  me  that  he 
had  an  internal  complaint,  and  that  he  had  had  this  for  some 
five  or  six  years,  1 think;  that  she  herself  had  been  his  nurse 
and  had  doctored  him  by  his  express  wish.  She  said  that  he  was 
very  sensitive  about  this  affliction,  and  on  that  account  he  had 
had  n^  regular  doctor  to  attend  him. 

Did  she  say  anything  that  had  happened  while  she  was 
attending  him  while  he  had  this  internal  complaint? — I do  not 
remember  her  saying  anything  then. 

Anything  about  the  chloroform? — ^Not  then,  not  at  that  time. 
I do  not  recollect  anything  more  that  she  said  then. 

Afterwards  what  more  did  she  say,  when  you  have  been  to 
Claverton  Street,  about  her  husband? — ^Later  she  told  me  that  the 
disease  caused  him  very  great  pain,  and  to  soothe  him  she  had 
been  accustomed  to  use  chloroform.  She  told  me  that  she  went 
for  advice  to  Dr.  Nichols,  in  Fopstone  Road,  Kingston,  or  Earl’s 
Court.  1 cannot  recollect  what  she  said — sim;^  l^at  slxe  gave  me 
to  understand  that  he  gave  her  advice.  She  mentioned  that  Annie 
Walker  came  to  see  him  occasionally  and  brought  him  what  medi- 
cine he  needed.  * 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills — ^Annie  Walker  was  a lady  nurse. 

ExamAmxLtion  contirmed — She  told  me  that  Annie  Walker  had 
nursed  her  husband  in  one  of  the  earlier  attacks  which  he  had. 
I do  not  remember  her  telling  me  how  she  first  became  acquainted 
with  Annie  Walker.  She  told  me  on  one  occasion  that  Annie 
Walker  had  brought  her  chloroform.  I frequently  spoke  to  her 
about  Dr.  Nichols,  as  I was  interested  in  him. 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills — ^Did  you  know  him? — No,  but  I was 
interested  to  know  something  about  him. 

Ei^amination  contmuedZ^  did  not  know  Dr.  Nichols  at  all. 

Did  you  know  that  there  was  such  a person? — ^No.  I can- 
not say  what  I said  to  Mrs.  Bartlett  about  Dr.  Nichols. 

At  this  time  was  not  the  doctor,  as  far  as  you  know,  attend- 
ing on  Mr.  Bartlett  at  the  house? — ^No,  not  that  I know  of. 

137 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Rev.  Geom  Dyeon 

Do  you  remember  anything  furtlier  that  was  said  by  Mrs, 
Bartlett  about  Mr.  Bartlett^s  illness? — She  said  it  was  an  internal 
complaint;  I remember  nothing  more. 

Was  anything  said  about  his  deaths  as  to  how  long  he  might 
live? — Oh,  yes,  that  Dr.  Nichols  had  said  he  might  die  within 
twelve  months.  I do  not  remember  .anything  more  being  said  as  to 
when  Mr.  Bartlett  might  die. 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills — mean  that  Mr.  Bartlett  might  die 
within  twelve  months  from  the  time  that  Mrs.  Bartlett  was  speak- 
ing. She  did  not  say  when  Dr.  Nichols  had  seen  him  last. 

Bicami/riation  continued — I do  not  remember  anything  more 
that  was  said.  Up  to  that  time,  when  this  conversation  took 
place  at  Claverton  Street,  Mr.  Bartlett  had  seemed  to  me  to  be 
in  good  health,  as  far  as  I could  judge,  except  that  he  was  very 
weary  in  the  evening  when  he  returned  from  business.  He 
returned  from  business  at  various  times,  sometimes  at  ten  o’clock 
at  night,  and  at  other  times  he  would  return  to  dinner  about 
five.  He  appeared  to  me  to  have  a very  severe  pain  in  his  left 
side;  I have  often  seen  him  place  his  hand  there  convulsively. 

Did  he  say  anything  to  you  as  to  what  was  the  matter  with 
him  ? — Yes,  he  told  me  that  he  had  sufiered  from  dyspepsia 
severely.  He  mentioned  that  some  years  previously  he  had  had  a 
severe  illness,  and  that  on  that  occasion  his  wife  sat  up  for  a fort- 
night with  him  and  nursed  him  very  faithfully.  As  far  as  I 
recollect,  he  said  that  it  was  dyspepsia  or  dysentery  that  he  sufiered 
from  then.  During  my  visits  to  Claverton  Street  I continued  to 
give  instruction  to  Mrs.  Bartlett.  I used  to  go  there  two  or  three 
times  a week,  generally  about  three  o’clock  in  the  afternoon. 
On  one  occasion  only  I went  at  half-past  nine  in  the  morning,  and 
Mr,  and  Mrs.  Bartlett  and  I left  ateut  half-past  ten  to  go  to  the 
St.  Bernard  Dog  Show.  When  I went  in  the  afternoons  I usually 
stayed  until  about  half-past  four  if  I had  an  evening  engagement, 
otherwise  I should  remain  the  evening.  I still  continued  on  very 
intimate  terms  with  both  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Bartlett. 

I knew  of  Mr.  Bartlett’s  illness,  commencing  about  10th 
December.  I think  I saw  him  on  the  day  he  was  laid  up,  or  just 
about  that  time — probably  two  or  three  days  before.  He  seemed 
then  to  be  very  wearied  and  very  much  depressed.  I saw  him 
several  times  during  his  illness.  The  first  time  I saw  him  he  was 
on  the  small  bed  in  the  drawing-room,  and  Mrs.  Bartlett  was 
nursing  him.  I first  heard  that  I was  the  executor  under  his  will 
about  the  middle  of  September,  as  far  as  I can  fix  the  date.  Mr. 
Bartlett  informed  me  of  that.  I heard  &at  Dr.  Leach  was  attend- 
ing him  during  his  illness,  and  I heard  that  he  was  sufiering 
from  dysentery. 

Anything  further? — heard  that  he  was  suffering  from  worms. 

138 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Rev.  Geom  Dyson 

He  told  me  so  himself — indeed,  1 heard  the  whole  course  of  the 
illness.  He  seemed  to  be  troubled  with  sleeplessness  as  much  as 
anything  else. 

During  the  Christmas  week  1 went  to  my  home  at  Poole, 
and  1 returned  on  Saturday,  26th.  1 went  to  the  house  then, 

and  1 saw  Mr.  Bartlett.  He  was  up.  He  seemed  very  prostrate, 
and  he  told  me  that  he  suffered  from  great  sleeplessness,  and  that 
he  regretted  that,  because  it  kept  Mrs.  Bartlett  from  having  any 
sleep.  He  said  he  was  glad  1 had  returned,  as  he  was  afraid  she 
was  breaking  down  with  nursing  him,  and  he  told  me  about 
worms.  1 called  about  two  o^clock  that  afternoon,  and  remained 
till  about  seven  or  eight  in  the  evening. 

From  his  conversation  and  manner,  how  did  he  appear  to 
be  as  to  spirits? — He  seemed  very  depressed.  As  far  as  I re- 
collect, 1 was  in  the  room  all  the  time.  1 must  correct  one  thing 
1 have  said  j he  was  depressed  on  the  Sunday. 

When  was  it  that  Mrs.  Bartlett  said  anything  to  you  about  the 
chloroform? — ^On  the  Sunday  night,  the  27th.  Mr.  Bartlett  was 
in  the  room  at  Claverton  Street.  My  conversation  with  Mrs.  Bart- 
lett took  place  while  she  and  I were  going  to  the  post,  about  nine 
or  half-past  nine.  She  told  me  she  wanted  some  chloroform,  and 
that  Annie  Walker  had  brought  the  chloroform  to  her  before.  She 
said  that  she  wanted  it  to  soothe  her  husband,  to  give  him  sleep, 
and  she  asked  me  if  1 could  get  some  for  her.  I told  her  I would, 
and  1 did. 

First  of  all,  I want  you  to  apply  your  mind  to  the  conver- 
sation on  that  Sunday  night.  Was  anydiing  more  said,  that  you 
remember,  about  it?  Did  she  say  how  the  chloroform  was  to  be 
used? — She  said  she  wanted  it  for  external  application.  She 
told  me  that  Annie  Walker  had  gone  to  America,  and  that  she 
knew  of  no  one  else  that  could  get  it  for  her  but  me.  I do  not 
recollect  anything  more. 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills — liid  it  not  occur  to  you  that  there 
was  a doctor  in  attendance? — Oh,  yes,  and  1 asked  her  to  get  it 
through  the  doctor. 

Examination  continued — She  told  me  that  he  did  not  know 
that  she  was  skilled  in  drugs  and  medicines,  and,  not  knowing 
that,  he  would  not  entrust  her  with  it. 

Was  her  medicine  chest  mentioned  at  any  time? — She  had  men- 
tioned to  me  before,  on  one  of  my  visits  to  Claverton  Street,  that 
she  had  a medicine  chest.  She  had  mentioned  the  medicine  chest 
at  other  times,  and,  as  far  as  I recollect,  she  did  mention  it 
then. 

What  about  it? — She  spoke  of  the  fact  that  she  understood 
medicine.  I agreed  to  get  the  chloroform  for  her. 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills — She  said  she  wanted  the  chloroform 
to  soo&e  her  husband,  to  get  him  to  sleep. 


139 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Rev.  George  Dyaon 

Did  she  give  any  explanation  of  what  slie  meant  by  extei’nal 
usel — ^YeSj  that  she  used  it  with  a handkerchief. 

You  mean  by  inhalation,  then? — I suppose  so.  She  said  she 
sprinkled  it  on  a handkerchief. 

Bxaymnation  continued — I was  to  get  a medicine  draught 
bottle.  She  said  that  it  was  volatile,  quickly  used,  and  that  she 
would  require  that  amount.  She  did  not  state  the  size  of  the 
bottle,  but  I understood  her  to  mean  the  ordinary  draught  bottle. 

I do  not  recollect  anything  further  that  was  said  by  her  about 
the  chloroform  on  that  occasion.  We  returned  to  the  house  in 
about  a quarter  of  an  hour’s  time.  She  gave  me  money  to  buy  the 
chloroform — I think  she  gave  me  a sovereign,  but  1 cannot  be 
sure  about  the  amount.  Nothing  was  said  as  to  how  much  it 
would  cost.  When  we  got  back  to  the  house,  somewhere  about 
nine  or  ten,  I saw  Mr.  Bartlett.  I think  I left  the  house  about 
half-past  ten. 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills — did  not  say  anything  to  Mr.  Bart- 
lett about  this  intended  purchase  of  chloroform. 

Examination  contirmed — ^When  I left  the  house  on  the  Sunday 
night,  STtii  December,  I wrote  to  a medical  student,  Theodore 
Stiles,  asking  if  he  would  get  me  some  chloroform.  He  was  at 
Poole  at  that  time,  and  I wrote  to  him  there.  He  is  not  in  town, 
now  that  1 know  of.  He  is  at  the  Medical  College  in  Bristol.  I 
did  not  keep  a copy  of  my  letter  to  him.  I did  not  receive  any 
answer  to  that  letter.  I telegraphed  to  him  at  Bristol.  He  was 
a friend  of  mine.  I did  not  get  any  chloroform  from  him. 

On  Monday,  the  28th,  did  you  purchase  the  chloroform  your- 
self?— Yes,  on  the  Monday.  I went  into  an  oil  and  colour  shop 
first,  mistaking  it  for  a chemist's.  As  1 did  not  get  it  there,  I went 
to  Mr.  Humble's,  next  door — ^Mr«  Humble,  the  chemist,  190  Bich- 
mond  Boad,  Putney.  I think  I went  there  between  nine  and  ten 
o'clock.  His  shop  is  about  four  or  five  minutes’  walk  from  where 
1 live,  I had  passed  the  shop  every  day,  but  I had  never  been  into 
it  before.  The  chapel,  of  which  1 was  the  minister,  was  about 
60  yards  away  from  the  shop.  1 purchased  an  ounce  bottle  full 
of  chloroform. 

What  did  you  ask  for  ? — asked  for  chloroform.  I was  served 
with  it,  and  1 paid  Is.  or  Is.  3d.  I was  asked  whether  I wanted 
camphorated  chloroform,  and  I said,  “ No,  pure  chloroform.”  I 
was  first  shown  a half-ounce  bottle,  hut,  as  I wanted  a larger 
quantity,  I bought  an  ounce. 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills — ^Why  did  you  not  say  at  once,  ” I 
want  a 6-ounce  bottle,  a regular  medicine  bottle  ”? — asked  him 
for  some  chloroform ; I di^J  not  mention  any  particular  quantity. 

You  said  you  underwood  you  were  asked  to  purchase  a 
medicine  bottle  full.  I do  not  understand  why  you  did  not  ask 
straight  out  for  a medicine  bottle  full? — do  not  remember  what 

140 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Rev.  Geotso  Dyton 

was  in  my  mind  at  time.  I did  not  mention  the  quantity  to 
him. 

M^o/rnAnthtion  continued — Did  you  say  what  you  wanted  it  for  1 
— I did  not  give  the  right  reason.  He  asked  me  whether  1 wanted 
camphorated  chloroform,  and,  as  far  as  I remember,  he  touched  his 
mouth  so  as  to  know  whether  it  was  for  the  teeth.  1 not 
answer  that  question.  But  I asked,  Is  it  good  for  taking  out 
grease  stains  1”  I think  he  told  me  that  it  was.  I then  b»>ught 
it  and  paid  for  it.  The  stopper  was  in  the  usual  way,  with  a 
leather  top  tied  over  it.  It  was  labelled  Chloroform."  Some 
bottles  had  “ Poison  ” on,  but  I cannot  say  whether  this  one  had. 
There  was  also  the  usual  chemist’s  label  on  giving  the  name 
and  address.  I next  went  to  Mr.  Penrose’s  shop  at  Wimbledon, 
That  is  the  business  of  Cadman  & Co.,  The  Ridgeway,  of  which  Mr. 
Penrose  is  the  manager.  * I should  think  that  would  be  about  three 
miles  from  Mr,  Humble’s  shop.  I had  known  Mr.  I’onrose  for 
about  eighteen  months.  He  was  an  occasional  hearer  ai  a chapel 
where  I officiated,  and  I knew  him  very  well. 

What  did  you  say  to  him  about  the  purchase  of  chloroform — 
for  what  purpose  did  you  want  iti — ^For  taking  out  grease  slaima. 
I forget  wHetiier  I asked  ior  the  quantity  or  not. 

Bid  you  tell  him  how  you  had  got  the  grease  stains  ? — On  being 
down  in  the  country,  down  at  Poole.  He  made  up  an  ounce  bottle, 
and  then  I asked  him  for  another  one.  I bought  the  two  bottles 
of  one  ounce  each,  but  I do  not  remember  the  price.  These 
bottles  were  properly  labelled,  Chloroform,  Poison,”  and  al«t> 
the  usual  chemist’s  label  giving  the  name  and  address.  T then 
went  to  Mr.  Mellin’s  at  36  High  Street.  Mr.  Mellin  is  a chemist, 
and  I have  known  him  for  about  eighteen  months.  Mr.  Mellin 
was  a member  of  my  congregation.  I asked  him  for  some  chloro- 
form. 

For  what  purpose? — I gave  him  the  same  reason.  I bought 
one  bottle  containing  2 ounces  or  an  ounce  and  a half,  I am 
not  sure  which.  I do  not  remember  what  price  I paid  to  Mr, 
Mellin.  The  bottle  I bought  at  Mr.  Mellin’s  was  a blue  bottle, 
with  the  words  Poison,  not  to  be  taken  ” on  the  bottle.  My 
last  purchase  was  about  two  o’clock  in  the  afternoon.  T took  the 
four  bottles  to  my  own  hohse  at  Putney,  and  I poured  the  chloro- 
form from,  them  into  one  bottle — a light,  colourless,  square-shaped 
bottle  similar  to  the  one  which  is  now  shown  to  me.  I had  got 
that  bottle  from  my  landlady.  I cannot  remember  whether  I 
cleaned  it  out,  but  it  is  probable  that  I would  do  so.  I took  the 
label  oft  the  blue  bottle,  as  far  as  I remember,  and  put  it  on  to 
this  bottle  in  which  I had  poured  the  chloroform.  I think  the 
words  on  the  label  were  " Chloroform,  Poison,”  because  it  was 
a long  label,  but  I cannot  bo  quite  sure  as  to  whether  ” Poison  ” 
•s^as  on  it.  Certainly  the  word  Chloroform  ” was  on  the  bottle. 

Hi 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Rev.  Georse  Dyson 

On  the  following  day,  Tuesday,  29th,  I took  the  one  bottle  con- 
taining the  chloroform  to  Claverton  Street.  I should  think  this 
would  be  between  two  and  three  o’clock  in  the  afternoon.  I saw 
a visitor  there — a Mr.  Hackett,  I believe.  Mrs.  Bartlett  was 
there.  1 gave  her  the  bottle  containing  the  chloroform  whilst 
we  were  out  for  a stroll  on  the  Embankment.  I asked  her  if  that 
would  do,  and  she  said  it  would.  I think  I told  her  some  of  it 
was  methylated. 

Had  she  told  you  what  sort  to  get? — No,  just  j^loroform.  I 
knew  that  some  of  the  chloroform  I had  purchased  was  methylated. 
After  asking  her  if  it  would  do,  I do  not  remember  anything  more 
that  was  said.  I had  had  a sovereign  from  her  and  I gave  her 
the  change,  but  I do  not  remember  when.  I went  back  with  her 
to  the  house  in  Claverton  Street,  and  saw  Mr.  Bartlett  there.  £ 
stayed  with  him  until  six  or  seven.  He  was  up  and  dressed  then. 

How  did  he  appear  to  be  on  that  Tuesday? — ^He  seemed  very 
weak.  He  seemed  brightened  by  the  fact  that  he  had  gone  out 
for  a drive,  but  he  was  still  troubled  with  his  sleeplessness.  I 
called  again  on  the  Wednesday.  He  was  then  in  bed,  and  appeared 
to  be  about  the  same;  I do  not  recollect  any  difierence.  I saw 
Mrs.  Bartlett  when  I called  on  the  Wednesday,  and  I apologised 
to  her  as  she  was  ofEended  at  something  I had  said  on  the  previous 
day,  Tuesday. 

What  was  it  ? — I had  advised  her  to  get  a^  nurse  to  assist  her, 
consequent  upon  her  telling  me  that  the  friends  were  saying 
unkind  things  about  her — ^that  she  was  not  giving  him  full  nursing 
attention.  I do  not  know  that  she  mentioned  any  names.  I 
told  her  that  it  would  be  better  in  the  eyes  of  the  world  if  she 
were  to  have  a nurse  with  her — ^meaning  that  that  would  stop 
them.  She  was  offended,  and  said  that  I suspected  or  did  not 
trust  her.  I told  her  that  I trusted  her  thoroughly,  and  Mr. 
Bartlett  overheard.  This  conversation  took  place  in  the  room 
after  the  return  from  the  walk.  Mr.  Bartlett  did  not  hear  the 
whole  of  the  conversation.  But  he  heard  that  exclamation  and 
saw  I was  distressed  with  it.  * 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills — Did  he  hear  that  she  told  you  the 
friends  were  saying  unkind  things,  and  that  you  advised  her  to 
have  a nurse.  Did  he  hear  the  whole  of  that^Oh,  that  I cannot 
say.  He  was  walking  about  the  room  at  the  time;  but  I know 
he  heard  those  words  **  respect  ” or  trust.” 

Mr.  ClaRtEE — There  was  one  conversation  on  Wednesday,  and 
another  conversation  had  taken  place  on  Tuesday  which  on  Wed- 
nesday was  apologised  for.  The  question  is  whether  Mr.  Bartlett 
heard  both  those  conversations. 

ISoxtmmation  contimted — The  conversation  about  getting  a 
second  person  to  nurse  was,  I understand,  after  you  returned  from 
the  walk  on  the  Embankment.  You  were  in  the  room?-— Yes. 
Mr.  Bartlett  was  walking  about  there,  and  she  said,  You  don’t 
142 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Rev.  Geom  Dyaon 

trust  me.'’  He  said,  **  Oh  yes,  you  may  trust  her.  If  you  had 
twelve  years'  experience  of  her  as  I have,  you  would  know  you 
could  trust  her."  It  was  in  consequence  of  that  that  I returned 
on  the  Wednesday  morning.  I was  troubled  about  it.  Mr. 
Bartlett  was  in  bed  alone  when  1 was  shown  into  the  front  room, 
and  1 told  him  I wished  to  see  Mrs.  Bartlett.  I then  apologised 
to  Mrs.  Bartlett  for  what  had  taken  place  on  the  previous  Tuesday. 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills — Mr.  Bartlett  requested  the  servant  to 
show  me  downstairs  when  1 told  him  that  1 wished  to  speak  to 
Mrs.  Bartlett. 

ExamirMion  continued — saw  Mrs.  Bartlett  downstairs,  and 
told  her  that  I was  distressed  that  she  should  say  such  a thing. 
I do  not  remember  saying  anything  more.  This  would  be 
between  ten  and  eleven  o'clock  in  the  morning.  I then  left,  and 
did  not  return  until  the  next  day,  Thursday,  the  31st,  about  two 
or  three  o'clock  in  the  afternoon.  I saw  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Bartlett. 
He  seemed  nervous,  and  he  was  in  great  pain  from  his  teeth.  He 
said  he  was  expecting  the  doctor,  and  lie  asked  me  to  call  and  tell 
him  to  come.  I went  to  Dr.  Leach,  but  I did  not  see  him  I 
think  I saw  the  servant-maid,  and  I left  a message.  1 returned 
direct  to  the  house  at  Claverton  Street.  I saw  Dr.  Leach  there, 
in  the  front  room.  After  he  left  Mrs.  Bartlett  told  me  that  the 
doctor  had  said  that  mortification  of  the  jaw  had  set  in.  1 left 
about  six  or  seven  o'clock. 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills — ^Mrs.  Bartlett  told  me  that  in  his 
room,  the  front  room.  1 think  Mr.  Bartlett  was  present,  but  T 
cannot  swear  to  that. 

Easammation  continued — About  what  time  did  you  leave? — 
left  about  half-past  four  or  five.  That  was  the  last  time  I saw 
Mr.  Bartlett.  He  was  up  then  and  getting  ready  to  go  to  the 
dentist,  if  I remember  rightly.  I did  not  go  to  the  house  the 
following  day,  the  Friday.  I received  a letter  from  Mrs.  Bartlett 
that  day,  but  I destroyed  it  within  a few  days  of  receiving  it. 

As  near  as  you  can  rememl^er,  what  was  stated  in  that  letter 
to  you  ? How  did  she  address  you  ? — cannot  remember — I think 
as  " Dear  Mr.  Dyson."  She  said  that  it  was  her  grief  to  tell 
me  that  Mr.  Bartlett  had  died  somewhere  about  two  o'clock,  as  far 
as  she  could  judge,  and  she  requested  me  to  call  and  see  her  on 
the  Saturday,  about  the  middle  of  the  morning.  I believe  she 
addressed  me  in  that  letter  as  " Dear  Mr.  Dyson." 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills — Surely  you  can  tell.  You  are  not 
likely  to  forget  a thing  of  that  sort,  I should  have  thought.  How 
was  she  in  the  habit  of  addressing  you  in  her  letters? — She  used 
my  Christian  name  in  some  letters,  but  I cannot  swear  to  this 
particular  one. 

BmmimUon  cmtm/ued — called  on  the  morning  of  Saturday, 
2nd  January,  about  eleven  or  twelve  o’clock,  and  I saw  Mrs.  Bart- 

143 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Rev.  Georc e Dyaon 

lett  in  the  front  room  upstairs.  I did  not  write  to  say  that  I was 
coming.  Mr.  Bartlett  was  lying  in  the  back  room. 

Now,  Mr.  Dyson,  state  fully  what  passed  between  you  and 
Mrs.  Bartlett  on  this  Saturday  morning  about  the  death,  and 
everything  she  said  ? — She  asked  me  whether  I did  not  consider  it 
was  sudden.  I said  it  was  very  sudden.  She  then  described 
the  night  of  his  death  and  said,  “ 1 was  sitting  by  the  beds-i<le 
reading  and  had  my  hand  or  arm  round  Edwin’s  foot,’'  and  I 
think  she  said  she  dozed  o£E  to  sleep,  and  when  she  woke  through 
the  feeling  of  pain  in  her  arm  she  found  Mr.  Bartlett  turned  over; 
she  expected  that  the  turning  over  had  caused  this  cramp  in  her 
arm;  she  gave  him  brandy,  and  then  she  roused  the  household. 
That  was  the  account  she  gave  me. 

Eh? — That  was  what  she  told  me  of  the  death. 

Anything  said  about  the  doctor? — ^About  the  doctor? 

Yes? — ^That  he  had  ordered  a post-mortem,  and  she  told  me 
that  it  was  to  be  held  that  afternoon.  I asked  her  what  he  had 
died  from. 

Was  this  before  the  post-mortem? — This  was  before  the  post- 
mortem. She  said  the  doctor  told  her  that  he  thought  some  small 
blood  vessel  must  have  broken  -near  the  heart  or  on  the  heart — I 
cannot  be  sure  of  which.  I do  not  recollect  anything  more. 

How  long  did  you  stay  with  her  on  that  occasion  ? — I remained 
to  the  post-mortem,  which  was  held  in  the  afternoon.  I was  down- 
stairs during  the  post-mortem,  and  Mrs.  Bartlett  was  downstairs 
also. 

Did  anything  further  pass  between  you  on  the  subject  of  her 
husband's  death? — Not  that  1 remember. 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills — ^Mr.  Wood,  the  solicitor,  and  my  co- 
executor, was  also  downstairs  with  us.  1 think  he  came  in  the 
afternoon,  but  1 cannot  be  sure  about  the  time. 

Exammation  continued — He  came  before  the  post-mortem. 
After  the  post-mortem  we  went  upstairs  to  hear  the  result.  Mrs. 
Bartlett  went  upstairs  with  us.  Mr.  Bartlett,  sen.,  was  there  the 
latter  part  of  the  time  of  waiting?  We  all  went  up  into  the  front 
room  to  hear  the  result.  Besides  the  doctors  there  were  present 
Mrs.  Bartlett,  Mr.  Bartlett,  sen.,  Mr.  Wood,  and  myself.  Dr. 
Leach  said  that  they  had  conducted  a careful  post-mortem 
examination,  and  had  failed  to  discover  the  cause  of  death.  He 
said  that  the  rooms  were  to  be  locked  and  sealed  and  handed  over 
to  the  coroner. 

Did  Dr.  Leach  in  the  presence  of  Mrs.  Bartlett  say  anything 
else  about  the  cause  of  death — anything  that  had  happened  at  the 
post-mortem? — Not  to  my  knowledge.  I went  away  with  Mrs. 
Bartlett  to  Mrs.  Matthews.  I think  we  left  the  house  about  four 
or  five  o'dock.  I took  Mrs.  Bartlett  to  Mr.  and  Mrs.,  Matthews, 
at  98  Friern  Boad,  East  Dulwich,  they  being  friends  of  Mrs. 
Bartlett’s.  On  the  way  I had  some  conversation  with  her.  I asked 
144 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Rev.  Georce  Dvsoa 

her  if  she  had  used  the  chloroform,  and  she  said,  I have  not 
used  it.  1 have  not  had  occasion  to  use  it.  The  bottle  is  there  just 
as  you  gave  it  me.”  She  also  said,  ” This  is  a very  critical  time 
with  me.”  She  told  me  to  put  away  from  my  mind  the  fact  that 
she  had  possessed  this  medicine  chest,  and  that  I had  given  her  the 
chloroform.  She  told  me  that  I must  not  worry  her  about  it. 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills — ^What  did  you  say  to  her  when  she 
said  it  was  a critical  time  and  you  must  put  away  the  fact  that 
you  helped  her  to  have  chloroform? — cannot  remember  what  the 
answer  was. 

Examination  continued — told  her  on  our  way  to  tHe  Matthews 
that  1 should  see  the  doctor  and  would  ask  him  about  the  post- 
mortem. I do  not  recall  any  more  conversation  on  the  way. 
When  we  got  to  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Matthews  I went  into  the  house  and 
saw  Mrs.  Matthews.  I do  not  think  I had  any  conversation  with 
Mrs.  Bartlett  in  the  Matthews’  house.  She  introduced  me  to 
Mrs.  Matthews  as  Mr.  Dyson,  and  then  she  told  Mrs.  Matthews  of 
the  post-mortem,  and  she  told  her  of  the  fact  that  she  had  come  to 
stay  with  her.  Nothing  further  passed  in  the  house  that  night 
about  the  death  or  about  chloroform,  so  far  as  I recollect.  1 
next  saw  Mrs.  Bartlett  on  the  morning  of  Monday,  the  4:th,  at 
Mrs.  Matthews.  She  was  alone  when  I first  saw  her.  I had  seen 
Dr.  Leach  that  day,  and  he  had  shown  me  some  notes  of  the  post- 
mortem. I went  direct  from  Dr.  Leach  and  asked  Mrs.  Bartlett 
what  she  had  done  with  the  chloroform. 

What  did  she  say? — She  was  very  angry  with  me  for  troubling 
her  about  it. 

But  what  did  she  say? — She  said,  Oh,  damn  the  chloro- 
form I ” 

How  did  she  behave?  What  did  she  say  or  do? — She  was 
angry.  She  stamped  her  foot  on  the  ground,  and  she  rose  from 
her  chair,  and  then  Mrs.  Matthews  came  in.  Mrs.  Matthews  left 
the  room  again,  and  I had  a further  conversation  with  Mrs. 
Bartlett.  • 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills — ^Was  nothing  further  said  when 
Mrs.  Matthews  came  in  during  the  time  she  was  in  the  room? — 
Mrs.  Matthews  a^ed  her  what  she  was  troubled  about,  but  1 do 
not  remember  her  reply.  Mrs.  Matthews  then  left  the  room, 
and  I told  Mrs.  Bartlett  about  my  having  seen  Dr.  Leach,  and  that 
either  dbilorodyne  or  chloroform,  some  drops  of  it,  had  been  found 
in  the  stomach  of  the  deceased  Mr.  Bartlett.  Then  she  asked  me 
to  tell  her  which  it  was — either  chlorodyne  or  chloroform — and  I 
told  her  1 was  not  sure,  that  I confused  the  two. 

Sxcmination  eontinued—l  then  spoke  to  her  about  her  hus- 
band’s sickness,  of  which  she  had  told  me.  I asked  Mrs.  Bartlett 
whether  she  had  not  told  me — or,  rather,  1 emphasised  the  fact 
to  her,  that  i^e  had  told  me  that  her  husband  was  sufiering  from 
L 145 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Rtt7.  George  Dyeen 

this  internal  complication,  and  probably  then  I spoke  of  the  fact 
that  nothing  ‘was  said  about  this  complication  in  the  post-mortem, 
and  1 asked  her  if  she  did  not  tell  me  that  her  husband's  life 
would  be  a short  one.  I said,  You  did  tell  me  that  Edwin 
was  going  to  die  shortly." 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills — ^WelU — She  said  she  did  not. 

Exarn/mation  contirmed — ^What  did  you  say? — I said  that  I 
was  a ruined  man. 

What  more,  if  anything? — ^Mrs.  Matthews  was  in  the  room  at 
that  time.  She  had  come  in. 

What  more? — She  said  I had  better  leave. 

Did  you  say  anything  more,  do  you  remember,  about  a 
ruined  man? — ^No,  I do  not  think  I said  anything  but  that.  I 
then  left. 

Before  you  left  was  anything  said  about  a piece  of  paper? 
— do  not  remember  it — cannot  remember  everything  that  was 
said. 

When  Mrs.  Matthews  was  in  the  room  was  there  anything  said 
about  poetry? — ^Tes,  I did  mention  to  Mrs.  Bartlett  a piece  of 
poetry — asked  her  for  a piece  of  poetry  that  I had  given  her.  I 
am  not  prepared  to  swear  it  was  on  this  occasion  I asked  her  that. 
To  my  recollection  it  was  on  the  Wednesday.  When  I did  men- 
tion it  she  said  it  was  at  Claverton  Street.  It  was  some  verses 
about  hereof  that  I had  written,  and  had  given  to  her  some  few 
weeks  previously.  Her  husband  read  it.  I do  not  recollect  any- 
thing more^  that  passed  on  Monday,  the  4th.  I saw  her  again 
the  same  night.  She  spoke  about  the  chloroform  then. 

What  did  she  say? — told  her  I was  going  to  make  a clean 
breast  of  the  aSair,  that  I should  tell  everything  I knew  about  it. 
I cannot  say  if  that  was  on  that  occasion,  or  whether  it  was  earlier 
in  the  day  that  I said  it.  She  said  she  did  not  wish  me  to  do  so. 
She  did  not  wish  me  to  mention  the  chloroform.  I cannot  recall 
her  exact  words,  but  the  substance  of  it  was  that  I was  not  to  say 
anything  about  the  chloroform.  • I repeated  my  intention. 

How  did  you  repeat  your  intention?  What  was  the  substance 
of  what  you  said? — ^The  substance  was  this,  that  I was  puzzled,  I 
was  very  much  perplexed  and  alarmed,  and  the  best  thing  I could 
do  in  this  matter  was  to  tell  what  I knew  of  the  matter  and  of  my 
having  bought  the  chloroform.  I do  not  remember  what  was  said 
to  that,  I cannot  remember  whether  she  made  any  answer.  I 
returned  her  a watch  which  she  had  given  me  on  the  Saturday, 
and  which  she  told  me  her  husband  had  left  to  me,  as  it  was  his 
wish  that  I should  have  that  watch  in  memory  of  him  when  he  was 
gone.  _ She  gave  it  to  me  before  the  post-mortem. 

Did  anything  more  pass  between  you  on  that  Monday?— Yes, 
I gave  her  money  for  a cheque  that  I had  changed  for  her.  She 
had  a^ed  me  to  change  a cheque  for  £6,  signed  by  her  husband. 

I4a 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Rev.  Georce  Dmn 

I had  received  that  sum  two  or  three  weeks  before  the  death.  It 
was  for  expenses  which  1 had  been  put  to  when  1 was  with  them 
at  Dover.  She  told  me  it  was  Mr.  Bartlett’s  wish  that  1 should  not 
suffer  any  expenses  owing  to  my  connection  with  them.  The 
cheque  was  for  £5,  and  1 gave  her  back  £4  that  evening.  Nothing 
more  happened  that  evening.  I cannot  remember  when  1 gave 
her  the  change  for  the  sovereign  which  I had  received  to  buy  the 
chloroform  with.  The  four  bottles  which  had  contained  the 
chloroform  were  still  at  my  lodgings.  I did  not  see  Mrs.  Bartlett 
on  the  Tuesday,  but  I saw  her  on  Wednesday,  the  6th. 

Where  do  you  say  the  bottles  were  on  the  evening  of  Monday, 
the  4th? — On  the  evening  of  Monday  they  were  on  Wandsworth 
Common.  When  I said  that  they  were  at  my  lodgings  I thought 
that  Saturday  was  the  day  that  was  being  referred  to.  On  the 
Sunday  morning  I had  thrown  the  four  bottles  away  on  Wands- 
worth Common  on  the  way  to  chapel  at  Putney.  I pointed  out  to 
one  of  the  officers  in  this  case  where  I had  thrown  these  bottles 
away.  1 threw  them  away  as  I walked  along  the  path.  As  far  as 
1 know  I took  the  label  ofi  the  one  bottle,  and  the  others  would 
have  the  labels  on,  1 presume.  On  Tuesday,  the  5th,  I went  to 
see  the  solicitor,  Mr.  Wood.  He  gave  me  some  letters  for  Mrs. 
Bartlett,  and  1 left  these  at  Mrs.  Matthews’  house  on  the  Wed- 
nesday. 

Were  these  unopened  letters  which  had  come  by  post,  or  were 
they  a bundle  of  opened  letters? — ^They  were  some  sorted  letters — 
two  or  three  dozen,  I should  think. 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills — ^They  were  letters  that  I had  been 
sorting  with  Mr.  Wood  at  his  office.  They  were  old  letters  to 
Mr.  Bartlett  from  various  people. 

Bxammation  cmtvMied-—!  gave  Mrs.  Bartlett  the  letters  on 
the  Wednesday.  Mr.  Wood  showed  me  the  will,  but  whether  then 
or  later  I do  not  know.  The  first  time  I saw  it  was  in  Mr.  Wood’s 
possession  at  the  office,  but  whether  on  the  Tuesday,  or  later,  1 
cannot  say.  * 

On  the  Wednesday  Mrs.  Matthews  and  Mrs.  Bartlett  were 
going  to  Claverton  Street,  and,  as  it  was  snowing  heavily,  I 
fetched  a cab  for  them,  and  went  with  them  to  Peckham  Eye 
Station.  1 do  not  remember  anything  passing  between  me  and 
Mrs.  Bartlett. 

Do  you  remember  whether  on  the  Wednesday  any  conversation 
took  place  between  you  and  Mrs.  Bartlett? — There  was  sure  to 
have  been  some  conversation. 

Anything  about  Mr.  Bartlett’s  death  and  the  chloroform? — 
Probably,  but  I really  cannot  remember.  On  that  day  Mrs. 
Bartlett  and  I came  down  to  Victoria  by  train,  and  I went  to  buy 
some  cord  for  Mrs.  Bartlett’s  boxes,  arranging  to  meet  Mrs.  Bart- 
lett and  Mrs.  Matthews  at  Dr.  Leach’s.  v^en  I went  to  Dr. 

147 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


IUt.  Geom  Dyapn 

Leach's  I found  that  they  had  gone  on  to  Claverton  Strwt.  I 
saw  Dr.  Leach,  and  I inquired  for  Mrs.  Bartlett  and  Mrs. 
Matthews.  He  told  me  that  they  had  gone  on  to  the  house,  and 
as  I was  leaving  he  gave  me  Mrs.  Bartlett’s  keys  and  told  me  that 
the  coroner  had  done  with  the  rooms,  and  requested  me  to  take 
the  keys  to  her.  I went  on  to  Claverton  Street,  but  I was  not 
allowed  to  go  into  the  house.  Afterwards  I saw  Mrs.  Bartlett 
outside  the  door  at  Claverton  Street,  and  1 gave  her  the  keys  and 
said  that  the  doctor  had  sent  them  for  her.  She,  Mrs.  Matthews, 
and  I returned  to  Dr.  Leach’s  house.  Nothing  passed  between 
Mrs.  Bartlett  and  me  then. 

I attended  the  inquest  before  the  coroner,  Mr.  Braston-Hicks, 
on  7th  January.  It  was  held  at  Pimlico,  near  the  Buckingham 
Palace  Road.  Mrs.  Bartlett  was  also  present.  I was  not  repre- 
sented on  that  occasion,  but  I heard  the  witnesses  examined.  The 
inquest  was  adjourned  to  4th  February. 

Up  to  that  time  had  you  told  anybody  except  Mrs.  Bartlett 
that  you  had  purchased  this  chloroform^ — Yes. 

To  whom  had  you  mentioned  it 

Mr.  Claeke — object. 

Mr.  Justice  Wills — think  it  is  inadmissible  at  this  stage. 
Something  may  occur  to  make  it  evidence,  but  at  this  stage  we 
cannot  go  into  it,  I think. 

Exarnination  contmmd — ^After  the  inquest  Mrs.  Bartlett  and 
I had  dinner  together  in  a private  room  at  Mrs.  Stuard’s,  the  con- 
fectioner’s shop.  1 should  think  we  were  together  there  for  about 
an  hour.  We  discussed  the  recent  events  which  had  happened — 
the  post-mortem,  and  my  having  bought  the  chloroform,  and  so 
forth.  She  told  me  I was  distressing  myself  unnecessarily,  and  1 
gave  her  to  understand  that  I thought  I had  reasons  to  be  alarmed. 
I remember  one  thing  she  said — ^that  if  T did  not  incriminate 
myself  she  would  not  incriminate  me.  I told  her  I was  aware 
of  my  perilous  position,  but  I was  not  afraid  to  stand  to  the  truth 
as  it  affected  me,  and  I should  persist  in  my  intention  to  make  a 
full  and  complete  statement.  t was  aware  that  the  contents  of 
the  stomach  had  been  sent  to  be  analysed.  I next  saw  Mrs. 
Bartlett  on  Saturday,  the  9th  January;  1 met  her  accidentally  at 
Mr.  Matthews’  place  of  business,  and  returned  with  both  of  them 
to  Mr.  Matthews’  house.  On  that  occasion  we  discussed  the  sub- 
ject; 1 was  anxious  to  know  what  really  had  become  of  Ihe  chloro- 
form, and  I told  her  that  I was  puzzled.  She  was  indignant  at 
me,  and  asked  me  why  I did  not  charge  her  outright  with  having 
given  it  to  him.  I do  not  recollect  anything  more  that  was  said 
about  the  chloroform. 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills — ^When  she  said,  “ Why  do  you  not 
charge  me  outright  with  having  given  it  to  him,”  what  did  you 
say? — cannot  tell  you  every  word  that  I said,  but  it  was  to  the 
effect  that  I was  not  prepared  to  do  such  a thing  as  that.  I believe 

148 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Rar.  Georce  Dyson 

it  was  on  that  occasion  that  she  told  me  she  had  poured  the 
chloroform  away  and  thrown  the  bottle  out  of  the  carriage  window 
as  she  was  coming  from  London  on  Wednesday,  6th  January. 

Exammation  contirmed — That  was  in  the  train  returning 
from  London  to  Peckham  Itye,  which  is  the  station  near  to  the 
Matthews.  I cannot  remember  anything  more  that  was  said  on 
the  9th.  The  funeral  took  place  on  the  Friday,  and  I saw  Mr. 
Matthews  that  day.  The  communication  I made  to  Mr.  Matthews 
was  not  on  that  day;  it  was  on  Wednesday,  the  6th.  I did  not 
see  Mrs.  Bartlett  after  the  9th. 

1 attended  the  adjourned  inquest  on  4;th  February.  Mrs. 
Bartlett  was  there.  I was  legally  represented,  and  I presume 
Mrs.  Bartlett  was  also  represented.  The  inquest  was  again 
adjourned  to  lllh  February.  I was  called  as  a witness  before  the 
coroner  then,  and  I presume  that  1 was  cautioned. 

Were  you  called  at  your  own  request? — was  to 

attend  as  a witness.  I believe  Mrs.  Bartlett  was  arrested  that 
day  after  I had  been  examined.  1 was  examined  again  on  the 
15th,  and  again  on  the  18ih,  when  there  were  one  or  two  questions 
put  to  me.  I was  arrested  on  the  18th  on  the  charge  of  wilful 
murder,  and  I was  afterwards  taken  before  the  magistrate  and 
committed  for  trial. 

X am  twenty-eight  years  of  age  now.  I have  kissed  Mrs. 
Bartlett  in  her  husband’s  presence. 

I believe  by  the  rules  of  your  body,  the  Wesleyan  body,  the 
earliest  period  at  which  you  can  marry  after  you  enter  the 
ministry  is  two  years? — ^There  is  a prohibition  of  from  six  to 
seven  years.  I could  have  married  next  October  or  thereabouts. 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills — ^In  June  last  I was  lodging  at  12 
Thornton  Road,  Wimbledon. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  Claeke — ^The  last  day  that  you  had 
any  conversation  with  Mrs.  Bartlett  was  Saturday,  9th  January, 
I understood  you  to  say? — It  was. 

On  that  day  you  spoke  to  her  about  the  chloroform? — ^Yes. 

And  she  was  indignant? — ^Very  indignant. 

And  she  said,  why  did  not  you  charge  her  outright  with 
having  given  chloroform  to  her  husband  ? — ^Words  to  tibat  effect. 

It  was  from  her  lips  you  first  heard  that  suggestion? — ^Yes- 

Had  you  made  the  suggestion  before? — No,  I had  not;  it  was 
from  her  lips  I first  heard  it. 

In  an  indignant  tone? — ^Very,  indeed. 

And  since  that  day  you  have  never  conversed  with  her  ? — Since 
that  day,  not  up  to  my  arrest. 

You  have  just  said,  in  answer  to  my  friend,  that  you  have 
kissed  her,  and  kissed  her  in  her  husband’s  presence? — ^I  have. 

Was  there  any  secret  between  you,  or  any  secret  understanding 
between  you,  apart  from  her  husband? — ^None. 

You  knew  nothing  of  Mr.  Bartlett  and  his  wife  until  you 

149 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


R«v«  George  Drion 

had  aoen  them  at  the  chapel  at  which  you  ministered  J— No.  1 
understood  the  learned  counsel  asked  me  the  question  with  regard 
to  a secret  understanding,  too,  in  reference  to  marriage,  and  I 
answered  it  in  that  r^ard. 

As  to  marriage,  it  was  not  a secret  understanding? — ^It  was 
not  a secret  understanding. 

There  was  no  secret  understanding  with  regard  to  marriage. 
Was  there  any  impropriety  of  conduct  between  you  and  Mrs. 
Bartlett? — ^There  was  not;  that  is  to  say,  I kissed  her. 

That  would  be  an  impropriety — you  do  not  defend  that? — No. 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills — You  mean  to  say  it  was  only  in  her 
husband's  presence? — ^And  out  of  his  presence. 

Groas-examindtion  continued — ^Whatever  your  relations  were 
with  regard  to  Mrs.  Bartlett,  they  were  relations  that  were  known 
to  her  husband? — Oh,  yes. 

We  have  the  letter  which  you  wrote  in  September  in  which 
you  addressed  him  as  “ My  dear  Edwin  "? — ^Tou  have. 

And  about  that  time  you  had  taken  to  speak  of  him  as  Edwin  ? 
— ^Tes. 

And  he  of  you  as  George? — ^Yes. 

Did  he  speak  of  his  wife  to  you  as  Adelaide? — ^Yes. 

I see  in  that  letter  you  say,  **  I have  from  a boy  ever  been 
longing  for  the  confidence  and  trust  of  others,  and  1 have  never 
been  so  perfectly  happy  as  when  in  the  possession  of  this,”  &c. 
” You  have  shown  yourself  a true  friend.”  Had  he  at  the  time 
that  you  wrote  that  letter  placed  implicit  confidence  and  trust  in 
you? — He  hadj  so  I judged. 

And  you  believed? — ^Yes. 

And,  in  your  belief,  did  he  continue  to  repose  that  implicit 
confidence  and  trust  in  you  to  the  very  last  hour  of  his  life? — ^He 
did. 

Now,  in  that  letter  you  say — ” I respond  from  my  heart  to 
your  wish  that  our  friendship  may  ripen  with  the  lapse  of  time.” 
That  was  your  real  and  sincere  wish,  was  it? — ^That  was  my  wish. 

And  did^  you^  down^  to  the  last  day  of  his  life  endeavour  to 
reciprocate  his  friendship  and  to  deserve  his  confidence? — did. 

Were  you  sincerely  solicitous  for  his  welfare? — Yes. 

And  do  you  believe  that  every  day  of  that  illness  you  and  his 
wife  were  both  anxious  for  his  welfare  and  tried  to  serve  him?— 
1 do. 

You  have  said  just  now  that  you  have  lately  ascertained — 
that  is,  since  you  were  examined  at  the  coroner's  inquest — ^that 
only  one  year  instead  of  two  had  to  elapse  before  you  were  allowed 
to  marry? — ^That  is  so. 

Down  to  the  time  that  you  were  examined  on  lllth  January 
you,  believed,  did  you  not,  that  you  could  not  in  any  case  be 
allowed  to  marry  till  October,  1887  ?— I had  that  belief. 

150 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Rev.  Georce  Dsrton 

You  had  never  inquired  particularly? — ^What  do  you  mean 
by  a particular  inquiry? 

You  told  my  learned  friend,  when  you  were  examined  before 
the  coroner,  that  you  had  inquired,  and  you  found  your  previous 
impression  was  a mistaken  one? — I did  not  inquire,  but  I was 
told  so. 

Told  so  by  some  one  who,  in  your  belief,  knew? — ^Yes. 

And  you  believe  that  your  present  impression  is  the  true  one? 
— ^Yes. 

Then  you  had  never  inquired  before  you  were  examined  before 
the  coroner  as  to  whether  your  impression  was  the  true  one— 
whether  you  knew  you  could  be  married  before  1887  ? — ^No,  I never 
made  any  inquiry. 

Had  you  ever  mentioned  to  Mr.  Bartlett  the  question  of  the 
time  at  which  you  could  be  married? — Never. 

Or  to  Mrs.  Bartlett? — may  have  done  so. 

And,  if  you  did  so,  you  mentioned  your  then  impression  that 
you  could  not  be  married  until  October,  1887? — That  I cannot 
swear. 

Try  and  recall  your  thoughts.  You  have  told  me,  down  to 
the  time  when  you  were  examined  before  the  coroner,  that  was 
your  belief? — Yes. 

Then,  if  you  mentioned  the  matter  to  Mrs.  Bartlett,  you  would 
have  mentioned  the  date  you  believed  to  be  the  true  one? — ^Yes; 
but  I cannot  swear  that  I did. 

You  have  no  distinct  recollection  of  having  mentioned  it  at 
all;  is  that  what  you  mean ? — ^No ; 1 have  a recollection  of  mention- 
ing it,  but  I have  no  recollection  of  what  you  ask,  namely,  that  we 
could  not  be  married  till  October,  1887. 

1 am  suggesting  to  you  that,  if  you  mentioned  it,  you  must 
have  mentioned  the  date  which,  in  your  belief,  was  the  true  one. 
You  would  tell  her  the  truth  about  it,  would  you  not? — Certainly. 

Then  was  it  this  that  you  mentioned  to  her,  that  you  could 
not  be  married  for  two  years?— vYes. 

Was  it  that  you  did  not  recollect  that  you  mentioned  the  date  ? 
— Yes. 

You  did  not  mention  the  date,  but  you  mentioned  that, 
according  to  the  rules  of  your  body,  you  could  not  be  married  for 
two  years? — Precisely. 

The  subject  of  marriage  had  been  mentioned  and  talked  about 
between  you  and  Mr.  Bartlett  during  his  lifetime? — Marriage  in 
general,  do  you  mean  ? 

We  will  begin  with  marriage  in  general? — ^Yes. 

And  you  became  aware  that  at  a very  early  period  of  your 
acquaintance  he  had  peculiar  ideas  on  the  subject  of  marriage?— 
Yes. 

Your  earliest  visit  was  paid  to  him  in  your  pastoral  character 
—it  was  that  which  induced  you  to  call  ? — ^It  was. 


151 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Rev.  George  Dyion 

And  very  early  in  your  acquaintance  did  he  ask  you  whether 
you  thought  the  teadiing  of  the  Bible  was  distinctly  in  favour  of 
having  one  wife  1 — ^He  did. 

Did  he  suggest  to  you  that  his  idea  was  that  there  might  be  a 
wife  for  companionship  and  a wife  for  service? — ^He  did. 

And  you  combated  that  view,  and  told  him  that  the  teaching 
of  the  Bible  was  distinctly  contrary  to  it? — The  general  tenor  of 
the  Bible. 

By  Mr.  Justiob  Wills — ^What  do  you  mean  by  a wife  for 
service?  Is  it  household  drudgery? — ^Yes;  he  explained  it  house- 
hold duties — ^the  general  management  of  the  household. 

And  what  did  companion&ip  mean? — He  explained  that  he 
thought  the  companion  should  be  educated  and  intelligent,  and 
should  be  his  confidante  in  all  matters. 

I really  want  to  understand  what  he  meant ; were  both  of  them 
to  be  his  bedfellows? — He  never  mentioned  that  to  me,  my  lord. 

Did  he  say  that  neither  of  those  two  wives  was  to  be  his  com- 
panion in  that  sense? — ^He  did  not  refer  to  that  question  at  all. 

Oross-eoKimim^tion  continued — Just  let  me  ask  you,  Mr,  Dyson, 
did  you  not  clearly  understand  that  the  suggestion  was  that  one 
was  to  be  the  wife  to  him ; or  do  you  mean  that  he  suggested  to  you, 
when  visiting  him  in  that  character  and  talking  to  him  about 
Scriptural  matters-— he  suggested  to  you  that  a man  should  have 
two  wives  in  that  full  and  complete  sense? — ^Yes;  so  I understood 
him. 

That  would  have  struck  you  as  a most  outrageous  suggestion, 
would  it  not? — It  struck  mo  as  a very  remarkable  suggestion. 

^ What  suggested  itself  as  the  explanation  to  you — amoral 
obliquity  or  simply  carelessness? — Oddity. 

Because  that  is  the  man  to  whom  afterwards  you  wrote  in  the 
terms  I have  read  to  you  in  that  letter.  Do  you  mean  to  suggest 
that  the  man  you  wrote  to  in  those  terms  had  actually  suggested 
to  you,  a Christian  minister,  that  he  should  be  allowed  any  sexual 
connection  with  two  women  ? — ^No ; tie  never  asked  me  such  a thing  j 
he  simply  asked  me  whether  the  Bible  admits  polygamy. 

But  he  never  suggested  it  for  himself? — ^No. 

He  suggested  it  for  nobody?— Yes;  I understood  it  to  be  a 
general  suggestion. 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills— Did  not  it  strike  you  as  an  unwhole- 
some sort  of  talk  in  the  family  circle? — ^Not  coming  from  him, 
my  lord ; he  was  a man  who  had  some  strange  ideas. 

Cross-examination  continued — ^He  made  no  secret  of  them? 

No;  he  told  me  not. 

And  he  would  refer  to  those  ideas  from  time  to  time,  would 
he?— -He  did  once  or  twice;  not  frequently. 

In  his  wife's  presence  ? — ^I  think  not. 

One  moment.  Do  you  mean  to  say  that  there  was  nothing 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Rev,  Georce  Djrion 

between  you  and  Mr.  Bartlett  which  was  kept  secret  from  his  wifef 
— 1 am  sorry  I cannot  undertake  to  say  yea  or  nay  to  that. 

But  to  ^e  best  of  your  belief,  was  there  any  matter  of  secrecy 
or  confidence  between  you  and  Mr.  Bartlett  from  which  his  wife 
was  excluded? — ^Your  question  does  not  touch  the  case. 

Will  you  answer  the  question,  and  not  judge  it?  Was  there 
any  matter  of  secrecy  or  confidence  between  you  and  Mr.  Bartlett 
from  which  his  wife  was  excluded  ? — I know  of  no  secret. 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills — ^Was  this  serious  talk,  or  was  it  as  a 
man  might  say  joking,  I think  it  would  be  a good  thing  to  have 
two  wives;  one  for  show  and  one  for  work  ''?  He  might  say  that 
in  a joking  sort  of  way.  Was  it  that,  or  was  it  seriously  said? — 
It  was  said  tentatively  to  me,  half  playfully,  the  first  time;  but  1 
have  a recollection  of  his  speaking  more  seriously  of  it  on  some 
later  occasion. 

Cross-examination  continued — You  told  us  that  you  have 
noticed  that  he  put  his  hand  on  his  side,  and  complained  of  some 
convulsive  pain,  I think  you  said? — Yes. 

How  early  did  you  notice  that? — think  all  through  the  time 
of  my  knowledge  of  him. 

Would  it  be  as  early  as  June  or  July,  to  begin  with? — ^Yes;  I 
think  I noticed  it  at  Merton  Abbey. 

Did  you  notice  that  a clutching  occurred  at  other  times,  or 
on  special  occasions? — Yes;  when  he  has  taken  wine  I have  seen  him 
put  his  hand  to  his  side  sharply,  in  that  way. 

And  did  he  tell  you  what  it  was  that  was  afiecting  him? — 
No,  he  did  not. 

Did  he  not  say  anything  about  it? — ^No;  I do  not  remember 
that  he  did. 

Of  course,  that  happened  before  his  wife,  when  his  wife  has 
been  there? — Yes;  at  the  dinner  hour,  for  instance. 

When  that  happened  to  him,  what  did  he  do?  Did  he  get  up 
from  his  chair,  or  leave  ofi  taking  wine,  or  what  did  he  do? — 
He  would  leave  off  taking  wine,* 

And  continue  his  dinner? — Yes. 

And  the  thing  would  pass  off,  whatever  it  was? — ^Yes,  ap- 
parently. 

How  early  was  the  question  of  the  possible  duration  of  his  life 
mentioned  in  his  presence  or  by  him? — I cannot  say  how  early. 

Was  not  it  at  Dover? — I cannot  swear  that  he  mentioned  the 
question  of  the  duration  of  his  life  at  Dover. 

Did  not  he  mention  to  you  at  Dover  something  about  his 
condition,  his  health — Shaving  regard  to  that  matter?-— He  did. 

What  was  it  he  said  at  Dover? — ^He  told  me  that  he  was  not 
the  strong  man  that  once  he  was.  1 am  not  giving  you  the  exact 
words. 

I do  not  ask  for  the  exact  words.  I only  ask  to  be  allowed 

153 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Rer.  Geovce  Dyioii 

to  hear  what  you  say.  Did  he  say  what  had  been  the  cause  of 
the  change  in  him? — He  attributed  it  to  overwork. 

Do  you  know  that  while  he  was  at  Dover  he  was  working 
extremely  hard  ? — think  he  used  to  get  up  at  three  in  the  morning, 
and  go  to  business  from  Dover. 

He  would  get  up  at  three  in  the  morning  and  come  up  by  the 
tidal  train — the  boat  express? — ^Yes. 

And  go  back  to  his  wife,  at  what  time  of  night  ? — have  known 
him  come  back  at  ten. 

By  Mr.  Justioi  Wills — ^How  long  were  you  at  Dover? — I 
spent  two  or  three  days  there  on  two  or  three  occasions. 

Six  or  seven  days? — ^Yes. 

CrosB-exami/nation  continued — ^And  it  was  between  your  two 
visits  to  Dover  that  you  wrote  the  letter  to  which  I have  referred? 
—Yes. 

Eeferring  to  the  first  visit,  you  say  “ Dear  old  Dover,”  Ac. 
“ Thank  you  for  the  telegram.  I am  looking  forward  with  much 
pleasure  to  next  week.”  Next  week  you  were  to  visit  him  again, 
were  you  not  ? — ^Yes. 

Was  that  which  you  have  told  us  the  only  reference  he  made 
while  you  were  at  Dover  to  the  matter  of  his  health  being  broken  ? 
— ^That  is  all  that  I remember. 

But  he  was  depressed  and  low-spirited  from  time  to  time, 
was  he? — ^Yes;  he  seemed  to  me  to  be.  I am  not  stating  quite  the 
correct  thing.  You  say  from  time  to  time;  it  was  more  latterly — 
the  last  two  months  that  I knew  him. 

But  even  when  he  was  at  Dover,  were  not  there  times  when 
he  was  depressed  and  despondent? — ^1  did  not  notice  it. 

The  statement  you  have  made  about  his  saying  he  was  not  the 
strong  man  he  was — ^that  is  all  you  recollect  him  saying  at  Dover? 
— ^With  regard  to  his  health. 

His  wife  had  told  you,  in  his  presence,  that  Edwin  was  very 
low-spirited,  and  did  not  think  he  would  live  long? — can  swear 
to  her  having  said  he  was  low-sI)irited.  I cannot  swear  to  her 
having  said  that  he  could  not  live  long — ^that  is,  in  his  presence. 

How  early,  then,  was  it  that  you  were  told  by  anybody  that 
his  life  was  not  likely  to  be  a long  one? — When  I first  went  to 
Claverton  Street. 

Not  until  then? — cannot  swear,  but  it  is  possible. 

I am  suggesting  to  you  that,  as  early  as  your  visit  to  Dover, 
that  was  the  conversation  in  his  presence  about  his  life  not  being 
likely  to  be  a long  one.  Will  you  swear  that  that  did  not  happen  ? 
— cannot  swear  to  that. 

You  say  that  he  was  an  odd  man,  or  a man  with  curious  ideas 
—I  forget  the  phrase? — did  not  say  thatj  I beg  pardon;  I said 
it  was  an  odd  question,  in  answer  to  my  lord. 

Mr.  JtTSTiOB  Wills — ^You  said  more  than  that;  you  said  it 
was  an  oddity. 

164 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Rev.  Georie  Dyion 

Cross-exammation  continued — L man  of  strange  ideas  in  con- 
nection with  the  married  state  ] — That  is  so. 

And  the  terms  upon  which  people  should  live  in  married  life; 
is  that  so? — ^Tes. 

Do  you  know  of  books  which  he  used  to  read  with  regard  to 
that  matter  ? — do  not. 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills — I had  better  ask  it  now,  or  I shall 
have  to  ask  it  afterwards.  What  do  you  mean  by  that — a man 
of  strange  ideas  in  connection  with  the  terms  upon  which  persons 
should  live  in  married  life?  Tell  us  what  you  mean? — I thought 
the  question  referred  to  what  I said  before — ^to  having  two  wives. 

Do  you  remember  anything  more  ? — ^No. 

Cross-examination  continued — ^You  were  on  the  closest  terms  of 
intimacy  with  him — as  brother  to  brother? — ^Yes. 

Did  ho  talk  to  you  about  the  books  he  read? — Yes. 

Did  he  never  talk  to  you  about  this  book?  It  is  called 
" Esoteric  Anthropology;  or,  the  Mysteries  of  Man  ”? — ^It  is  the 
first  time  I have  heard  of  the  book. 

Are  you  sure? — Certain. 

Do  you  mean  to  say  you  never  saw  it  in  his  possession? — ^Not 
to  know  it. 

Just  look  at  it  (handing  the  book  up  to  the  witness)  ? — This  is 
the  fir^  time  I have  seen  that  book. 

Do  you  mean  to  say  that  Mr.  Bartlett  has  not  talked  to  you 
about  Dr.  Nichols? — ^No;  Mr.  Bartlett  never  mentioned  him  to 
me. 

Do  you  mean  to  say  that  Mr.  Bartlett  never  mentioned  the 
name  of  Dr.  Nichols  to  you? — ^Never. 

Are  you  certain? — ^Yes;  I never  heard  him  mention  Dr.  Nichols. 

Well,  now,  had  he  any  other  strange  ideas  with  regard  to  mar- 
riage ? — I never  heard  him  offer  any. 

Did  he  ever  make  reference  to  marriage  between  you  and  Mrs. 
Bartlett  after  he  should  bo  dead  ? — ^Yes. 

How  early  did  he  make  fliat  reference — ^how  early  in  your 
acquaintance  ?— I should  think  it  would  be  about  the  latter  end  of 
October. 

They  were  then  at  Claverton  Street? — I must  explain;  ho 
did  not  mention  the  words  there.  I have  conveyed  a wrong  im- 
pression. 

If  you  think  any  answer  of  yours  is  doing  yourself  or,  still 
more,  anybody  else,  injustice,  correct  it? — ^He  has  made  statements 
which  left  no  doubt  on  my  mind  but  that  he  contemplated  Mrs. 
Bartlett  and  myself  being  ultimately  married. 

And,  to  the  best  of  your  recollection,  was  that  statement 
first  made  in  October  ? — ^About  that  time. 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills — I must  ask  you  to  be  a little  more 
definite,  and  tell  us  what  he  did  say.  It  was  a very  remarkable 
conversation,  probably  such  a one  as  never  occurred  in  the  ex- 

155 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Rev.  Georee  Dyson 

perience  of  any  man  in  Court  before,  and  therefore  must  be 
impressed  upon  your  mind.  What  was  it  he  said? — can  re- 
member this;  he  had  been  finding  some  fault  with  Mrs.  Bartlett, 
not  angrily,  but  correcting  something,  and  1 said  to  him,  If 
ever  she  comes  under  my  care,  I shall  have  to  teach  her  differently,  ” 
or  some  such  words. 

Cross-escaminaiion  continued — Well,  go  on? — ^He  smiled  and 
said  something  to  the  effect  that  he  had  no  doubt  1 should  take 
good  care  of  her.  1 have  a clear  impression  of  such  words  passing 
between  me  and  Mr.  Bartlett. 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills — Is  it  possible  that  this  was  the  first 
of  sudi  conversations?  It  seems  very  extraordinary  for  a man 
to  suggest  to  another  man,  if  ever  his  wife  came  under  his  care, 
that  he  should  have  to  teach  her  differently.  Was  that  the  first 
time? — The  first  time  that  I can  recollect. 

Gross-eamwmation  continued — ^Let  me  suggest  challenging 
your  recollection,  only  trying  your  memory.  According  to  you, 
the  first  conversation  began  by  your  saying,  If  ever  she  comes 
in  my  care  ? — Yes. 

Does  not  that  remind  you  that  there  must  have  been  some  con- 
versation, at  some  previous  time  or  other,  about  her  becoming 
your  wife  ? — ^Not  necessarily. 

You  were  speaking  of  it  as  a thing  assumed  and  known 
between  you  as  likely  to  happen? — ^Precisely. 

Was  it  assumed  by  you  ?— I so  understood  it. 

Then  there  must  have  been  a previous  conversation? — ^Not 
touching  the  question  of  marriage. 

What  previous  conversation  can  you  suggest  as  having  estab- 
lished that  understanding  in  consequence  of  which  you  have  spoken  ? 
— Conversations ; one  was  Mr.  Bartlett’s  letter  to  me. 

Now,  I have  reminded  you  that  letter  is  dated  23rd  Sep- 
tember, and  was  written  by  you  while  they  were  at  Dover? — Yes. 

Let  me  read  it  again;  it  may  help  you : ‘‘My  dear  Edwin, — 
Thank  you  very  much  for  the  brdlherly  letter  you  sent  me  yester- 
day. I am  sure  I respond  from  my  heart  to  your  wish  that 
our  friendship  may  ripen  with  the  lapse  of  time,”  Ac.?— Yes. 

Now,  what  was  the  conversation  upon  which  you  say  that 
letter  was  founded? — conversation  which  took  place  at  Putney, 
when  Mr.  Bartlett  came  to  see  me. 

Was  that  the  conversation  when  he  told  you  that  he  had  made 
his  will  and  made  you  the  executor  ? — It  was. 

What  was  the  conversation? — ^This  is  a very  delicate  matter 
for  me. 

Mr.  Justice  Wills — ^No,  no;  we  have  long  outstepped  the 
bounds  of  delicacy. 

Qro&e~e9Hmmation  contwued — ^When  he  came  to  see  you  at 
Putney  he  had  come  up  from  Dover.  He  came  to  tell  you  he  had 
15a 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Rev.  George  Dyioa 

made  a will,  leaving  his  money  to  his  wife  and  leaving  you  as  hie 
executor  1 — ^Yes. 

Now,  then,  what  did  he  tell  you  at  that  time  about  you  and 
his  wife? — ^Well,  I told  him  that  there  was  no  denying  the  fact 
that  I was  growing  very  attached  to  her,  and  that  I wished  to  let 
him  know  it ; that  it  was  disturbing  me  in  my  work ; and  I asked 
him  whether  it  would  not  be  better  for  me  to  discontinue  my 
friendship  with  them,  and  he  said,  ‘‘  Why  should  you  discontinue 
it?  ” 

Well  1 — He  told  me  I had  been  a benefit  to  her ; she  liked  my 
preaching,  and  it  had  helped  and  had  benefited  her.  He  showed 
me  one  of  her  convent  letters,  which  she  had  written  to  him  from 
the  convent,  which  was  a very  devotional  letter;  and  he  said  he 
should  like  me  to  endeavour  to  lead  her  back  more  closely  to  that 
frame  of  mind  or  disposition  of  heart.  He  said  he  had  confidence 
in  me,  and  that  he  should  be  pleased  if  1 would  continue  as 
friendly  as  I had  been  with  them.  That  was  the  substance  of  what 
he  said. 

What  did  he  say  with  reference  to  the  possible  future? — He 
did  not  mention  the  future,  except  that  he  looked  forward  to  it. 

To  what? — He  said  nothing  very  much;  but  what  he  said  of 
the  matter  was,  that  he  hoped  we  should  have  some  pleasant  inter- 
course. 

Mr.  JusTiOB  Wills — There  is  nothing  in  that. 

Cross-examination  continued — ^What  about  his  will  ? — He 
mentioned  the  will  to  me,  and  said  that,  as  a proof  of  confidence 
in  me,  he  had  selected  me,  with  his  legal  man,  to  act  as  executor. 

Just  let  me  remind  you;  you  were  telling  the  husband  that 
you  had  become  attached  to  his  wife,  and  you  say  that  the  husband 
expected  you,  did  you  not,  to  continue  the  intimacy? — ^Precisely. 

He  desired  that  it  should  continue? — ^Tes. 

He  spoke  of  appointing  you  executor  to  his  will? — He  did. 

Was  it  not  then  that  he  said  that,  if  anything  happened  to 
him,  you  and  Mrs.  Bartlett  might  come  together? — ^No;  that  was 
later — at  Claverton  Street. 

And  you  told  us  that,  so  far  as  you  can  remember,  nothing 
more  was  said  at  that  interview  in  September? — ^Not  touching 
upon  that  matter;  but  we  had  a long  conversation  together  not 
pertinent  to  this  inquiry. 

Not  touching  upon  future  relations  between  yourself  and 
Mrs.  Bartlett? — No.  I must  correct  one  thing.  You  asked  me 
• if  he  did  not  say,  If  anything  happens  to  me,  you  two  may 
come  together.^’  Those  words  have  gone  down  upon  the  deposi- 
tions; but  the  coroner  put  it  in  that  way.  I suppose  he  said  that; 
and  I said,  ‘‘Yes;  something  very  much  like  that.”  But  I did 
not  say  that  he  used  those  words. 

That  being  suggested  to  you  as  the  meaning,  you  accepted 
it? — Yes. 


157 


Adelaide  Bartlett 


Rev.  George  Dgaon 

And  accept  it  now? — do. 

Can  yon  remember  what  the  words  were  in  which  it  was 
clothed,  because  it  is  not  a usual  thing  to  take  place? — No,  I 
cannot. 

There  is  one  question  I ought  to  ask  you.  I need  scarcely  ask 
you,  as  a gentleman,  you  had  at  that  time  said  nothing  to  Mrs. 
Bartlett  about  your  feelings  independent  of  Mr.  Bartlett? — 1 
regret  to  say  that  1 had. 

Did  you  tell  him  that  you  had? — ^Yes. 

You  said  that  you  had.  Did  he  ask  you  to  write  to  her? — 
He  asked  me  to  write  to  her  before,  when  they  went  away  to 
Dover. 

But  the  situation  was  altered? — ^Yes;  I understand  you.  He 
did  ask  me  on  one  occasion  to  write  to  her. 

And  you  wrote? — ^Yes. 

And  is  that  the  letter  to  which  he  referred  in  the  letter  which 
has  been  mentioned,  which  I will  read  again — Dear  George, — 
Permit  me  to  say  that  1 feel  great  pleasure  in  thus  addressing 
you  for  the  first  time,^’  Ac.  That  letter  had  been  read  to  him,  as 
he  said,  by  his  wife? — ^Yes. 

After  that,  you  wrote  letters  to  her  from  time  to  time? — I did. 

Which  she,  at  your  request,  returned  to  you? — ^No. 

What? — Do  1 understand  the  question,  that  she  had  returned 
the  letters  I wrote  to  her? 

That  she  has  returned  your  letters  to  you? — ^No,  not  one  that 
I remember;  no,  1 should  surely  recollect  it. 

Did  not  you  ask  her  for  them? — I remember  her  showing  me 
one  of  my  letters. 

Did  you  ask  her  for  them?^ — ^No. 

Do  you  say  that? — say  that. 

By  Mr.  Justiob  Wills— Why  were  you  so  anxious  to  get 
that  piece  of  poetry? — Because  it  was  sentimental. 

Oross-examination  contin/ued — ^Were  not  the  letters  senti- 
mental?— ^No,  not  as  that  is;  they^were  aSectionate,  but  not  senti- 
mental. 

Now,  Mrs.  Bartlett  had  told  you  that  she  had  no  friends  of 
her  own? — ^Yes. 

And  that  her  husband^s  friends  were  not  kind  to  her  ? — ^Yee. 

And  you  have  told  us  that  she  said  they  did  not  understand 
her,  she  being  a foreigner,  and  that  her  husband  had  confidence 
and  affection  for  you,  and  so  on,  and  that  he  knew  you  would  be 
a friend  to  her.  On  that  occasion  that  was  said  in  his  presence, 
was  it  not? — ^Not  in  his  presence. 

Did  not  you  know  from  him  that  his  friends  were  not  kind 
to  her? — ^Yes. 

When  had  he  told  you  that?— I believe  he  told  it  me  at 
Merton — at  least  not  so  strongly  at  Merton ; he  said  that  they  did 
168 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Rey.  George  Dgaon 

not  understand  her,  and  he  was  accounting  for  the  quietness  of 
their  lives,  and  he  gave  that  as  a reason. 

Did  he  mention  her  being  a foreigner? — ^Yes. 

And  he  told  you  she  was  at  a later  period? — ^Yes;  he  em- 
phasised that  at  a later  period. 

And  did  he  express  to  you  at  all  times,  as  to  the  future,  that 
he  hoped  you  would  be  a friend  to  her  when  he  was  gone? — I 
remember  Mrs.  Bartlett  telling  me  that. 

In  his  presence? — ^Noj  he  was  not  present. 

Where  was  it? — ^At  Claverton  Street. 

After  the  illness? — It  was  when  they  first  went  to  Claverton 
Street. 

Now,  he  told  you  of  her  having  nursed  him  affectionately 
previously? — ^Yes. 

I think  you  gave  us  the  expression  that  if  you  had  known  her, 
as  he  had,  for  twelve  years,  and  known  how  affectionately  she  had 
nursed  him,  you  would  not  have  doubted  her? — ^Yes. 

Earlier  than  that,  had  he  spoken  to  you  of  the  previous  ill- 
ness during  which  she  had  nursed  him? — ^Yes. 

When  did  he  speak  to  you — ^what  did  he  tell  you? — He  spoke 
of  it  after  hearing  me  preach  at  Merton ; that  would  be  in  August. 
I must  correct  myself. 

By  all  means  ? — ^It  was  after  my  return  from  Dover  th^  came 
to  hear  me  preach  at  Merton. 

Shall  we  alter  it  from  Merton  to  when  he  came  to  hear  you 
preach  at  Merton? — Yes. 

And  brought  her  with  him? — ^Yes. 

And  it  was  after  the  service — ^what  did  he  tell  you  after  the 
service? — was  troubled  with  indigestion,  and  he  said  he  had 
suffered  himself  from  dyspepsia,  and  she  had  nursed  him  during 
the  illness. 

Did  he  say  where  this  had  been? — ^No. 

Did  he  say  when  it  had  been  ? — Some  years  before  that  time. 

Did  he  tell  you  where  they«had  lived  at  the  time? — ^Probably 
he  would. 

Do  you  remember? — do  not  remember. 

Did  he  tell  you  what  doctor  had  attended  him? — He  did  not 
mention  any  doctor  attending  him. 

You  can  tell  us  no  more  about  it,  then? — ^No. 

Did  he  ever  tell  you,  or  spea^  to  you,  about  Mrs.  Bartlett's 
one  confinement? — think  he  did. 

When  did  he  tell  you  of  it? — ^At  Merton. 

Did  you  learn  from  him  then  that  some  few  years  before  she 
had  for  the  only  time  in  their  married  life  been  pregnant? — ^He  told 
me  nothing  about  that. 

What  did  he  tell  you  ? — Simply  that  she  had  this  child  which 
died. 


169 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Rev.  Georsa  Dyson 

Did  he  tell  you  that  was  the  only  one? — ^Noj  I do  not  think 
he  mentioned  more  than  that. 

No,  1 suppose  not ; there  were  no  more  to  mention,  you  know ; 
that  was  the  only  child  she  had? — Yes. 

You  knew  that  from  him? — ^Yes. 

Was  it  spoken  of  by  him  in  Mrs.  Bartlett's  presence  on  any 
occasion? — ^Not  that  I remember;  indeed,  I may  say  no.  1 only 
remember  his  mentioning  it  to  me  once. 

Do  you  know  that  Annie  Walker  attended  Mrs.  Bartlett  in 
her  confinement? — ^Yes. 

Who  told  you  that? — ^Mrs.  Matthews. 

That  was  long  afterwards;  did  not  you  know  it  before  his 
death? — ^No,  not  before  his  death. 

Are  you  sure  about  that? — Certain. 

Annie  Walker  was  mentioned? — ^Yes. 

By  Mrs.  Bartlett? — ^Yes. 

Do  you  mean  to  say  that  Mrs.  Bartlett  never  said  Annie 
Walker  attended  her  in  her  confinement? — She  said  that  Annie 
Walker  attended  her  husband  in  his  sickness. 

Do  you  mean  to  say  that  she  did  not  say  that  Annie  Walker 
attended  her  in  her  confinement? — ^No. 

Are  you  positive  ? — ^Positive.  I am  upon  oath,  and  I say  so ; 

1 am  positive. 

Tell  me  the  date  that  Annie  Walker  was  first  mentioned? — 

I cannot. 

Did  you  ever  speak  to  Mrs.  Bartlett  about  that  one  child? — 
She  spoke  to  me  about  it  when  we  were  passing  the  cemetery  at 
Merton. 

How  early  in  the  acquaintance? — That  would  be  before  we 
went  to  Dover, 

Just  try  and  recall  when  Mrs.  Bartlett  told  you  about  the 
birth  of  the  child.  Mrs.  Bartlett  spoke  to  you  about  it  when  you 
were  near  the  cemetery.  Was  not  Annie  Walker's  name  mentioned 
in  reference  to  that  matter  ? — ^No^  I cannot  swear  that  it  was. 

Do  you  undertake  to  pledge  yourself  absolutely  that  it  was 
not? — think  I may. 

You  think  you  may? — ^Yes;  she  was  often  spoken  of. 

Excuse  my  suggesting  to  you  if  she  was  so  often  spoken  of, 
that  makes  it  more  likely.  Do  you  undertake  to  swear  that  she 
was  not  spoken  of  with  regard  to  that?— She  may  have  been,  but 
I cannot  swear  to  it.  I cannot  pledge  myself  to  what  I am  not 
certain  of. 

She  was  so  often  spoken  of;  and  Dr.  Nichols  was  so  often 
spoken  of — so  frequently,  that  you  say  you  were  interested  in 
him?— Yes. 

Was  that  before  Mr.  Bartlett? — ^No;  I never  remember  Dr. 
Nichols  being  mentioned  before  Mr.  Bartlett. 

160 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Rev.  Geom  Dyton 

Let  me  ask  you  again.  You  have  told  me  you  had  no  secret 
with  Mrs.  Bartlett  from  her  husband.  Were  not  you  in  the  habit 
of  talking  in  the  most  friendly  and  affectionate  way  with  Mr. 
Bartlett  about  his  illness  and  his  business? — ^Excuse  me;  I do  not 
think  I have  stated  that  I had  any  secrets  with  Mrs.  Bartlett  which 
her  husband  did  not  know  of.  You  asked  me  about  an  expression 
of  marriage,  and  I qualified  it  in  that  way. 

Do  you  mean  to  say  that  you  had  a secret  with  Mrs.  Bartlett 
about  Dr.  Nichols? — ^Yes. 

How  early? — After  they  went  to  Claverton  Street. 

Why?  Had  you  anything  to  do  with  Dr.  Nichols? — ^Nothing. 

I do  not  understand.  If  you  were  in  the  fullest  confidence 
with  Mr.  Bartlett,  why  did  you  not  talk  about  Dr.  Nichols  with 
him  ? — ^Because  Mrs.  Bartlett  said  he  might  not  like  my  mentioning 
it  to  him  because  of  an  internal  af9.iction. 

You  understood  that  Dr.  Nichols  had  never  seen  him? — ^No. 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills — ^What  had  the  internal  affliction  to 
do  with  it? — He  advised  Mrs.  Bartlett  when  Mr.  Bartlett  was 
worse. 

Without  seeing  him? — ^Yes;  and  he  prescribed  as  to  the 
nursing,  and  so  on. 

Oross^etJcamiimtion  cty/itirmed — ^Now,  as  soon  as  Mr.  Bartlett 
was  taken  ill,  you  saw  Dr.  Leach? — ^Yes. 

You  were  at  that  time  on  honest  and  true  friendship  with  Mr. 
Bartlett  ? — ^Yes. 

Did  you  ever  say  to  Dr.  LeacH  that  it  would  be  as  well  for 
him  to  see  Dr.  Nichols? — did  not. 

Mr.  Justice  Wills — ^For  him  to  see  Dr.  Nichols? 

Mr.  Claekb — ^Yes. 

The  Witness — ^It  never  occurred  to  me  to  suggest  such  a thing. 

GroBS-examination  continued — You  knew  his  name  and  you 
knew  his  address? — Yes. 

And  you  did  know  as  a fact^that  Dr.  Nichols  was  to  be  found 
at  the  Fopstone  Boad? — ^Yes. 

Why  did  you  not  suggest  to  the  doctor  that  it  would  be  as 
well  for  him  to  know  what  Dr.  Nichols  had  prescribed? — never 
made  any  suggestion  to  the  doctor. 

What  for  ? — I should  have  considered  it  impertinence. 

Impertinence,  when  you  were  on  terms  of  brotherhood  with 
the  man  who  was  ill  ? — ^Yes ; I should  have  considered  it 
impertinence. 

Do  you  really  mean  to  say  that,  in  your  relations  with  Mr. 
and  Mrs.  Bartlett,  you  would  have  considered  it  impertinent  to 
suggest  what  another  medical  man’s  opinion  might  be? — Yes,  1 do. 

Now,  Mr.  Bartlett  told  you  he  had  been  suffering  from 
dysentery,  did  he  not? — ^He  did. 

That,  according  to  his  account,  he  used  to  suffer  from  that? — 
u 161 


Adelaide  Bardett 


Rev.  George  DgioB 

I told  you  just  now  it  was  some  years  before  I got  to  know  Mrs. 
Bartlett. 

We  do  not  understand  that  that  had  anything  to  do  with  the 
internal  disease? — did  not  understand  you  as  referring  to  the 
internal  disease. 

And  you  did  not  understand  that  he  mentioned  distinctly 
that  that  had  nothing  to  do  with  the  internal  disease? — I did  not 
know  of  the  internal  disease  then.  I knew  of  the  dysentery  before 
we  went  to  Dover. 

No  name  of  a disease  was  mentioned,  was  it? — No. 

But  only  something  upon  which  Mr.  Bartlett  would  be  sensi- 
tive?— ^That  was  how  it  was  explained  to  me;  it  was  put  to  me 
in  that  way.  Mrs.  Bartlett  put  it  that  he  was  sensitive  as  to  a 
question  of  his  sickness. 

You  were  with  him  at  the  very  beginning  of  his  illness,  were 
you  not? — ^Yes. 

I think  you  went  with  him  and  his  wife  to  the  Dog  Show? — 
I did. 

On  the  9th  of  December? — ^Yes. 

And  was  he  taken  ill  in  the  course  of  the  evening? — ^He  was. 

Had  he  appeared  to  you  before  that  time  to  be  getting  into 
an  ailing  and  low  condition? — He  seemed  very  much  worn  out  at 
night  when  he  returned. 

I think  you  describe  him  to  us  as  being  very  weary,  very  much 
depressed,  and  complaining  of  sufiering  from  sleeplessness  ? — 
During  the  sickness. 

From  the  beginning  of  the  sickness — at  the  beginning  of  the 
sickness? — Yes;  not  before  the  sickness. 

You  just  said  that  he  seemed  ailing  up  to  the  time,  and  then, 
when  it  began,  you  describe  him  as  very  weary,  very  much  de- 
pressed, and  sufiering  from  sleeplessness? — ^Yes. 

^ Did  he  from  that  day  up  to  the  last  time  you  saw  him  com- 
plain of  sleeplessness  and  pain?— Yes j throughout  the  sickness. 

Ab  that  sickness  wore  on  did  he  become  more  depressed?— 
He  varied. 

You  have  seen  him  crying,  have  you  not  ? — ^Yes,  once. 

Are  you  sure  it  was  only  once? — am  certain  about  it;  I only 
remember  seeing  him  once. 

Could  you  say  what  date  that  was  at  all?— I think  it  was 
just  before  I went  home  before  Christmas. 

When  did  you  go? — went  on  the  Monday  in  Christmas 
week. 

That  would  be  Monday,  21st  December? — ^Yes. 

Now,  did  you  see  Dr.  Leach  early  during  the  time  of  the 
illness? — ^In  the  first  week  of  it. 

Can  you  tell  me  about  how  many  days  after  he  was  taken  ill 
you  had  any  conversation  with  Dr.  Leach? — should  think  five 
or  six. 

162 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Rev.  George  Dyson 

Do  you  know  anything  of  Dr.  Leach  being  called  in — ^how  it 
was  he  was  sent  for? — ^Because  Mr.  Bartlett  was  so  unwell. 

Why  was  he  selected  ? It  was  not  anybody  he  knew  before  1 — 
I do  not  know  why  he  was  selected. 

You  say  that  Monday,  21st  December,  was  the  day  when  he 
was  crying? — ^No;  I did  not  name  the  day.  I said  it  was  some 
time  just  before  1 left. 

I thought  you  did? — ^No;  1 could  not  name  days. 

Mr.  Justice  Wills — ^He  gave  the  date  of  his  own  journey. 

Cross-eixmrLvnation  contiimed — At  the  time  he  was  crying,  was 
he  in  very  low  spirits,  and  talking  about  not  recovering? — ^He 
spoke  very  little  indeed,  and  1 can  recollect  nothing  that  he  said 
to  me. 

Nothing  that  he  said  about  being  alarmed  about  himself,  or 
anything  of  that  kind? — No;  I cannot  remember  it. 

Is  not  it  the  impression  on  your  mind  that  at  that  time  he 
was  very  low-spirited,  and  that  he  should  not  recover? — ^Yes;  I 
have  the  impression  that  he  thought  he  would  not  recover. 

When  you  came  back  on  Saturday,  26th,  you  found  him  still 
worse,  did  you  not? — Not  worse. 

You  said  that  you  came  back  on  Saturday,  26th,  and  he  was 
very  prostrate,  there  was  great  sleeplessness,  and  that  he  said  he 
was  glad  you  had  returned,  and  he  was  afraid  his  wife  was 
breaking  down  in  nursing  him? — Yes,  he  said  that. 

Did  he  tell  you  on  that  day,  Saturday,  of  his  having  had 
worms? — No. 

On  the  Sunday — ^the  next  day? — Yes. 

You  told  us  you  were  there  from  two  o’clock  to  seven  or  eight 
on  Saturday.  You  went  again  on  Sunday — at  what  time? — 
About  nine  or  a quarter-past  in  the  evening. 

And  then  he  was  still  worse,  and  more  depressed,  was  he  not? 
— No;  I thought  he  was  brighter  on  the  Sunday, 

You  told  me  he  was  depressed  on  the  Sunday? — On  the 
Saturday.  • 

You  correct  yourself,  then;  you  said  he  was  brighter  on 
Saturday,  and  much  depressed  on  Sunday,  I am  putting  it  to 
you  whether  on  this  visit,  Saturday  and  Sunday,  he  was  very  ill, 
very  prostrate  and  depressed? — ^Well,  it  is  difficult  to  tell  you; 
he  contradicted  himself. 

Contradicted  himself? — ^Yes;  he  asked  me  on  Sunday  whether 
any  one  could  be  lower  than  he  was  without  passing  away  alto- 
gewer,  and  he  attributed  that  to  the  medicine  for  worms. 

He  asked  you  whether  you  thought  it  possible  for  a man  to 
be  lower  than  that  without  passing  away  altogether? — Yes. 

And  that  very  great  depression  you  attributed  to  the  appear- 
ance of  the  worms? — I cannot  say  it  was  very  great  depression. 
He  had  that  impression  of  his  state,  but  he  did  not  seem  cast  down 
in  spirits.  He  seemed  to  be  bearing  up  well. 


163 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Rer.  Georse  Dyaon 

According  to  that  expression,  ha  was  thinking  of  himself  as 
one  actually  on  the  edge  between  life  and  death? — ^Yes. 

But  !he  was  cheerful  ? — ^He  seemed  to  bear  up  very  well 
against  it. 

Did  you  see  the  doctor  on  the  26th  or  27th  ? — ^What  days  would 
that  be? 

The  Saturday  or  Sunday? — ^No. 

How  long  were  you  there  on  the  Saturday,  as  far  as  you  re- 
member?— called  about  three,  and  I was  there  till  between  five 
and  six. 

Between  five  and  six  in  the  afternoon? — ^Yesj  I spent  the 
afternoon  there. 

On  the  26th  did  not  Dr.  Leach  visit  him  three  times,  on  the 
third  occasion  staying  several  hours,  because  his  condition  was 
so  bad? — So  Mr.  Bartlett  told  me  on  the  Sunday.  He  did  not  tell 
me  he  visited  him  three  times  j he  told  me  he  was  there  that  length 
of  time. 

Several  hours? — Several  hours. 

Did  he  tell  you  the  condition  of  his  bowels  was  such  that  on 
the  26th  he  had  taken  two  purgative  draughts  and  also  a dose  of 
croton  oil,  and  that  he  also  had  been  galvanised  in  the  abdomen  ? — 
Yes;  he  described  that  to  me. 

And  that  he  had  taken  santonins  as  well  ? — No ; ho  did  not. 

At  all  events  he  had  taken  purgatives  and  croton  oil,  and  had 
been  galvanised,  and  had  hot  tea  and  cofiee,  and  did  he  tell  you 
all  had  been  no  use  ? — Yes. 

Did  he  tell  you  that  the  doctor  had  given  it  up  in  despair  ? — 
Yes ; that  he  was  going  to  try  later  in  a day  or  two. 

Now,  with  regard  to  the  sleeplessness,  did  you  know  he  had 
been  having  frequent  injections  of  morphia? — Yes. 

Did  he  tell  you  that  even  that  would  not  give  him  sleep,  and 
that  he  got  up  and  walked  about  in  the  night  ? — ^Yes. 

And  was  it  with  regard  to  that  that  he  spoke  of  his  wife 
being  likely  to  break  down  under  the  strain  of  nursing  him  ? — Yes. 

Now,  on  the  evening  of  the  27th  you  have  told  us  that  Mrs. 
Bartlett  spoke  to  you  about  chloroform.  I think  you  said  you  went 
out  together.  As  a matter  of  fact,  your  going  out  together  was  an 
accident,  was  it  not? — ^Yes;  that  is  to  say,  as  I came  to  the  door, 
I found  her  going  out  to  post  some  letters;  and  I went  as  far  aS 
the  post,  and  then  returned  to  the  house  wit^  her. 

1 must  just  ask  one  other  question  on  this  with  regard  to 
Annie  Walker ; you  have  spoken  of  Dr.  Nichols,  and  Annie  Walker 
has  been  mentioned  several  times,  and  you  said  Mrs.  Bartlett  told 
you  Annie  Walker  had  gone  to  America.  Will  you  undertake  to 
sa7  it  was  not  Dr.  Nichols  who  was  mentioned  as  being  a doctor  in 
America — an  American  doctor — and  that  that  was  the  way  America 
was  mentioned? — Yes;  I understood  he  was  an  American — an 
American  Toy  extraction. 

164 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Rev.  George  Dgeon 

Tou  must  have  understood  that  from  Mrs.  Bartlett? — ^Yes. 

Well,  then,  she  mentioned  America  to  you  in  connection  with 
the  name  of  Dr.  Nichols? — ^Yes,  but  it  was  rather  a jumble.  Do 
you  mean,  did  she  do  that  at  any  time  or  on  any  particular  occa- 
sion? 

I say  at  any  time? — Oh,  yes,  she  did. 

Now,  you  see  that  Mr.  Bartlett  told  you  morphia  would  not 
give  him  sleep,  and  he  used  to  get  up  and  walk  about.  Did  you 
have  any  conversation  with  him  about  mesmerism? — 1 think  it  is 
likely  1 did. 

You  alone  can  tell  us  whether  you  did  or  not — did  you? — 
Yes,  I did  at  Merton. 

At  Merton  ? — ^Yes. 

Did  you  know  him  then  as  being  a believer  in  mesmerism  ? — 
No. 

What  ? — I did  not  know  him  as  being  a believer  in  mesmerism. 

Did  not  he  tell  you  he  believed  in  mesmeric  force? — do  not 
remember  his  telling  me  he  believed  in  it ; he  asked  me  if  I did. 

Did  he  suggest  he  had  mesmerised  anybody,  or  that  you  had 
mesmerised  him? — ^No. 

Did  he? — 1 cannot  remember  him  doing  that. 

Cannot  you  tell  us  what  sort  of  a conversation  it  was  about 
mesmerism? — I told  him  a story  in  connection  with  mesmerism  on 
this  occasion. 

Am  I to  take  it  you  introduced  the  subject,  or  did  he  ask  you 
if  you  believed  in  it? — believe  I introduced  it. 

You  believe  you  introduced  it? — ^Yes. 

Did  you  ascertain  that  it  was  a subject  to  which  he  had  given 
attention? — ^No,  I did  not. 

Did  you  ever  hear  that  he  believed  in  mesmeric  influences 
of  a very  singular  kind? — ^No. 

Did  he  never  tell  you  almost  at  the  close  of  his  illness  that 
that  very  night,  the  28th,  when  he  was  so  desperately  ill  he  had 
got  up  and  stood  for  two  hours  waving  his  hands  about  over  his 
sleeping  wife  ? — No,  he  did  not  tell  me  fiiat. 

Do  you  mean  you  never  heard  anything  about  that  before  that 
at  all  ? — ^In  evidence  I have. 

I am  not  speaking  of  evidence? — ^No,  I have  never  heard  that. 

Nothing  at  all  ? — No. 

Not  before  you  were  examined — ^not  before  the  inquest  took 
place,  at  all  events? — ^No. 

Do  try  and  remember? — do  not  remember. 

You  mean  to  say  you  never  heard  of  mesmerism  at  all,  or 
anything  of  that  kind? — ^No;  not  till  I heard  it  in  evidence. 

What  was  your  income  ? — ^About  £100  a year. 

Had  you  mentioned  that  to  Mr.  Bartlett  or  to  Mrs.  Bartlett 
at  any  time? — ^They  both  knew  it;  yes. 

It  is  no  reproach.  I do  not  mean  it  at  all  unpleasantly, 

165 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Rev.  Gcovgtt  Dytoa 

but  they  knew  you  were  not  competent  enough  to  bear  extra  ex- 
penses— expenses  of  travelling,  and  so  on,  and  Mr.  Bartlett  ofiered 
you  the  season  ticket  to  Dover? — ^Yes. 

Which  you  declined,  and  then  afterwards  he  gave  you  a season 
ticket  by  which  you  travelled  from  Putney  to  Victoria? — ^Yes; 
Putney  to  Waterloo. 

Did  you,  during  his  life,  ever  say  anything  to  Mrs.  Bartlett  to 
suggest  1±Lat  you  would  marry  her  immediately  on  his  death  if 
he  ^ould  die? — ^Never. 

The  understanding  that  at  some  time  or  other  you  and  she 
might  come  together,  you  tell  me,  was  known  to  him  ? — ^Yes. 

There  was  no  more  than  that  understanding  between  you  and 
Mrs.  Bartlett,  was  there? — ^No  more. 

Now,  you  have  told  us  that  Mrs.  Bartlett  mentioned  to  you 
the  way  in  which  chlorofoim  was  to  be  used,  about  sprinkling  it 
upon  a handkerchief:  was  it  for  the  purpose  of  soothing  her  hus- 
band?—Yes. 

Did  you  understand  that  her  husband  was  at  all  violent,  then  ? 
— ^Yes;  ehe  told  me  that  in  a previous  sickness  he  was  violent. 

And  she  was  in  some  apprehension  of  that  state  of  things  re- 
curring?— Yes — described  it  as  a paroxysm. 

And  was  it  by  way  of  soothing  him  and  quieting  him  in 
these  paroxysms  you  understood  it  was  to  be  used? — Yes;  to  give 
him  sleep. 

Now,  you  have  told  us  about  your  getting  the  chloroform; 
at  the  time  you  got  the  chloroform,  and  you  went  to  the  chemist’s 
whom  you  knew,  and  wrote  to  your  friend,  and  so  on,  was  there 
the  faintest  or  the  remotest  idea  in  your  mind  that  it  could  be  used 
for  any  dangerous  or  improper  purpose? — ^Not  the  faintest. 

I mean  there  was  no  such  idea  of  that  kind  crossing  your  mind 
with  regard  to  danger  from  the  misuse  of  this  chloroform  you 
were  getting? — Not  in  this  case;  no. 

You  had  never  seen  Mrs.  Bartlett  with  a medical  book,  had 
you — Squire’s  ” ?— Yes,  I have  seen  her  with  that. 

You  have  seen  " Squire’s  ” I — ^Yes. 

Mr.  JusTiOB  Wills — You  speak  of  “ Squire’s  ” as  one  which 
everybody  knows;  is  it  a book  of  domestic  medicine? 

Mr.  Clarke — ^It  is  a pharmaceutical  book,  my  lord:  the 
Companion  to  the  British  Pharmacopoeia.” 

Mr.  PoLAEi) — ^This  is  the  very  book  that  was  found,  my  lord : 
Companion  to  the  British  Pharmacopoeia.” 

The  Witness — ^Yes. 

Where  had  you  seen  that  ?— 

At  Claverton  Street. 

You  yourself  had  some  knowledge  and  some  studies  in  medical 
science,  had  you  not? — ^Not  medical;  no. 

But  do  you  know  much  about  chloroform? — know  very  little 
about  it,  if  that  was  in  the  sense  you  ask. 

166 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Rev.  Geom  Dvion 

Have  you  ever  seen  it  administered? — ^No. 

You  put  it  not  in  the  sense  1 ask.  You  may  know,  not  the 
ohemioal  properties  of  chloroform,  but  the  medical  property,  as 
aneesthetic,  and  the  limits  with  which  it  might  safely  be  used, 
and  all  that? — ^No  j what  1 knew  was  that  chloroform  was  used  for 
soothing  and  sleeping  purposes;  nothing  more. 

And  your  idea  was  that  putting  a few  drops  on  a handkerchief 
was  a thing  for  which,  as  far  as  your  knowledge  went,  chloroform 
might  be  safely  used  ? — ^Yes. 

You  say  you  did  not  mention  it  to  Mr.  Bartlett  that  you  had 
got  the  chloroform,  and  you  understood  that  Mrs.  Bartlett  did 
not  desire  it  to  be  mentioned  to  him? — ^Not  specifically  the  chloro- 
form. 

What? — ^Not  that  the  chloroform  was  not  specifically  to  be 
mentioned,  but  the  disease,  the  affliction,  for  which  she  wanted  it. 
1 understood  from  her  these  paroxysms  arose  from  that. 

She  never  asked  you  not  to  mention  you  had  got  the  chloro- 
form?— No.  I think  I ought  to  state,  in  justice  to  myself,  there 
was  a visitor  there,  and  I could  not  give  it  to  her  in  his  presence. 

If  the  visitor  had  not  been  there,  would  you  have  given  it 
to  her  in  the  presence  of  Mr.  Bartlett?— I cannot  say.  I might  or 
might  not. 

At  all  events,  she  had  not  asked  you  to  keep  it  secret? — No. 

Now,  I should  like  to  clear  this.  Was  it  on  that  very  day 
when  chloroform  was  given  to  her  that  there  was  this — forget  what 
you  called  it — disagreement,  or  whatever  it  was — ^misunderstand- 
ing— ^between  you  and  Mrs.  Bartlett? — ^No. 

You  suggested  that  she  might  as  well  have  a nurse? — ^Yes. 

And  you  knew  at  that  time  that  for  more  than  a fortnight,  I 
think,  this  lady  had  never  had  a proper  night's  rest? — ^Yes;  I 
was  under  that  impression. 

From  what  you  had  heard  from  Mr.  Bartlett? — Yes. 

He  had  spoken  of  the  probability  of  her  breaking  down? — 

Yes. 

And  could  you  see  yourself,  from  her  appearance  and  manner, 
that  she  was  tired  and  strained  with  the  work  ? — ^Yes. 

And,  besides  that,  she  had  told  you  about  the  friends  com- 
plaining that  he  was  not  properly  nursed,  hadn't  she? — She  had. 

Taking  those  two  things  together,  you  suggested  that  a nurse 
should  be  obtained? — Yes. 

And  she  was  indignant — angry  at  the  suggestion? — Yes. 

And  you  said  you  did  not  trust  her,  or  something  of  that  kind  ? 
— ^Yes. 

Was  there  at  that  time  in  your  mind,  or  in  your  suggestion, 
the  smallest  distrust  of  Mrs.  Bartlett? — T!here  was  not. 

At  every  time  when  you  had  been  there  during  her  husband’s 
illness,  had  you  seen  her  giving  diligent  and  afiectionate  attention 
to  his  wants? — Yes. 


167 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


R«t.  Gmse  Dym 

And  did  he  himself  ever  suggest  that  a nurse  would  have  given 
him  better  attention  .and  carel — I cannot  remember  that  he  men- 
tioned that. 

Cannot  you  remember  ? He  told  you  that  the  wife  was  tired 
and  broken  down.  Did  he  suggest  a nurse  being  fetched  1 — He  did 
not  then. 

At  any  time? — do  not  remember  his  doing  so. 

Why,  the  moment  he  heard  of  this  conversation,  his  answer 
to  you  was,  if  you  had  known  her  for  twelve  years  you  would  not 
have  hesitated  to  trust  her? — Yes. 

Do  you  suppose  he  would  have  listened  for  a moment  to  any- 
body else  doubting  her  ? — I do  not  suppose  he  put  any  construction 
on  it.  I do  not  quite  understand  your  question. 

The  following  day  that  question  of  a nurse  was  mentioned 
before  Mr.  Bartlett,  and  you  explained  that  you  wanted  to  apologise 
to  Mrs.  Bartlett,  and  then  he  said  that  he  had  known  her  for 
twelve  years — ‘‘  You  can  trust  her;  if  you  had  had  twelve  years 
of  experience  you  would  know  you  could  trust  her.’’  That  is  what 
he  said? — Yes, 

Did  not  you  gather  from  her  that  he  was  not  only  satisfied 
with,  but  that  he  praised  and  desired  to  continue,  that  attention 
that  she  was  giving  him? — ^That  was  the  impression  it  left  on  my 
mind. 

She  was  angry  with  you  that  you  made  this  suggestion  to  her  ? 
— Yes. 

So  angry,  that  you  went.  You  returned,  as  you  said,  the 
next  morning,  in  order  to  apologise? — Yes. 

You  thought  you  had  offended  her  ? — ^Yes. 

And  then,  let  us  understand,  so  little  was  there  any  reserve 
between  you  and  Mr.  Bartlett  that  you  told  him — ^you  found 
him  in  bed  alone,  and  told  him  you  wanted  to  see  Mrs.  Bartlett 
alone  and  apologise  to  her ; and  then  I think  he  sent  the  servant 
to  show  you  downstairs  that  you  might  make  the  apology.  That 
was  so,  was  it  not? — ^Yes,  that  w^s  it. 

We  hear  that  in  some  of  Mrs.  Bartlett’s  letters  to  you  she 
addressed, you  as  George;  from  the  time  when,  in  September,  this 
understanding  was  set  up  between  you  and  the  husband,  was  he 
in  the  habit  of  calling  you  George? — ^Yes. 

And  were  you  spoken  of  as  George  when  you  three  were 
together  ? — ^Yes. 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills — ^What  did  you  call  her  in  his  presence? 
— ^By  her  Christian  name. 

Cross-exammttion  continued — ^Adelaide  ? — ^Yes. 

You  habitually  called  her  that  before  him? — ^Yes. 

And  in  his  presence?  Now,  on  the  Saturday  evening  you  say 
she  spoke  to  you — ^it  was  after  the  post-mortem  examination — and 
said  you  were  to  put  away  from  your  mind  the  fact  that  she  pos- 
sessed a medicine  chest.  I just  want  to  call  your  mind  to  that  con- 
168 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Rev.  Georse  Dyson 

versation.  At  that  time  you  had  the  bottles  which  you  had  bought) 
— ^Tes. 

You  threw  them  away  as  you  went  to  church  on  the  Sunday 
morning? — I did. 

Did  you  tell  her  you  had  thrown  them  away  the  next  time 
YOU  saw  her — on  the  Monday? — No. 

Are  you  sure? — ^Yes,  I am  sure  of  that. 

Why  did  not  you  tell  her? — could  not  say  at  this  time. 

Why? — Probably  because  it  never  occurred  to  me  to  tell  her. 

Were  you  in  great  anxiety  and  distress  at  that  time  about 
your  position? — was. 

You  were  afraid  the  effect  of  your  having  bought  the  chloro- 
form might  get  you  into  trouble? — Precisely  so. 

So  that  you  thought  you  had  better  get  rid  of  the  bottles? — 
No. 

Why  did  you  throw  them  away? — ^Because  it  was  the  horror 
that  seized  me  when  1 imagined  what  might  have  happened. 

That  is  what  I was  suggesting;  you  thought  you  had  better 
not  have  the  bottles  in  your  possession? — ^No;  that  was  not  the 
motive  in  my  heart  when  I threw  them  away;  the  sight  of  them 
was  hateful  to  me,  and  in  a panic  I threw  them  away;  it  was  not 
the  motive  of  self-protection. 

What  did  you  mean  when  you  said  you  were  a ruined  man? 
— ^Because  1 had  in  my  mind  what  might  have  happened. 

You  had  in  your  mind  what  might  happen  to  yourself  ? — ^Yes  ; 
what  might  be  the  cause  of  Mr.  Bartlett's  death. 

What  might  happen  to  yourself? — was  going  on  to  say  the 
thought  was  in  my  mind  at  the  time,  possibly  it  was  the  chloro- 
form 1 had  bought  had  been  the  cause  of  Mr.  Bartlett's  death. 

Did  that  first  occur  to  you  on  the  Saturday  morning? — ^It 
would  be  difficult  to  say  when  the  thought  first  came.  1 think  on 
Saturday  night  it  grew  on  me. 

And,  thinking  that,  you  thought  you  would  be  a ruined  man 
if  the  matter  came  out? — thoijght  I should  be  a ruined  man  if 
the  matter  came  out — you  mean  about  the  chloroform? 

Yes? — 1 thought  1 should  be  a ruined  man  if  my  fears  were 
true. 

And  if  you  were  associated  with  the  matter? — I saw  that 
danger. 

And  was  it  that  that  suggested  to  you  the  throwing  away  the 
bottles? — ^No. 

Now,  then,  why  did  you  not  tell  her  on  the  Monday  that  you 
had  thrown  the  bottles  away  ? — presume  because  it  never  occurred 
to  me  to  tell  her. 

Do  you  mean  to  repeat  that  answer — ^it  never  occurred  to  you? 
— do. 

It  did  occur  to  you  to  ask  for  the  piece  of  poetry? — Yes. 

And  you  got  it? — ^Yes. 


169 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Rev.  George  Dyaon 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills — ^WHen  did  you  get  it? — On  the  Satur- 
day, I believe. 

Let  me  see  where  we  are.  That  is  the  9th  ? — ^After  the  inquest, 

I think  it  would  be — it  was  then,  or  the  Wednesday. 

CT088~exavn4/n>ation  continued — Just  think.  The  9th  was  the 
last  time  you  ever  saw  Mrs.  Bartlett  to  speak  to— the  day  she  was 
indignant,  and  suggested  you  might  as  well  charge  her  with  giving 
chloroform.  Do  you  mean  it  was  that  day? — ^Yes,  I think  it  was 
that  day. 

There  had  been  a conversation  about  it  before,  had  not  there  ? 
Do  you  remember  the  conversation  partly  in  Mrs.  Matthews' 
presence,  and  partly  when  Mrs.  Matthews  was  out  of  the  room? 
Were  not  you  then  trying  to  got  that  piece  of  paper  ? — I have  said 
I cannot  swear  whether  it  was  on  the  Wednesday.  I heard  Mrs. 
Matthews  give  in  evidence  that  I was  there. 

You  have  heard  Mrs.  Matthews  give  in  evidence  it  was  then, 
and  I understand  you  to  say  whatever  was  the  paper  spoken  of 
in  Mrs.  Matthews'  presence  was  this  piece  of  paper? — Yes. 

There  was  no  other  piece  of  paper  you  were  trying  to  got 
back? — ^No;  it  was  this  piece  of  poetry. 

You  say  that  Mrs.  Bartlett  told  you  not  to  say  anything 
about  chloroform? — ^Yes. 

Was  that  at  the  time  the  piece  of  poetry  was  mentioned? — 
Noj  that  was  on  the  Saturday  night. 

That  was  the  first  Saturday  after  the  post-mortem  examina- 
tion ? — Yes. 

The  2nd  of  January.  What  was  the  day  on  which  you  gave 
your  evidence  about  purchasing  the  chloroform^  do  you  remem- 
ber?— I believe  it  was  the  third  sitting  of  the  coroner's  inquest. 

That  was  in  February? — ^Yes,  it  would  be. 

11th  February,  I think.  Was  Mrs.  Bartlett  the  only  person 
who  had  advised  you  to  say  nothing  about  the  chloroform? — ^No. 

Mr.  Matthews  had,  had  he  not? — ^Yes.  Understand  me, 
nothing  about  the  chloroform,  not  altogether;  nothing  about  it 
immediately.  He  recommended  me  to  wait  the  result  of  the 
analysis. 

Mr.  Matthews,  to  whom  you  spoke,  advised  you  to  say  nothing 
about  the  chloroform  until  the  result  of  the  analysis  was  known  ? — 
Yes. 

And  you  took  his  advice,  and  did  not? — ^No,  I did  not. 

Re-examined  by  Mr.  Folakd — ^When  was  it  you  mentioned  it 
to  Mr.  Matthews  that  you  had  purchased  chloroform  for  Mrs. 

' Bartlett? — On  the  Wednesday  evening. 

You  mean  the  Wednesday,  the  6th? — ^Yes. 

6th  January;  that  was  the  day  before  the  inquest? — ^Yes. 

Where  had  you  mentioned  that  to  him? — ^Walking  between 
his  house  and  Peckham  Rye  Station  in  the  evening. 

What  had  you  eaid  to  him  about  that? — told  him  briefly  the 

170 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

K«Vt  Geor«e  DyioB 

facts  of  the  case,  and  1 said  that  1 had  my  fears,  and  that  my  idea 
was  to  give  the  facts. 

Tou  mean  by  the  facts  of  the  case  that  you  had  purchased 
chloroform  1 — Tes. 

And  what  you  had  done  with  it — ^that  you  had  given  it  to  Mrs. 
Bartlett? — Yes. 

What  did  you  mean  by  your  fears? — My  fears? 

Yes? — ^As  to  what  had  become  of  it;  what  use  had  been  made 
of  it;  or,  rather,  as  to  what  its  efiects  had  been. 

You  say  it  was  then  Mr.  Matthews  advised  you  to  await  the 
result  of  the  analysis  before  you  said  anything  about  it? — ^Yes; 
and  really  to  await  my  being  called  by  the  coroner,  and  give  my 
evidence  in  due  order — ^that  was  the  advice. 

Was  Mr.  Matthews  the  first  person  to  whom  you  men- 
tioned you  had  purchased  this  chloroform  and  given  it  to  Mrs. 
Bartlett? — Mrs.  Matthews  was  the  first. 

Then  you  had  previously  mentioned  it  to  Mrs.  Matthews? — 

Yes. 

When  had  you  mentioned  it  to  her? — At  Dr.  Leach’s  house, 
when  I was  waiting  in  the  ante-room. 

Which  day? — ^Wednesday. 

Did  she  advise  you  at  all? 

Mr.  Clabkb — My  friend  is  carrying  his  suggestions  a little 
too  far. 

Mr.  Justice  Wills — think  so. 

Ee-emmination  continued — ^At  any  rate,  you  did  mention 
the  fact  to  her.  Had  you  mentioned  the  fact  to  any  one' else? — 
Do  you  mean  on  that  day  ? 

Yes? — ^No;  I had  mentioned  it  to  none  then. 

Then  had  you  mentioned  it  to  any  one  else  before  you  were 
called  before  liie  coroner  on  the  11th? — ^Yes;  to  the  Wesleyan 
minister  at  Poole,  my  home. 

Had  you  been  down  there? — ^Yes. 

I only  want  to  know — it  right  you  should  mention  it — ^you 
had  also  mentioned  it  to  another  minister  of  your  own  body? — 
Yes. 

Then,  on  the  first  day  you  were  called  and  examined  before 
the  coroner  you  mentioned  about  this  chloroform? — That  is  so. 

Was  it  the  first  day? — The  first  opportunity  I had;  not  the 
first  day. 

Now,  I want  you  just  to  tell  me  a little  more  fully  what  was 
said  when  you  told  Mr.  Bartlett  you  were  growing  much  attached 
to  Mrs.  Bartlett,  and  you  had  better  discontinue  the  visits,  and 
he  said  you  had  better  not,  because  your  preaching  had  afiected 
her.  Describe  that  more  fully.  How  had  it  affected 
her  ? — He  did  not  describe  the  particular  way,  but  thought  it  had 
benefited  her ; since  you  a^  the  question,  in  a spiritual  way. 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills — want  to  know  why  you  went  to 

171 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Rer.  Geo«i«  Dyion 

three  difierent  shops  to  buy  the  chloroform? — ^Because  1 did  not 
get  as  much  as  I wanted  at  one  shop. 

Why  did  not  you  say  to  the  first  man,  **  You  have  given  me 
a little  bottle;  I want  four  or  five  times  this  quantity  ’’  ?— Because 
1 thought  he  would  want  to  know  what  1 wanted  it  for,  and  I did 
not  wish  to  enter  into  a long  explanation. 

Why  not? — ^Because  1 thought  he  would  not  understand  that 
Mrs.  Bartlett  was  skilled  in  the  use  of  medicines. 

Why  did  you  say  it  was  for  taking  grease  spots  out  of  clothes? 
— ^He  ai^ed  me  what  I wanted  it  for. 

Do  not  let  us  have  any  nice  distinctions  between  telling  a false- 
hood and  acting  i^  ? — do  not  defend  that,  my  lord ; it  was  simply 
that  I wanted  to  avoid  an  explanation.  That  was  the  only  idea  I 
had  in  my  mind. 

What  was  your  notion  of  what  this  very  large  quantity  of 
chloroform  was  wanted  for,  for  you  say  you  went  to  three  druggists, 
and,  except  that  from  each  of  them  ihe  quantity  you  were  asking 
for  appeared  excessive,  nothing  appears  as  to  what  was  your  notion 
of  what  such  a large  quantity  of  chloroform  would  be  necessary 
for? — This  way.  I knew  chloroform  was  used  by  amateurs.  I 
heard  of  its  being  used  for  the  gums — ^toothache,  for  instance. 

What  do  you  mean  by  amateurs? — ^That  is,  by  any  one. 

Yes,  for  toothache.  Well  ? — And  I knew  that — at  least,  I had 
an  idea — ^this  would  bo  sold  to  doctors;  at  least,  to  people  who 
understood  the  use  of  it  for  the  other  purposes  for  which  it  was 
wanted. 

You  see,  that  answer  does  not  meet  my  question  quite.  You 
say,  three  chemists  you  went  to  in  succession;  and  you  seem  to 
have  been  conscious  that  each  one  of  them  would  think  that  quantity 
you  really  wanted  to  get  was  a very  large  quantity.  What  was 
your  own  notion  of  what  such  a large  quantity  was  wanted  for? 
— Oh  I I understand.  I thought  it  was  used  very  quickly  in  the 
way  Mrs.  Bartlett  mentioned.  I knew  it  was  volatile.  I had  an 
idea  that  a very  few  applications ’^would  exhaust  the  amount, 

A very  few  sprinklings  on  a handkerchief? — ^Not  a few  sprink- 
lings. I bought  it  was  more  than  that. 

Did  you  think  the  whole  handkerchief  was  to  bo  saturated 
with  iE? — ^Not  saturated,  but  well  moistened  in  it.  I had  never 
heard  how  it  was  done,  and  knew  nothing  of  how  it  was  done. 

When  you  went  to  Mrs.  Bartlett  with  the  chloroform  in  your 
pocket,  you  say  a visitor  was  there.  Who  was  that? — ^A  Mr. 
Eackett  was  there — believe  the  name  is. 

How  long  did  he  stop? — He  was  gone  when  I returned. 

You  loft  him  there  ? — left  him  there  with  Mr.  Bartlett. 


The  Court  adjourned. 


Third  Day— Wednesday,  14th  April,  1886. 

John  Bawtbnn  Humble,  examined  by  Mr.  Molonet — am  a 
chemist  at  190  Upper  Richmond  Road,  Putney.  I know  Mr. 
Dyson  by  sight.  1 saw  him  pass  my  house  on  several  occasions 
before  28th  December.  1 recollect  his  coming  to  my  shop  on 
Monday,  28th  December,  about  twelve  o’clock,  and  asking  for  some 
chloroform.  1 asked  him  whether  he  required  camphorated 
chloroform  for  teeth,  and  he  said  No,  pure  chloroform.”  I 
then  took  up  a 2-drachm  bottle  and  asked  him  if  that  would  be 
sufficient.  He  said  he  wanted  more,  and  1 showed  him  a ^-ounce 
bottle,  but  he  said  he  should  like  more  than  that.  I then  showed 
him  a 1-ounce  bottle,  and  he  said  that  that  would  do.  1 ulti- 
mately gave  him  1 ounce  of  methylated  chloroform  in  a white 
glass  bottle,  which  1 labelled.  He  paid  me  Is.  3d.  for  it. 

Was  that  a large  or  an  ordinary  quantity  to  sell  to  one  person 
at  one  time  ? — I should  have  considered  it  rather  a large  quantity 
without  a prescription. 

Thomas  Samuel  Penrose,  examined  by  Mr.  Poland — am  a 
chemist,  and  1 manage  the  business  of  Cadman  & Co.,  The  Ridge- 
way, Wimbledon.  I have  known  Mr.  Dyson  for  about  eighteen 
months.  He  came  to  my  shop  about  twelve  o’clock  on  28th 
December,  and  I sold  him  two  bottles  of  methylated  chloroform  of 
1 ounce  each,  for  which  he  paid  me  Is.  6d.  There  was  a label  on 
the  bottle,  ” Chloroform,  Poison,”  and  there  was  also  one  of  my 
trade  labels  on  it.  Mr.  Dyson  took  these  bottles  away  with  him. 

Joseph  Richard  Phillips  Mbllin,  examined  by  Mr.  Poland — 
I am  assistant  to  my  father,  Joseph  Mellin,  a chemist,  at  36  High 
Street,  Wimbledon.  I have  known  the  Rev.  Mr.  Dyson  for  about 
eighteen  months.  He  came  to*  our  shop  on  28th  December  about 
midday,  and  purchased  or  2 ounces  of  pure  chloroform.  The 
price  was  2s.  an  ounce,  and  the  chloroform  was  in  a small  blue 
bottle  with  the  words,  ” Poison,  not  to  be  taken,”  on  the  glass. 
In  addition  to  that,  it  had  a label  pasted  on  it,  ” Chloroform,” 
and  also  one  of  our  ordinary  trade  labels  with  the  name  and 
address.  The  bottle  would  hold  2 ounces  I think,  but  I do  not 
remember  whether  It  was  full  or  not. 

Mrs.  Alice  Jane  Sblbt  Matthews,  examined  by  Mr.  R.  S. 
Wright — am  the  wife  of  Mr.  George  Frederick  Matthews,  and  1 
live  at  98  Friern  Road,  East  Dulwich.  I have  known  the  prisoner, 
Mrs.  Bartlett,  for  about  five  years,  and  intimately  for  about  three 
and  a half  years.  1 also  knew  her  late  husband.  When  I first 

178 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Alice  J.  S.  MaiUiewc 

knew  them  they  were  living  at  Herne  Hill,  and  afterwards  at  Lord- 
ship  Lane,  East  Dulwich,  where  1 was  in  the  habit  of  going  to  visit 
them.  They  afterwards  went  to  Merton  Cottage,  and  1 continued 
to  visit  them  there.  Last  July  my  husband  and  1 stayed  for  a 
week  in  their  house.  So  far  as  I could  see,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Bart- 
lett lived  on  very  affectionate  terms,  and  apparently  as  man  and 
wife.  About  three  years  ago  Mr.  Bartlett  sunered  from  neuralgia, 
but  I could  not  say  for  how  long  j it  may  have  been  a day  or  two 
or  it  may  have  been  longer. 

By  Mr.  Justiob  Wills — ^He  did  not  lie  up.  At  other  times 
the  state  of  his  health  was  very  good.  1 did  not  see  them  at  all 
in  Glaverton  Street  in  the  autumn  of  last  year. 

Examination  continued — On  the  morning  of  1st  January  I 
received  a letter  from  Mrs.  Bartlett,  and  I went  to  the  house 
about  twelve  o^clook.  T went  upstairs  with  Mrs,  Bartlett  to  the 
room  where  the  body  was.  She  gave  me  an  account  of  how  the 
death  had  taken  place. 

By  Mr.  Justiob  Wills — ^That  was  in  the  front  room. 

Examination  conti/nued — ^Mrs.  Bartlett  said  to  me  that  the 
night  previously  her  husband  was  in  bed  and  she  sat  by  his  side» 
with  her  arm  round  his  foot,  and  that  she  was  wakened  by  feeling 
a cramp  in  her  arm.  She  said  it  was  after  twelve  before  she  had 
gone  to  sleep,  because  she  heard  the  people  downstairs  wishing 
each  other  a happy  New  Year.  When  she  was  wakened  by  feeling 
a cramp  in  her  arm  she  found  her  husband  lying  on  his  face.  She 
turned  him  over  and  tried  to  give  him  brandy,  but  she  did  not 
tell  me  whether  he  swallowed  any  of  the  brandy.  I asked  her 
what  he  died  from,  and  she  said,  “ We  don't  know.  There  must 
be  a post-mortem."  I do  not  remember  anything  else  that  either 
of  us  said  about  the  death  at  that  time.  I stayed  in  the  house  all 
day  with  her,  except  that  we  went  out  together  in  the  afternoon  to 
get  some  mourning.  We  went  back  to  the  house  in  the  afternoon, 
and  I stayed  there  until  about  nine  o'clock  at  night. 

Saturday,  and  January,  Mrs.  Bartlett  and 
Mr.  Dyson  came  together  to  my  house  at  Dulwich  after  tea.  I 
had  never  seen  Mr,  Dyson  before,  but  I knew  that  there  was  such 
a person.  I cannot  remember  from  whom  I had  heard  that  there 
was  such  a person. 

_ By  Mr.  Justiob  Wills — Do  you  mean  you  had  heard  of  him 
in  connection  with  the  Bartletts  or  independently?— In  all  proba- 
bihly  It  would  be  in  connection  with  the  Bartletts,  but  I cannot 
say. 

Emmination  contmueS^ELcB.  Bartlett  said  to  Ine  that  the 
doctora  were  not  agreed  with  regard  to  the  cause  of  deatii,  and 
that  the  rooms  were  to  bo  sealed,  and  so  she  had  come  to  me.  I do 
not  r^em^  toything  of  any  importance  in  connection  with  the 
nert  day,  Sunday,  the  3rd.  Mr.  Dyson  did  not  come  that  day, 
but  he  came  on  Monday,  the  4th,  beWe  lunch.  Mrs.  Bartlett 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Alice  J.  S.  Matthew* 

was  out  at  the  time  he  came.  He  stayed  until  she  came  in,  and 
I left  them  alone  for  a minute  or  two. 

As  you  came  back  to  the  room  where  they  were  was  your 
attention  attracted  by  anything? — ^Tes,  1 heard  a noise  in  the  room, 
like  some  one  stamping.  1 went  into  the  room,  and  I saw  Mrs. 
Bartlett  stamping  round  the  room.  I asked  her  what  was  the 
matter.  She  did  not  answer  for  some  minutes,  and  then  she  said 
that  Mr.  Dyson  was  bothering  her  about  a piece  of  paper.  I went 
out  of  the  room  for  a few  minutes,  and  when  I returned  1 heard 
Mr.  Dyson  saying  to  Mrs.  Bartlett,  You  did  tell  me  that  Edwin 
was  going  to  die  soon,*'  and  she  said,  “ No,  I did  not.^'  Mr. 
Dyson  then  bowed  his  head  on  the  piano  and  said,  “ Oh,  my 
God  ! ” After  a bit  I asked  him  whether  he  had  not  better  go. 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills — There  was  nothing  more  said. 

Examination  continued — ^As  he  went  out  he  said,  I am  a 
ruined  man.'*'  I do  not  remember  asking  Mrs.  Bartlett  what  he 
meant  by  all  that,  but  I remember  asking  her  what  the  paper  was, 
and  she  told  me  it  was  a piece  of  poetry.  On  Wednesday,  the 
6th,  Mr.  Dyson  came  to  my  house.  Mrs.  Bartlett  and  I were 

f>ing  to  London  when  he  came,  and  he  went  with  us.  Mrs. 

artlett  and  1 left  him  at  Victoria  Station,  and  then  we  went  to 
Dr.  Leach's,  but  found  him  out.  We  then  went  on  to  Claverton 
Street.  Mr.  Dyson  came  there  in  the  afternoon.  About  three 
o'clock  the  three  of  us  went  to  Dr.  Leach's  house.  Mrs.  Bartlett 
went  alone  into  one  room  to  see  Dr.  Leach,  while  Mr.  Dyson  and 
I remained  in  another.  Mrs.  Bartlett  left  us  alone  for  about  an 
hour,  and  during  that  hour  1 had  a conversation  with  Mr.  Dyson. 
On  Saturday,  the  9th,  Mr.  Dyson  came  to  my  house. 

Was  Mrs,  Bartlett  staying  with  you? — No.  She  went  up  to 
town,  and  went  to  my  husband's  place  of  business  to  bring  him 
home.  Mr.  Dyson  went  there  also  to  see  my  husband,  and  they 
all  came  down  together.  I cannot  say  that  Mrs.  Bartlett  told 
me  what  she  had  b^een  seeing  Dr.  Leach  about  on  Wednesday,  the 
6th,  but  I understood  she  was  to  go  and  hear  the  result  of  the  post- 
mortem. On  Saturday,  the  9th,  in  the  evening,  there  was  some 
talk  going  on  in  my  house.  Mr.  Dyson  was  in  a great  state 
because  he  said  he  would  be  ruined  and  would  have  to  leave  his 
ministry,  and  so  on.  Mrs.  Bartlett  and  my  husband  were  present. 
I cannot  recollect  the  whole  of  the  conversation,  but  I know  Mr. 

Dyson  said,  Suppose  it  should  be  proved " and  he  hesitated 

and  did  not  iini^.  Then  Mrs.  Bartlett  said,  Do  not  mince 
matters.  Say  I gave  him  chloroform  if  you  want  to."  She  said 
it  very  indignantly.  That  is  all  I remember  about  the  9th.  On 
the  Saturday  or  the  Monday — do.  not  recollect  which — asked 
Mrs.  Bartlett  why  she  told  Mr.  Dyson  all  those  lies.  I did  not 
tell  her  what  it  was  that  Mr.  Dyson  had  said,  but  I knew  that 
she  knew  what  he  told  me. 

How? — ^Well,  about — cannot  remember  now  what  was  said. 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Alico  Jb  S*  MAtthcwf 

Mr.  Clarke — must  object  to  this. 

Mr.  Wright — I am  entitled  to  ask  what  he  said. 

Mr.  Claree — Oh,  no. 

Basamination  continued — ^Well,  you  asked  her  why  she  told 
Mr.  Dyson  all  those  lies? — ^Yes.  She  said  he  had  bothered  her 
so,  that  he  did  not  believe  her  when  she  told  him  the  truth. 

Did  she  say  what  the  truth  was? — ^Yes. 

That  Edwin  was  going  to  die? — ^A.nd  so  she  told  him  the  lie. 

By  Mr.  Clarke — Told  him  what? — ^Told  him  the  lie. 

Easamination  continued — That  is  all  that  I remember. 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills — Just  listen  to  me.  Don't  say  any- 
thing you  know  from  any  other  source.  Has  anything  passed 
between  you  and  her  to  indicate  what  you  were  talking  about? — 
No,  I do  not  remember ; but  I should  like  to  say  this,  that  I said 
to  her  then  I did  not  know  that  Edwin  thought  he  was  going  to  die 
soon,  and  she  said  that  he  did  think  so  latterly. 

Examvna,tiou  contimied — ^Did  Mrs.  Bartlett  ever  tell  you  that 
she  had  any  chloroform? — ^Yes.  She  said  she  had  had  the  chloro- 
form to  soothe  Edwin,  but  that  she  had  never  used  it.  I cannot 
say  that  she  told  me  where  she  got  it,  but,  of  course,  I understood. 
It  was  either  on  the  Saturday  or  the  Monday  that  she  told  me 
about  the  chloroform — it  was  after  wo  were  at  Dr.  Leach’s.  She 
told  me  she  had  poured  the  chloroform  on  the  rails  as  she  came 
from  Victoria  to  Peokham  Rye  on  the  6th,  and  that  she  had  thrown 
the  bottle  into  Peckham  Rye  Pond.  I passed  Peckham  Rye  Pond 
on  the  6th ; it  was  Trozen.  There  were  some  boys  on  the  ice  at  one 
end,  but  I could  not  say  whether  it  was  frozen  all  over.  Mrs. 
Bartlett  left  my  house  on  the  11th,  and  went  to  lodgings  in  Wey- 
mouth Street,  Portland  Place.  She  paid  me  two  or  three  visits, 
but  I do  not  remember  anything  that  was  said.  On  the  SOth, 
when  she  came  to  see  me,  she  said  she  had  asked  Dr.  Leach  about 
giving  Edwin  chloroform,  and  he  had  told  her  she  could  not 
possibly  have  given  him  chloroform,  because  it  would  have  shown 
in  his  brain  if  she  had  given  it  to  him  by  inhalation,  and  if  she 
had  given  it  to  him  to  drink  it  would  have  burnt  his  throat  all 
down,  and  his  screams  would  have  alarmed  the  house. 

Mr.  Clarke — have  no  questions  to  aek. 

The  Foreman— There  is  one  question  I should  like  to  ask — 
Mr-  Bartlett,  in  his  evidence,  stated  that  his  son,  the  deceased, 
had  told  him  that  he  intended  to  alter  his  will  on  let  January 
in  his  favour.  Is  there  any  proof  of  that  beyond  hie  own  state- 
ment? 

Jfr.  Justice  Wills— No,  there  has  been  none  given. 

^e  Foreman— You  can  easily  understand  why  I ask  the 
question,  I think. 

Mr.  CLAK^Perhaps  it  was  with  reference  to  a question  that 
TOs  asked.  I do  not  think  he  said  he  intended  to  alter  his  will, 
but  to  make  him  an  allowance. 

176 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Alice  J.  S,  Matthews 

The  Fobbman — ^To  alter  his  will,  I think  it  was. 

Mr.  Justice  Wills — will  refer  to  it.  It  strikes  me  as  new. 
My  memory  may  be  wrong. 

Mr.  Clarke — ^What  he  said  was  that  there  was  not  room  for 
him  at  the  house — I had  no  allowance  from  him  ” — ^he  was  to 
give  him  an  allowance  this  year.  It  was  after  I had  read  a page 
over  to  him. 

Mr.  Justice  Wills — think  He  did  say  something  in  answer 
to  your  question.  I remember  his  answer  to  it — “ He  had  never, 
in  fact,  made  me  an  allowance,  but  I had  from  him  what  money 
1 wanted.  He  was  the  tenderest  of  sons.’'  That  is  the  passage,  1 
think,  but  there  was  nothing  said  about  altering  his  will. 

A Juror — ^We  are  still  under  the  impression  that  he  stated 
so,  and  that  it  was  an  allowance.  Was  there  any  proof  that  he 
promised  that  besides  his  own  statement? 

George  Frederick  Matthews,  examined  by  Mr.  Moloney — 1 
am  the  husband  of  the  last  witness.  1 have  known  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
Bartlett  for  about  three  and  a half  years.  1 visited  them  at 
Merton  Abbey,  and  stayed  some  time  with  them.  Up  to  the  time 
of  Mr.  Bartlett’s  death  his  general  health  was  very  good,  so  far 
as  I know.  I did  not  notice  anything  peculiar  al^ut  his  ideas. 
So  far  as  I could  judge,  he  and  his  wife  lived  as  man  and  wife. 
I saw  him  during  his  last  illness  on  15th  December.  He  seemed 
very  prostrated.  Mrs.  Bartlett  told  me  that  he  was  suffering  from 
sli^t  mercurial  poisoning,  and  also  from  verdigris.  She  said  he 
might  possibly  have  got  it  from  moving  things  in  the  warehouse-— 
he  had  been  hunting  rats.  That  was  the  last  time  I saw  him  alive. 

On  1st  January  I went  to  Claverton  Street  and  saw  Mrs.  Bart- 
lett there.  After  having  tea  she  said  that  Dr.  Leach  had  said  that 
he  could  not  grant  a certificate.  Later  on  in  the  evening  it  was 
said  that  Dr.  Leach  and  Mrs.  Bartlett  had  come  to  an  under- 
standing that  morning  that  thex^  must  be  a post-mortem.  Mrs. 
Bartlett  came  to  my  house  on  2nd  January  with  Mr.  Dyson.  In 
the  evening  she  spoke  to  us  about  how  her  husband  died ; she  told 
me  that  she  must  have  fallen  asleep  sitting  near  the  foot  of  the  bed, 
and  die  had  his  foot  under  her  arm;  she  was  wakened  by  feeling 
cramp  in  her  arm,  and  found  her  husband  lying  on  his  face ; she 
turned  him  over  and  endeavoured  to  give  him  some  brandy,  and, 
becoming  alarmed,  she  proceeded  to  rouse  the  house  and  also  send 
for  the  doctor.  Mrs.  Bartlett  stayed  at  our  house  that  night. 

On  the  Sunday,  speaking  to  her  about  the  death,  was  anything 
said  by  you  about  having  got  poison? — Yes,  we  talked  about  the 
death,  and  I asked  her  if  it  was  possible  that  he  might  have  taken 
poison  himself  or  if  he  could  have  got  at  any  poison  himself,  and 
she  gave  me  to  understand  that  die  did  not  think  he  could  have 
done  so. 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


G«org«  F.  Matthews 

Did  she  say  why? — Tes,  she  said  she  did  not  think  there 
were  any  poisons  in  the  house. 

Did  Ate  say  anything  as  to  the  smell  of  chlorodyne  at  the 
post-mortem? — Tes,  I believe  she  said  the  doctor  had  told  her  that 
there  was  a smell  of  chlorodyne,  which  might  be  accounted  for 
by  her  husband  having  used  chlorodyne. 

Was  anything  said  about  arsenic? — ^Yes,  I was  told  that  there 
was  a smell  of  garlic.  I asked  her  if  it  was  possible  that  he  could 
have  got  at  any  arsenic,  and  she  said  no.  There  is  nothing  more 
than  that  that  I can  remember. 

We  had  a visitor,  and,  of  course,  there  was  not  much  said. 

I remember  seeing  Mr.  Dyson  on  6th  January  when  I wasi  coming 
home  from  business.  I walked  with  him  to  the  station,  and  had  a 
long  conversation  with  him.  Mrs.  Bartlett  was  not  present  at 
that  conversation.  Mr.  Dyson  and  Mrs.  Bartlett  came  to  my 
house  on  the  evening  of  7th  January,  the  day  of  the  coroner’s 
inquest.  We  discussed  the  evidence  which  had  been  given  at  the 
inquest,  but  nothing  more  that  I can  remember.  Mr.  Dyson  came 
to  my  place  of  business  in  the  city  on  Saturday,  9th  January. 

Did  Mrs.  Bartlett  also  come  to  your  warehouse  that  day?— Tes, 
Mr.  Dyson  came  about  eleven  o’clock  in  the  first  instance.  I 
was  too  busy  to  see  him,  and  asked  him  to  call  again  when  I was 
about  to  leave — at  two  o’clock.  Mr.  Dyson  and  Mrs.  Bartlett 
went  with  me  to  my  house  that  afternoon,  at  my  request.  In 
Mrs.  Bartlett’s  presence  there  was  a conversation  about  Mr. 
Dyson’s  position ; he  told  me  that  he  was  ruined,  so  far  as  his  pros- 
pects in  the  ministry  were  concerned.  1 endeavoured  to  combat 
the  idea,  and  he  proceeded  to  explain  that  it  was  impossible  for 
him  to  do  otherwise  than  resign ; that,  according  to  a system  that 
existed  with  them,  certain  superintendents  of  every  district  were 
responsible  for  the  condition  of  the  ministers  in  each  district; 
and  that  the  slightest  breach  of  anything  on  the  part  of  the  minister 
would  cause  him  to  be  called  before,  what  I understood  to  be,  a sort 
of  council.  Turning  to  Mrs.  Btfrtlett,  he  said,  Supposing  that 

it  turns  out ” or  “ Suppose  it  should  be  proved  that  you ” 

and  then  he  hesitated.  Mrs.  Bartlett  said,  Don’t  mince  matters; 
say-  it,  if  you  wish  to  say,  I gave  him  chloroform.”  He  said, 
” Well,  to  put  it  hypothetically,  supposing  it  was  discovered  tibat 

you  gave  him  chloroform,  and  I gave  it  to  you ” Then,  I 

cannot  say  exactly  the  words,  but  he  made  an  action  as  much  as 
to  say,  ” What  would  be  the  opinion  of  the  world?  How  diould 
I come  out  in  such  a case?”  and  he  moved  his  hands  so  (showing). 
Mr.  Dyson  went  away  almost  immediately  after  that. 

By  Mr,  Justiob  Wills — cannot  recollect  anything  that  Mrs. 
Bartlett  said  to  that. 

Eaxern4nati<m  contwaed — ^Mrs.  Bartlett  left  my  house  on  11th 
January.  I saw  her  with  my  wife  at  my  house  on  20th  January. 
She  told  us  that  Dr.  Leach  had  said  that  it  would  be  impossible 

m 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

George  F.  Metthewe 

for  her  to  have  given  her  husband  chloroform  by  inhalation  with- 
out it  showing  in  the  brain,  and  she  could  not  have  given  it  to 
him  as  a drink,  because  he  would  have  burnt  his  throat  all  down, 
and  he  would  have  aroused  the  house  with  his  cries. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  Clabke — ^You  have  been,  I believe,  for 
some  years  a friend  of  Mr.  Bartlett's? — ^Yes. 

You  believed  that  you  were  in  perfect  confidence  and  in- 
timacy with  him? — ^Yes. 

You  had  every  reason  to  think  so? — ^Yes. 

Did  he  ever  talk  to  you  about  medical  matters? — ^No. 

Did  he  ever  communicate  with  you  his  strange  ideas  on  the 
subject  of  marriage,  or  anything  connected  with  it? — ^No,  never. 

He  never  lent  you  any  books,  or  showed  you  any  book? — ^No. 

Did  you  ever  hear  of  Dr.  Nichols’  book? — ^Yes,  1 have  seen  it. 

There? — ^Yes^  Mrs.  Bartlett  handed  it  to  me,  once. 

Mrs.  Bartlett? — ^Yes. 

Is  that  the  book  (holding  one  up)? — cannot  say. 

Was  it  a queer  sort  of  book? — ^Yes;  scarcely  in  my  line  of 
business.  1 did  not  read  it — ^yes,  that  is  the  book. 

How  long  ago  was  that  ? — Two  years  ago,  quite. 

And  did  he  ever  talk  to  you  a^ut  magnetism? — ^No,  never. 

Or  mesmerism? — No. 

And  you  had  no  knowledge  of  his  having  strange  ideas  about 
marriage,  or  about  his  having  ideas  about  magnetism? — ^No, 
nothing  of  the  kind. 

Is  that  the  only  medical  book  you  have  known  of  belonging 
to  him  and  Mrs.  Bartlett? — 'No;  I have  seen  Squire’s  Com- 
panion ” there. 

Where  have  you  seen  that — at  Merton  ? — ^At  Merton  Abbey. 

Be-ezamined  by  Mr,  PoLAim — ^You  say  that  is  the  book  which 
you  saw  her  with? — ^Yes. 

How  long  ago? — Two  years. 

Where? — ^At  my  house. 

She  lent  it  to  you? — ^Yes. 

What  did  she  say  about  it? — Mrs.  Bartlett  was  a believer  in 
the  hydropathic  system;  and  I do  not  know,  but  I rather  think 
that  itie  book  was  about  that,  and  she  gave  it  to  me  so  that  I 
should  read  something  on  the  subject.  I am  not  certain,  because 
I never  read  the  book,  but  I know  so  well  that  it  was  a book  on 
hydropathy. 

By  Mr.  Justiob  Wills — am  glad  you  have  told  us  the  book; 
it  was  a book  of  a diSerent  kind? — I never  looked  at  it. 

Be^examination  eontimted — ^Was  it  left  with  you? — ^Yes. 

Did  you  road  it  at  all? — ^No. 

Did  you  return  it  to  her? — ^I  believe  my  wife  did;  I do  not 
think  I did. 

Did  you  look  at  the  book  to  see  what  it  was  about? — have 
no  memory. 


179 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 

Geom  F*  MaHihewt 

Was  the  title  of  it  Esoteric  Anthropology  (The  Mysteries 
of  Man) : a Comprehensive  and  Confidential  Treatise  on  the 
Structure,  Functions,  Passional  Attractions  and  Perversions,  True 
and  False  Physical  and  Social  Conditions,  and  the  Most  Intimate 
Relations  of  Men  and  Women.  By  T.  L.  Nichols,  M.D.,  F.A.S.”? 
— If  I had  read  as  far  as  that  I should  not  have  read  any  further  : 
that  was  the  reason  she  gave  it  to  me;  she  was  speaking  of  Dr. 
Nichols. 

Did  you  know  anything  of  Dr.  Nichols  yourself  1 — ^No. 

I think  you  said  that  you  had  never  seen  Mr.  Bartlett  with 
that  book? — ^No,  never. 

Annie  Walker,  examined  by  Mr.  Poland — I am  a midwife 
and  a trained  nurse,  attached  since  October,  1881,  to  the  London 
Association  of  Nurses,  62  New  Bond  Street.  I received  a letter  at 
the  Institute  from  Mrs.  Nichols,  the  wife  of  Dr.  Nichols,  of  Fop- 
stone  Road,  EarPs  Court.  Mrs.  Nichols  is  now  dead.  That  letter 
made  an  appointment,  and  I went  to  see  her.  In  cons^uence  of 
what  she  said  to  me  1 went  to  see  Mrs.  Bartlett  at  Station  Road, 
Herne  Hill.  I saw  Mrs.  Bartlett,  and  I was  engaged  to  attend 
her  in  her  approaching  confinement.  I attended  her  without  a 
doctor  in  her  house  for  four  weeks  before  she  was  confined  in 
November,  1881.  The  child  was  stillborn. 

Had  you  spoken  to  her  at  all  about  having  a doctor? 
— I am  not  quite  certain  whether  I took  the  order  from  her. 
I went  to  her  husband  and  asked  him  to  let  her  have  some  medi- 
cine. He  asked  me  if  her  life  would  be  all  right.  I said  I did 
not  fear  for  her,  but  I feared  if  he  did  not  have  help  at  once  the 
child  would  be  stillborn.  He  said  he  would  much  rather  that  I 
took  the  case  through.  He  would  much  rather  not  have  any  man 
interfering  with  her,  and  I agreed  to  go  on.  She  had  a very  bad 
time  at  her  confinement  and  sufiered  great  pain.  I begged  Mir. 
Bartlett  to  send  for  a doctor,  so  as  to  be  there  when  the  child  was 
born.  A doctor  was  sent  for,  but  the  child  was  born  before  he 
arrived.  I continued  to  attend  on  Mrs.  Bartlett  for  tibree  weeks. 
We  spoke  on  the  subject  of  the  confinement,  and  she  said  that 
she  never  meant  to  have  any  more  children,  but  she  did  not  say 
why.  When  I visited  her  after  her  confinement  I saw  Mr.  Bart- 
lett. As  far  as  I could  judge,  they  were  living  together  as  man 
and  wife,  and  they  were  on  affectionate  terms  togellier.  I visited 
them  when  they  were  at  Lordship  Lane,  and  also  when  they  were 
at  The  Cottage,  Merton  Abbey.  I stayed  with  them  at  The  Cottage 
for  a few  days  in  September,  1884. 

Did  she  say  any&ing  to  you  then  about  her  husband? — ^All  I 
remember  her  saying  was  that  she  played  and  sang  in  the  evening, 
and  that  he  never  appreciated  enough  what  she  did.  She  said  that 
he  did  not  appreciate  her  work.  She  worked  very  beautifully, 
but  he  always  thought  that  she  ou^t  to  do  it  better.  ' 

180 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 


Anaio  Walker 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills — ^Are  you  expressing  the  result  of  your 
own  observation  or  what  she  said  hevselil — ^What  she  said  herself. 

Examination  continued — Did  she  speak  to  you  on  that  occasion 
about  the  will? — cannot  say  whether  it  was  on  that  occasion;  it 
was  on  several  occasions,  and  I think  she  even  said  it  in  the  presence 
of  Mr.  Bartlett.  She  said,  “ Don't  you  think  it  is  a shame?  Edwin 
has  made  a will  that  the  property  will  come  to  me,  provided  that 
1 never  marry  again."  1 feel  sure  she  mentioned  that  more  than 
once,  but  I cannot  be  quite  positive  of  it. 

1 have  seen  Dr.  Nichols,  but  he  has  never  seen  me,  so  far  as 
I know.  1 have  never  seen  him  about  Mr.  Bartlett  at  all,  and  have 
never  had  any  communication  with  him.  I know  he  is  the  husband 
of  the  lady  who  had  originally  written  to  me,  and  I know  he  is  the 
gentleman  who  wrote  a book,  The  Mysteries  of  Man."  I have 
seen  that  book  lying  about  at  the  Bartlett's,  but  I have  never  seen 
any  one  reading  it.  I understood  from  Mrs.  Bartlett  that  it  was 
through  reading  that  book  that  she  wrote  to  Mrs.  Nichols.  I have 
never  seen  any  other  medical  book  in  the  house,  nor  have  1 seen 
any  medicine  chest. 

1 have  never  had  any  conversation  with  Mrs.  Bartlett  about 
chloroform,  nor  have  I ever  got  any  chloroform  for  her  on  any 
occasion.  She  has  never  asked  me  to  purchase  any  chloroform 
or  any  medicine  for  her.  I have  never  been  out  of  England, 
and  I have  never  spoken  of  going  to  America.  I never  knew  any- 
thing of  Mr.  Dyson.  I never  attended  Mr.  Bartlett  at  all. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  Clause — ^There  was  no  chloroform  used 
at  Mrs.  Bartlett's  confinement,  was  there? — No,  sir;  not  any. 

At  any  lime  when  you  have  been  there  have  you  heard  chloro- 
form mentioned? — ^Never. 

By  her  or  before  her? — ^Never. 

So  far  as  you  know,  she  knew  nothing  about  chloroform  at  all? 
— ^Not  that  I know  of,  in  any  way  at  all. 

You  came  to  be  attending  her  through  Mrs.  Nichols,  I think 
you  said? — ^Yes. 

Mrs.  Nichols  herself  attended  people,  I believe,  did  she  not? — 
I do  not  know  if  she  did.  She  visited  a lady  that  I attended 
once,  but  they  were  great  friends. 

Don't  you  know  that  she  attended  people  herself? — ^Well,  I 
have  read  it  in  the  book. 

You  have  read  this  : “ In  a large  practice  extending  over  many 
years  . . . Mrs.  Nichols  has  never  directed  treatment  to  be 

suspended  "? — ^Yes.  I do  not  know  much  about  the  book;  I have 
just  looked  at  it  a little. 

You  only  know  Dr.  Nichols  as  Mrs.  Nichols’  husband,  and  as 
the  author  of  the  book? — ^That  is  all. 

You  have  looked  through  this  book? — have. 

There  is  nothing  immoral  or  indecent  in  this  book,  is  there? 
—•Not  anything. 


181 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Annie  Welker 

And  you  have  seen  it  at  the  place  there  'while  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
Bartlett  were  there? — Tes,  while  they  were  there. 

There  was  no  concealment  about  it? — ^Not  at  all. 

It  was  lying  about? — ^Yes. 

Had  you  seen  patients  before  through  the  recommendation  of 
Mrs-  Nichols? — ^Mrs.  

Never  mind  the  name;  one  or  two? — ^Two. 

Did  you  attend  a patient  afterwards  through  Mrs.  Nichols? 
—No. 

Now,  in  September  you  were  four  weeks  in  the  house  before  this 
poor  lady  was  confined? — ^Tes. 

And  were  you  living  in  the  house  with  her? — was  living  in 
the  house,  and  taking  my  meals  with  them  both. 

Was  she  attentive  and  afiectionate  towards  her  husband? — 
Most  affectionate. 

And  was  she  as  attentive  as  she  could  be  to  him  with  regard 
to  his  meals  in  the  morning? — ^Very.  She  would  get  up  very  early, 
and  see  that  he  had  his  breakfast  at  seven,  before  he  started,  com- 
fortably. 

Although  she  was  expecting  her  confinement  to  happen  some 
little  time  before  it  really  did? — Tes. 

And  did  you  form  some  attachment  for  her? — ^Yes. 

I think  you  gave  her  your  photograph? — ^Tes. 

In  your  nurse’s  dress? — ^Yes. 

And  do  you  know  that  that  photograph  was  put  in  the  album  ? 
— ^No,  I do  not  know  that.  I have  never  seen  her  since  I went  to 
the  house  last  October  twelve  months. 

You  say  that  once,  after  the  confinement,  Mrs.  Bartlett  said 
that  she  should  never  have  another  child  ? — ^Yes. 

It  had  been  a very  painful  time? — ^Yes. 

She  had  a very  bad  time,  and  a time  of  great  suffering? — 

Tes. 

Altogether,  you  were  seven  weeks  in  the  house,  I believe? — 

Tes. 

And  you  were  really  anxious  at  the  time  of  the  confinement? — 
Very  anxious. 

With  regard  to  her  life — ^her  life  was  in  danger,  was  it  not? — 
Well,  I did  not  see  any  reason  for  fear.  She  was  keeping  up  very 
well. 

But  you  were  anxious,  and,  even  after  what  Mr.  Bartlett 
said,  you  again  insisted  on  having  a medical  man? — Yes. 

Have  you  nursed  a great  many  ladies  in  labour? — ^A  great 
many.  I have  been  fourteen  years  nurse. 

It  is  not  a very  uncommon  thing  for  a woman  to  say  that  she 
hopes  never  to  have  another  child,  is  it? — ^No;  not  at  all. 

Reexamined  by  Mr.  Poland — You  say  that  you  know  they 
were  living  together  on  the  terms  of  man  and  wife?  ' 

182 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 


Annie  Walker 

Mr.  Clarks — Do  not  keep  repeating  that,  or  I must  ask  my 
learned  friend  to  define  what  he  means.  It  is  a phrase  he  uses 
so  frequently. 

Mr.  JusTiOE  Wills — ^It  is  a phrase  that  I shall  have  to  point 
out  the  illustration  of  when  it  comes  to  my  time.  Among  ordinary 
people  you  know  what  passes  in  the  ordinary  relations  of  life,  but 
you  know  nothing  of  what  passes  in  the  bedroom,  or  how  the  bed- 
room is  arranged  with  reference  to  the  specific  matter  which  is  the 
only  thing  we  can  inquire  into.  The  mere  opinion  is  worthless  on 
this  point. 

Rt-etmmination  continued — ^After  the  statement  she  made  that 
she  would  not  have  another  child,  did  she  ever  say  anything  to  you 
as  to  the  terms  upon  which  she  was  with  her  husband  ? — ^No. 

They  occupied  the  same  room  and  the  same  bed,  did  theyl — 
When  I was  with  them. 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills — ^When  you  paid  your  visit  1 — ^Yes. 

I suppose,  whenever  you  paid  your  visit,  you  have  been  up  in 
their  room? — ^Yes. 

Did  you  use  chloroform  at  all  at  the  confinement? — -Ko. 

You  say  that  they  occupied  the  same  bed ; was  there  anything 
exceptional,  as  far  as  you  know,  between  them  as  man  and  wife? 
—No. 

As  I understand  you,  Mrs.  Bartlett  never  made  a statement  to 
you  in  reference  to  herself  and  her  husband  as  to  the  terms  upon 
which  they  cohabited.  That  is  what  you  mean? 

Mr.  Poland — ^Yes,  I will  put  it  that  way. 

The  Witness — ^No. 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills — ^Let  me  ask  you  one  other  question. 
I had  a very  cursory  glance  at  that  book,  but  there  are  parts  of  it 
which  do  tell  married  people  how  to  live  together  without  having 
children,  are  there  not? — ^Yes. 

Mr.  Clarke — am  sure  your  lordship  wishes  me  to  be  correct. 
Your  lordship  will  find  that  the  book  contains  nothing  objection- 
able. The  answer  is  vague.  • 

Mr.  Justice  Wills — will  take  the  opportunity,  Mr.  Clarke, 
of  looking  at  the  book  this  evening  myself.  I will  just  point  out 
to  you  at  once  the  passage  which  caught  my  eye. 

Mr.  Clarke — ^Yes. 

Mr.  Justice  Wills — It  was  opened  there;  that  is  how  I came 
to  see  it. 

Mr.  Clarke — Abstinence. — There  is  one  way  that  is  natural, 
simple,  and  efiectual.  It  is  to  refrain  from  the  sexual  act.  It  is 
easily  done  by  most  women,  and  by  many  men.  In  every  civilised 
community  thousands  live  in  celebacy,  many  from  necessity,  many 
from  choice.  In  England  and  the  older  American  States  there  is 
a large  surplus  female  population.  In  Catholic  countries  the  whole 
of  the  priesthood  and  a great  number  of  religious  of  both  sexes  take 

183 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Annie  Walker 

yows  of  perpetual  chastity.  This  practice  has  existed  for  at  least 
sixteen  centuries.  I have  shown  that  in  the  ordinary  cases  con- 
ception can  only  take  place  when  connection  is  had  a day  or  two 
before,  or  ton  days,  or,  for  safety’s  sake,  say  sixteen  days  afler, 
menstruation.  There  is  then  a fortnight  each  month  when  the 
female  is  not  liable  to  impregnation.” 

Mr.  Justice  Wills — I am  much  obliged  to  you. 

Mr.  Glabee — ” And  it  is  also  to  be  observed  that  the  natural 
period  for  sexual  union  is  when  it  is  demanded  for  the  purpose  of 
procreation;  and  that  the  use  of  marriage  or  the  sexual  act  for 
mere  pleasure,  and  using  any  means  to  avoid  impregnation,  are 
unnatural.  It  is  questionable,  therefore,  whether  we  can  morally 
justify  the  use  of  any  means  to  prevent  conception.  If  it  can  ever 
be  justified,  it  is  when  a woman  is  unwillingly  compelled  to  submit 
to  ttie  embrace  of  her  husband  while  her  health  or  other  conditions 
forbid  her  to  have  children.” 

Mr.  Justice  Wills — ^I  am  much  obliged  to  you  for  correcting 
my  impression ; it  was  formed  on  hastily  opening  the  book. 

Thomas  Low  Nichols,  examined  by  Mr,  Wright — ^I  live  at  32 
Fopstone  Boad,  Earl’s  Court.  I was  a graduate  at  New  York  in 
1850,  but  I have  no  d^ree  entitling  me  to  practise  here.  I have 
been  for  about  twenty-five  years  in  England,  mostly  in  London. 
There  is  no  other  Dr.  Nichols  that  I know  of  in  Fopstone  Boad, 
Earl’s  Court,  or  in  any  part  of  Earl’s  Court.  The  book  entitled 
Esoteric  Anthropology,”  which  has  been  mentioned  in  Court,  is 
one  of  my  books.  I first  saw  Mrs.  Bartlett,  the  prisoner,  at  the 
Westminster  Police  Court.  I cannot  remember  having  any  com- 
munication with  her  or  her  husband  by  letter  or  otherwise.  I do 
not  know  any  one  of  the  name  of  Bartlett  in  this  country,  nor  do 
I know  any  nurse  or  midwife  of  the  name  of  Annie  Walker.  This 
morning  I saw  the  witness  called  Annie  Walker ; I have  never  seen 
her  at  all  before  to  my  knowledge. 

Did  you  ever  make  any  statement  to  anybody  that  anybody  of 
the  name  of  Bartlett  would  die  within  twelve  months? — Certainly 
not. 

Or  any  statement  of  that  sort! — ^I  could  not  make  any  such 
statement  unless  I had  examined  the  patient. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  Clarke — You  Have  no  qualification 
here,  I think  ? — ^I  am  not  registered  j my  diploma  was  just  too  late 
to  be  registered. 

But  you  have  lived  for  some  years  in  England,  have  you  not? 
— ^For  twenty-five  years. 

You  used  to  live  at  Malvern,  I think? — Yes.  . 

And  it  was  while  you  were  living  at  Malvern,  in  the  year 
1873,  that  you  issued  the  English  edition  of  this  book? — Quite  so. 
It  was  written  about  1853,  in  America. 

184 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Thomai  L.  Nidioli 

And  it  was  published  in  America,  and  largely  circulated,  I 
think? — ^Very  largely — all  over  the  world,  I believe. 

Did  Mrs.  Nichols,  your  late  wife,  write  a book  and  publish  a 
book? — Oh,  yes. 

It  was  called,  I think,  “ A Woman’s  Work  in  Water  Cure  and 
Sanitary  Education  ”? — ^Yes;  that  was  the  English  reproduction  of 
a previous  work  called  Experience  in  Water  Cure,”  publidied  in 
America. 

In  the  year  1863,  I think,  you  were  giving  lectures  in  New 
York,  at  the  American  Hydropathic  Institute? — ^Yes. 

And  you  were  then  teaching  students  in  anatomy,  physiology, 
and  hydro-therapeutics,  and  assisted  by  Mrs.  Nichols  either  in 
teaching  or  writing  books? — ^In  both.  She  wrote  her  own  books, 
and  did  her  part  of  the  teaching  for  both  sexes. 

Then  I understand  that  the  American  book  which  she  wrote 
was  called  “ Experience  in  Water  Cure,”  and  the  English  book 
” A Woman’s  Work  in  Water  Cure  ”? — ^Yes,  in  England. 

And  was  again  largely  circulated? — ^Yes. 

I think  the  first  book  you  wrote  was  called  ‘ ‘ Human  Physiology 
the  Basis  of  Sanitary  and  Social  Science  ” ? — ^That  was  later.  That 
was  written  at  Malvern. 

That  was  a larger  book,  was  it  not? — Somewhat  larger — ^twice 
the  size. 

I think  it  is  only  right  that  I should  read  to  you  a passage 
from  the  preface  of  the  English  edition  in  order  to  found  a question 
upon  it.  ” ‘ Esoteric  Anthropology,’  though  covering  a portion 
of  the  same  ground,  yet  varies  widely  from  my  recent  work,  * Human 
Physiology  the  Basis  of  Sanitary  and  Social  Science  ’ ; it  treats 
more  particularly  of  disease  and  more  practically  of  treatment — 
especially  of  the  conditions  and  diseases  of  the  reproductive  system 
and  of  gestation  and  childbirth.  * Human  Physiology  ’ treats 
more  of  social  science,  and  three  of  its  six  parts  are  devoted  to 
matters  which  are  but  slightly  •touched  in  the  ^Anthropology.’ 
One  may  therefore  well  be  the  sequel  or  companion  of  the  other.  I 
have  honestly  tried  to  make  both  of  them  thoroughly  good  and 
useful  books — ^true  in  science,  ptxre  in  morals,  and  containing  the 
principles  of  the  highest  welfare  of  man  and  of  humanity.”  Does 
that  truly  represent  your  intention  in  writing  the  book? — ^Most 
certainly  it  does. 

And  the  character  of  the  book? — Most  certainly  it  does. 

Did  Mrs.  Nichols  practise  largely  in  England? — ^Most  of  the 
patients  came  to  her. 

At  page  302  I see  you  are  dealing  with  some  matters  of  the 
troubles  of  women,  and  you  say,  ” The  treatment  of  this  condi- 
tion will  alarm  such  persons  as  think  they  mtist  not  touch  cold 
water  . . . bad  consequences^”  It  was  a large  practice  in^ 

185 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Tbonai  L.  Niebob 

volving  hundreds  of  cases? — Including  America,  yes.  She  had 
more  practice  here  than  I had. 

You  did  not  know  Miss  Walker  at  all — ^the  last  witness? — 1 
did  not.  She  may  have  visited  at  my  house,  but  she  might  have 
seen  me  without  my  noticing  her  at  all. 

The  practice  which  the  late  Mrs.  Nichols  was  carrying  on  was 
a practice  that  would  in  the  ordinary  course  of  things  lead  to  com- 
munication with  Miss  Walker  without  your  recollecting  it? — Quite 
so.  She  had  her  own  patients,  who,  as  I said,  usually  came  to 
her,  and  she  saw  them  in  a different  apartment. 

And  ladies  might  come  and  consult  her,  I need  scarcely  ask 
you,  without  your  knowing  their  name  or  an^hing  of  the  kind  ? — 
Certainly. 

Have  persons  occasionally  come  to  consult  you  for  your  advice  ? 
— Sometimes  persons  who  read  the  book  came  to  me.  I did  not  lay 
myself  out  for  practice,  nor  wished  it;  I was  engaged  in  literary 
work. 

It  is  again  only  fair  that  I should  read  this  sentence  from  the 
preface — " I write,  not  to  get  consultations,  but  to  prevent  their 
necessity;  not  to  attract  patients,  but  to  keep  them  away  and  to 
enable  them  to  get  health  without  my  further  cure.’' — That  is  so, 
that  was  my  intention. 

i^d,  to  the  best  of  your  ability,  you  carried  out  that  inten- 
tion?— ^I  wished  to  make  my  book  as  perfect  as  I could. 

But  from  time  to  time  persons  did  come  to  you  for  advice, 
which  was  given? — ^Yes. 

Would  that  be  sometimes  for  matters,  or  generally  for  matters, 
involving  very  private  considerations? — They  might;  that  might 
come  in  some  cases. 

You  never  visited  patients,  I think? — ^Very  seldom.  I have 
sometimes  been  prevailed  upon  to  see  a patient. 

However,  you  never  held  yourself  out  as  a practitioner  ? ^Not 

at  all.  I always  gave  persons  to  understand  what  my  position  was. 
If  they  insisted  upon  my  seeing  a*  child  or  a patient  that  I thought 
I could  be  useful  to,  I ordinarily  went,  but  that  was  very  rare. 

Did  you  practise  in  America? — ^I  had  some  practice  there. 

Did  you  keep  a record  of  those  who  visited  you  in  England  ? 

I never  did. 

Not  even  a record  of  the  names,  or  whether  they  were  real  or 
assumed  names? — I never  kept  any  records  at  all 

I believe  Mrs.  Nichols  died  in  1884?— In  May,  1884^nearlv 
two  years  ago.  ^ 

Re-examined  by  Mr.  Wright — ^Your  wife  used  to  attend 
patients  of  a certain  kind?— She  attended  usually  to  ladies  who 
called. 

In  London,  did  she  ever  receive  male  patients? — She  may 
have  se^  gentlemen  who  may  have  wished  to  speak  to  her : I cannot 
say  with  regard  to  that  positively. 

186 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Thomu  L.  Nichob 

Not  to  your  knowledge? — ^No— not  often.  I do  not  know  that 
I quite  understand.  She  very  seldom  visited  any  patients : if  they 
were  not  able  to  come  to  her,  when  she  drove  out  she  may  have 
sometimes  called. 

Thomas  Bobbbts,  examined  by  Mr.  Molohby — ^1  am  a dental 
surgeon  practising  at  49  Charlwood  Street,  Pimlico.  1 was  called 
to  see  Mr.  Bartlett  on  16th  December,  and  1 went  to  86  Claverton 
Street.  I saw  Mrs.  Bartlett  on  the  landing  outside  the  door,  and  1 
asked  her  if  her  husband  was  in  the  habit  of  taking  mercury  in 
any  form.  As  far  as  I recollect,  I think  she  said  ‘‘  I do  not  know.*' 
I saw  the  deceased,  Mr.  Bartlett,  that  day.  I examined  his  mouth, 
and  1 looked  at  the  gums.  According  to  my  judgment  he  was 
suffering  from  mercurial  poison.  His  teeth  were  loose,  and  I ex- 
tracted the  two  upper  central  roots.  1 went  to  see  him  again  on 
the  l7th,  along  with  Dr.  Leach,  and  extracted  about  eleven  more 
roots.  On  the  2l8t  I extracted  four  lower  incisors.  1 used  a solu- 
tion of  cocaine  on  his  gums.  Cocaine  is  a new  drug  lately  used ; 
I cannot  say  whether  it  is  a mineral  or  a vegetable  drug.  The 
object  of  painting  Mr.  Bartlett's  gums  with  cocaine  was  to  produce 
local  anassthesia,  to  dull  the  sense  of  pain  in  the  jaw  and  make  the 
operation  more  easy.  When  I saw  Mr.  Bartlett  on  the  21st  I 
thought  that  the  signs  of  mercurial  poison  had  lessened.  On  the 
31st  December  Dr.  Leach  and  Mr.  Bartlett  came  to  my  house,  be- 
tween five  and  six,  and  I extracted  a tooth.  Dr.  Leach  used 
nitrous  oxide  gas,  and  I should  think  he  was  about  half  a minute 
under  its  infiuence.  On  31st  December,  which  was  the  last  time 
upon  which  I saw  him,  I should  say  that  his  condition  was  much 
better.  1 noticed  in  the  lower  jaw,  the  front  portion,  the  gums 
had  separated  and  receded  from  the  central  ridge  of  the 
alveolus,  the  bone  of  the  jaw;  the  alveolus  is  the  bony  process  in 
which  the  teeth  are  inserted.  I said  to  Dr.  Leach,  I think  this 
looks  very  much  like  necrosis  setting  in.**  Necrosis  means  the  death 
of  the  bone.  It  had  extended  between  two  lower  canines  about  an 
inch  and  a half  or  an  inch  and  a quarter,  and  the  decay  had  gone 
down  the  whole  socket  of  each  of  the  teeth  which  I had  extracted 
before. 

Was  the  disease  of  the  bone  what  you  call  extensive? — ^Not  at 
all  BO.  1 should  say  it  was  only  commencing. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  Clarkh — ^Did  you  have  some  trouble 
on  the  last  day  in  administering  the  nitrous  oxide  gas? — ^He  took 
more  than  patients  would  ordinarily  do;  he  inhaled  more  gas. 

Did  you  help  to  apply  it  several  times? — ^No;  only  once. 

How  long  did  it  take  before  he  went  off,  do  you  liiink? — ^Three 
or  four  minutes,  I should  think.  I did  not  take  the  time. 

As  a rule,  two  minutes  is  quite  sufficient,  is  it  not? — Tes. 

You  noticed  the  condition  of  the  bone  of  which  you  have  told 

187 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Thomai  Roberts 

US.  Did  you  also  notice  a fungoid  growth  in  the  mouth? — ^Yes; 
round  the  necks  of  the  teeth. 

There  were  very  few  teeth  remaining^  were  there  not? — ^Very 
few  teeth.  Of  what  date  are  you  speaking;  of  the  first  time  I saw 
him? 

No,  the  last  time. 

By  Mr.  Jubtiob  Wills — How  many  teeth  did  what  you  ex- 
tracted answer  to? — extracted  eleven  teeth  and  stumps  on  my 
second  visit ; but  I cannot  say  how  many  teeth  or  how  many  stumps. 

Oro88‘ecoarn4/i^ati(m  eonti/n/aed — ^There  were  only  two  left  on  each 
side? — ^No,  more;  I know  there  were  more. 

How  many? — cannot  say  exactly.  I know  one  was  left  on 
the  lower  left  side  and  one  canine  on  the  lower  right. 

How  many  were  left  in  the  upper  jaw,  right  and  left? — I can- 
not say  how  many. 

The  larger  teeth  at  the  back  of  the  jaw  had  gone,  had  they? 
— believe  they  had. 

Was  the  breath  very  foul  ? — I did  not  notice  at  the  last  visit. 
It  was  extremely  so  at  the  first  and  second. 

When  did  you  notice  this  fungoid  growth? — ^At  each  visit; 
each  time  I saw  him. 

Was  it  found  in  the  hollow  space  where  the  teeth  had  previously 
been? — ^No;  I should  say  not. 

Will  you  tell  me  where  it  was? — ^Around  the  necks  of  the  teeth 
on  the  margin  of  the  gums. 

. Around  the  necks  of  the  teeth  that  still  remained,  do  you 
mean  ? — ^Yes. 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills — ^Was  that  the  growth  of  the  bone  or  of 
the  gum?  1 do  not  quite  understand  what  fungoid  growth  is?— 
It  was  principally  tartar,  I should  say. 

XJrQSB-exarnmation  coniAmitd — ^You  tell  us  you  said  to  Dr. 
LeacE  you  thought  necrosis  was  setting  in — ^was  that  said  after 
the  operation  had  been  performed? — ^Before  the  last  operation  had 
been  performed.  * 

Was  it  said  in  Mr.  Bartlett^s  presence? — ^It  was. 

Will  you  first  tell  us,  supposing  necrosis  not  to  be  stopped, 
how  does  it  progress?  You  say  it  is  the  death  of  the  bone? — ^It  goes 
on — that  is,  the  dead  part  of  the  bone  separates  from  the  healthy 
part^  and  ^en  you  can  take  it  away.  It  separates  entirely,  and 
you  can  remove  it. 

How  much  of  the  structure  of  the  bone  may  be  involved  in 
that,  I suppose,  depends  upon  the  condition  of  the  person,  the 
circumstances  of  his  life,  and  so  on? — Certainly. 

I mean  it  might  go  on  in  a way  which  would  cause  the  death 
practically  or  the  destruction  of  the  jawbone? — ^It  might  do  so. 

Whidi  of  course  would  be  a very  terrible  thing  to  contem- 
plate?— ^Very. 

18S 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Thomas  Roberta 

Re-examined  by  the  Attornet-Genebal — The  portion  that  was 
decayed,  you  said,  would  have  separated  from  the  healthy  portion 
— ^the  portion  where  necrosis  appeared,  which  was  decayed  or 
dead,  would  separate  from  the  healthy  portion  ? — ^1  did  not  say  that 
it  had  separated. 

But  it  would? — It  would,  if  allowed  to  have  gone  on. 

There  is  also  a means,  is  there  not,  by  paring  or  removing  the 
decayed  part,  of  separating  it  from  the  healthy  part,  and  pre- 
venting the  spread  of  the  necrosis? — ^Yes^  I suppose  it  might  do 
so.  I cannot  say  for  certain. 

At  all  events,  did  you  consider  this  a case  involving  any 
serious  consequences,  involving  any  serious  operation? — ^Not  at  that 
time. 

You  did  not  think  it  sufficiently  serious,  then,  to  consider  the 
question  whether  an  operation  would  be  necessary? — ^Not  as  to  the 
necrosis  portion  of  the  bone. 

You  thought  it  would  separate  entirely  naturally? — ^That  is 
its  process. 

Leaving  the  rest  of  the  gums  healthy? — ^Yes. 

As  to  this  fungoid  growth  you  have  spoken  of,  did  you  find 
it  necessary  to  suggest  any  treatment,  or  to  do  anything  in  re- 
lation to  that? — ^No. 

Why? — ^Except — cannot  say  for  certain — ^that  I recommended 
the  mouth  to  be  rinsed  out  with  Condy’s  fiuid. 

And  was  that  an  adequate  treatment,  in  your  opinion,  for 
the  case? — ^Well,  I thought  it  was  the  best  thing  to  do. 

Did  you  attach  any  serious  importance  to  that? — ^Not  to  this 
fungoid  growth. 

The  deposition  of  Dr.  Thomas  Hbnbt  Green,  sworn,  was  put  in  and 
read  as  follows : — am  a physician  at  Charing  Cross  Hospital.  I 
was  present  at  a post-mortem  on  the  deceased  Bartlett  on  the  2nd 
'Of  January,  and  the  post-mortem  was  made  under  my  directions. 

I made  no  notes.  I dictated  the  notes.  I did  not  read  over  the 
notes  at  the  time.  I have  read  them  since.  I believe  the  notes 
contain  what  I dictated.  I noticed  the  oesophagus  (I  cannot  speak 
positively  to  the  condition,  unless  I am  allowed  to  refer  to  my 
notes) ; as  far  as  1 can  remember,  the  lower  part  of  the  oesophagus 
was  denuded  of  the  epithelium. 

The  Attorney-General — Your  lordship  does  not  need  to  have 
that  explained  to  you,  but  perhaps  it  may  be  convenient  to  say  that 
that  long  word  means  the  gullet. 

Mr.  Clabkb — ^My  lord,  the  deposition  of  Dr.  Green  is  divided 
into  certain  portions.  I should  like  the  examination  and  the 
cross-examination  to  be  read  straight  on  without  any  interruption, 
if  the  Attorney-General  consenis. 

Mr.  Justice  Wills — You  mean  without  showing  where  the 
htesi,  is? 


189 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Dr,  Thmau  H,  Green 

Mr.  Clabkb — ^Tes,  my  lord. 

The  Attoenbt-Gbotbal — ^Very  well. 

Depodtion  cmtimied — ^It  had  come  ofi  in  little  patches  here 
and  there.  The  stomach  was  removed.  It  was  tied  before  removal 
at  both  ends.  The  contents  of  the  stomach  were  put  into  a large 
glass  vessel;  this  vessel  had  no  stopper  to  it,  therefore  a smaller 
glass-stoppered  bottle  was  procured  from  the  chemist,  and  the  con- 
tents were  transferred  from  the  larger  vessel  to  the  smaller.  I 
should  think  about  half  an  hour  elapsed  before  the  transfer  to  the 
smaller  vessel.  The  contents  of  the  stomach  smelt  very  much  like 
chloroform.  I compared  it  to  a mixture  of  chloroform  and  garlic. 
I examined  the  cardiac  end  of  the  stomach  and  the  mucous  mem- 
brane. I examined  them  by  my  eyes,  by  means  of  a lens,  and  by 
my  finger.  The  mucous  membrane  at  the  cardiac  end  of  the 
stomach  was  covered  with  thick,  tenacious  mucus  (I  am  speaking 
from  memory).  I believe  it  was  unnaturally  red — I am  not  sure — 
a dusky  red,  I believe.^  The  capillaries  were  filled  with  blood. 
There  was  considerable  injection  of  the  mucous  membrane  at  this 
part  of  the  stomach.  In  the  posterior  dependent  aspect  of  the 
stomach  there  was  a distinct  loss  of  substance— I should  think  over 
a space  about  the  size  of  a shilling.  I examined  the  intestines.  I 
do  not  remember  if  the  contents  were  run  into  any  receiver.  The 

smell  of  the  contents  of  the  intestines  was  similar  to  the  stomach 

much  less  intense.  I examined  the  heart.  I noticed  the  tissue 
It  was  perhaps  a little  softer  than  I expected  it  to  be  so  shortly  after 
death.  If  I remember  rightly,  I said  that  the  tissue  is  a little 
softer  than  natural,  perhaps  post-mortem.  It  was  very  slight.  I 
noticed  ^e  cavities  and  larger  vessels  of  the  heart  were  much  too 
deeply  stainef  The  blood  itself  was  fluid.  That  was  not  a 
formal  condition,  considering  the  time  that  had  elapsed  from  death 
to  the  post-mortem  examination,  I was  not  present  when  the  result 

I was  obliged  to  leave.  I concluded 
that  death  was  most  likely  due  to  the  contents  of  the  stomach.  I 
roggested,  before  I left,  that  it  would  be  wise  to  have  the  contents 
^^e  stomach  sealed,  and  the  coroner  should  be  communicated 

Bbal— My  depositions  taken 
before  ^0  coronw  I looked  through  hurriedly  and  I signed.  Thev 
were  offwed  to  be  read  to  me  by  the  coroner,  but  he  did  not  read 

post-mortem  rapidly  about  two 

toted  T;«  / ^ ^re  S 

deceased’s  stomach  myself.  The  inflitTnn.i.ti«if, 
at  the  cardiac  end  was  obviously  recent.  It  was  obviouslv  a recent 

aoute  inflammation  could  hive  lasted 
^ characterised  as  recent.  When 

Bad  melt.  Th^  were  glass  and  quite  clean.  I do  n(rt  r3« 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Dr.  Thomas  H.  Groen 

any  more.  A third  small  stoppered  bottle  was  sent  for  from  the 
chemist.  I examined  it.  It  appeared  to  be  perfectly  new.  1 don't 
know  that  1 exactly  saw  the  sealing  of  the  jars.  I was  engaged 
in  something  else.  I cannot  say  I saw  them  labelled.  The  skull- 
cap was  removed.  The  dura  mater  did  adhere  to  the  skullcap 
rather  more  than  it  ought  to  do.  The  brain  was  carefully  ex- 
amined throughout,  cut  up,  sliced  in  every  possible  direction.  I 
do  not  remember  that  the  meninges  were  thickened.  The  ventricles 
of  the  brain  I did  not  notice  anything  abnormal  about.  1 did 
not  notice  any  odour  about  the  ventricles.  We  examined  the  brain 
most  carefully,  and,  as  far  as  I remember,  there  was  nothing  ab- 
normal about  it.  The  brain  was  examined  after  the  stomach.  It 
was  examined  last.  I examined  the  larynx,  and  cut  it  all  the 
way  down.  I believe  there  was  nothing  abnormal  about  it.  I 
examined  the  trachea.  1 believe  there  was  nothing  abnormal  about 
that.  The  kidneys  I examined.  They  were  quite  natural.  I 
examined  the  spleen.  That  was  quite  natural.  I have  no  recol- 
lection of  examining  the  bladder.  I should  think  I did  so,  but 
I do  not  remember.  There  was  nothing  particular  about  the  lungs ; 
a little  congestion  behind;  I fancy  a post-mortem  change;  for  all 
practical  purposes  they  were  healthy.  I only  looked  at  the  skin 
with  my  eye.  I did  not  notice  ulcers  about  the  leg.  We  noticed 
he  was  a healthy-looking  man.  I noticed  no  ulceration  anywhere 
except  in  the  stomach.  The  pyloric  end  of  the  stomach  was  in- 
flamed, I believe  the  small  intestines  were  perfectly  healthy 
throughout.  We  cut  them  up  and  carefully  looked  at  them.  We 
weighed  none  of  the  organs;  we  had  no  scales,  and  I saw  no 
special  reasons  for  doing  so.  I can't  remember  the  size  and  idiape 
of  the  loss  of  substance  in  the  dependent  part  of  the  stomach.  It 
was  about  the  size  of  a shilling — ^very  shallow.  The  edges  were 
certainly  not  clean  cut.  The  loss  of  substance  did  not  extend  to 
the  muscular  coat.  There  was  very  marked  congestion  for  some 
distance  round  the  ulcer.  All  the  appearances  in  the  deceased's 
corpse  were  consistent  with  natural  disease  except  the  appearance 
of  the  stomach.  Some  of  the  appearances  in  the  stomach  I might 
attribute  to  natural  disease — all  the  appearances  of  the  stomach, 
except  that  of  the  ulcer  and  the  mucous  membrane  in  its  immediate 
vicinity.  I do  not  consider  those  appearances  due  to  chloroform, 
but  to  some  irritant — ^I  could  not  say  from  chloroform.  1 in- 
ferred it  from  the  smell.  The  whole  of  the  stomach  was  slightly 
inflamed.  I examined  the  mouth.  I think  we  found  nothing  but 
the  condition  of  the  jaw — ^there  was  some  slight  necrosis — ^nothing 
in  the  mucous  membrane  of  the  mouth.  I did  not  notice  the  teeth 
particularly.  A good  many  were  lost.  I did  not  observe  an  abcess. 
I noticed  the  pharynx  was  quite  natural,  and  the  upper  part  of  the 
oesophagus.  He  was  a strong,  well-nourished,  healllLy-lowing  man, 
powerful,  well  developed — I i^ould  say,  as  far  as  I could  observe, 
a man  capable  of  considerable  physical  exertion. 

191 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Dr.  Tbomat  H.  Gre«n 

By  Mr.  Ligkfold — cannot  complain  of  my  practice.  1 should 
imagine  necrosis  of  the  jaw  is  not  a pleasant  ailment.  1 expect 
to  find  it  occur  in  a healthy  person.  1 should  not  call  a person 
suSering  from  necrosis  in  a healthy  condition.  1 do  not  remember 
I heard  Mr.  Leach  describe  him  as  suffering  from  alarming  symp- 
toms of  necrosis.  Poisoning  by  liquid  chloroform  is,  I believe, 
of  very  rare  occurrence.  I have  never,  in  the  course  of  my 
practice,  had  a case  of  poisoning  by  liquid  chloroform.  I have 
never  seen  a case  in  which  I suspected  death  to  have  resulted  from 
chloroform.  I do  not  know  what  chloroform  is  considered.  I 
believe  it  may  destroy  life  very  quickly  in  a liquid  state.  I do 
not  know.  1 believe  so  now.  I have  not  come  to  that  conclusion. 
If  1 had  been  asked,  I should  have  said  it  might  destroy  life 
quickly.  1 do  not  know  that  persons  have  taken  4 ounces  and 
recovered.  Taylor  is  a great  authority.  If  I have  referred  to  his 
book,  it  must  have  been  when  a student.  I have  no  personal  know- 
ledge whatever  of  poisoning  by  liquid  chloroform,  nor  of  the  symp- 
toms it  produces.  Ulceration  of  the  stomach  does  not  commonly 
follow  on  gastritis.  Gastritis  is  ulceration  of  the  stomach — 
ulceration  is  one  of  the  manifestations  of  gastritis.  Ulceration  of 
the  stomach  will  sometimes  cause  perforation,  and  perforation 
eudden  death.  What  1 meant  was  that  signs  of  acute  inflammation 
might  pass  off — signs  of  acute  inflammation  of  the  stomach  might 
pass  off  completely,  or  leave  only  signs  which  could  not  be  dis- 
tinguished from  a chronic  process.  It  would  not  pass  off  after 
death.  I quite  agree  with  the  passage  in  “ Taylor  on  Poisons,*’ 
second  edition,  page  163,  read  to  me.  I do  not  know  anything 
about  the  theory  that  chloral  hydrate  may  be  turned  into  ^loro- 
form  by  the  action  of  the  blood  alkali.  Chloral  hydrate  would 
not  have  the  slightest  smell  of  chloroform.  If  in  the  stomach — 
do  not  know.  I do  not  remember  having  heard  the  medical  men 
say  anything  about  the  brain  before  what  I have  said  to-day. 

I do  not  remember  I said  anything  before  the  coroner  about  it. 

I have  a very  clear  recollection*  of  what  I conceive  to  be  the  alK 
important  facts  of  the  case;  of  course  I mean  as  to  post-mortem 
appearances.  The  notion  that  there  was  chloroform  in  the  system 
did  impress  me.  1 should  not,  to  my  knowledge,  have  expected 
to  find  something  wrong  in  the  brain  in  a case  of  poisoning  by 
liquid  chloroform.  I believe  the  blood  in  chloroform  poisoning 
is  more  or  less  altered  and  does  not  coagulate  properly,  and  stains 
the  tissues;  but  I have  no  knowledge.  I do  not  think  1 have  spoken 
to  Mr.  Leach  since  the  post-mortem.  Oh,  yes,  I did,  when  he 
adted  me  to  come  to  the  coroner’s  inquiry.  We  certainly  had  no 
medical  discussion. 

Be-examined — ^I  first  got  a notion  of  chloroform  as  soon  as 
we  opened  the  stomach,  after  the  thorax  had  been  examined. 
Before  smelling  the  stomach,  no  person  had  suggested  to  me  there 
192 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 


was  chloroform.  The  notion  came  to  me  immediately  I opened 
the  stomach.  There  was  no  perforation  of  the  stomach  in  this 
case;  the  ulceration  was  only  superficial.  The  ulceration  and  the 
appearances  surrounding  the  ulcerated  part  were,  in  my  opinion, 
due  to  the  recent  action  of  an  irritant  poison.  Chloroform  is  a 
very  volatile  liquid.  It  acts  as  a local  irritant.  It  is  used  ex- 
ternally as  a local  irritant.  I should  not  like  to  express  any 
opinion  as  to  whether  any  of  the  signs  of  infiammation  of  the 
stomach  might  have  been  due  to  an  inflammation  of  the  mucous 
membrane  antecedent  in  causation  to  that  caused  by  an  irritant. 
What  I mean  to  say  is,  that  the  signs  of  inflammation  at  the 
cardiac  end  of  the  stomach  were  to  my  mind  so  characteristic 
of  the  action  of  a local  irritant  that  the  slighter  degrees  of  in- 
flammation in  other  parts  of  the  stomach  might  have  been,  or 
not,  due  to  the  irritant.  1 cannot  distinguish  in  the  pyloric 
part  between  inflammation  due  to  the  irritant,  and  any  irritation 
due  to  any  preceding  gastric  disturbance.  The  inflammation 
was  recent,  certainly.  The  infiammation  at  the  cardiac  end  was 
certainly  recent. 

By  Mr.  Liokpold — Chlorodyne  would  not  have  nearly  so 
pungent  a smell  as  I smelt  in  the  stomach.  It  has  a slight  smell 
of  chloroform,  I believe;  but  what  I smelt  was  almost  as  strong 
as  a freshly  opened  bottle  of  chloroform. 

The  Witness  further  says — desire  to  say  that  all  I have 
said  has  been  from  my  memory,  and  without  reference  to  notes. 

(Signed)  T.  Hbnby  Gbbbn. 

Dr.  Alfred  Leaoh,  examined  by  the  Attornet-Genbral — am 
a licentiate  of  the  Boyal  College  of  Surgeons,  a licentiate  of  the 
Society  of  Apothecaries,  and  a licentiate  of  midwifery.  I practise 
at  4:1  Gharlwood  Street,  Pimlico,  which  is  less  than  a quarter  of  a 
mile  away  from  Claverton  Street.  On  10th  December 
last  1 was  called  in  between  nine  and  ten  in  the  morn- 
ing by  Mrs.  Bartlett  to  attend  the  deceased.  I had 
never  heard  either  of  him  or  of  the  accused.  I arrived  at 
85  Claverton  Street  before  eleven  o’clock  in  the  forenoon.  The 
deceased  was  sitting  up  on  the  sofa  in  the  drawing-room,  and  I 
think  he  had  on  a dressing  gown.  1 found  that  he  was  suffering 
from  diarrhoea,  some  pain  in  the  left  side,  foetid  breath,  and  he 
was  suffering  from  the  signs  of  indigestion  and  sub-acute  gas- 
tritis— one  might  call  it  mercurialism.  Mercurialism  is  the  effect 
of  a dose  of  mercury  in  a person  with  an  idiosyncrasy  for  that 
drug,  certain  persons  being  more  liable  to  the  injurious  effect  of 
mercury  than  others. 

By  Mr.  Justiob  Wills — ^Does  that  mean  that  he  had  taken 
too  large  a dose  of  blue  pill  or  something  containing  mercury) — 
Tes.  It  does  not  mean  that  he  had  been  taking  mercury  chroni- 
cally, 
o 


19S 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Dr.  Alfred  Leeeh 

contvrm^d — I cannot  remember  exactly  what  I 
prescribed  for  him.  I think  it  would  be  chlorate  of  potash  and 
bismuth,  but  I am  afraid  I am  venturing  to  say  too  much  even 
with  that;  I have  not  looked  at  my  notes  since  I was  at  the  Police 
Court,  and  I am  speaking  from  memory  only,  which  is  fallacious. 
I gave  the  copy  of  my  prescriptions  to  the  Treasury.  On  referring 
to  it  1 find  the  first  prescription  is  Bismuth  cinchona,  tincture  of 
nux  vomica,”  which  may  be  correctly  described  as  a stomach 
mixture.  On  the  same  day  I also  prescribed  chlorate  of  potash 
and  lemon  syrup  as  a mouth  wash,  because  of  the  state  of  the  jaw. 
1 called  again  on  11th  December,  and  I directed  that  the  bismuth 
should  be  suspended  by  a solution  of  bicarbonate  of  soda,  bromide 
of  ammonium  (a  mild  sedative),  nux  vomica,  and  fiavouring  matter 
— compound  tincture  of  chloroform  at  the  end.  That  would 
contain  two  drops  of  pure  chloroform  in  the  entire  prescription, 
which  would  again  be  described  as  a stomach  and  sedative  pre- 
scription. I called  on  the  14th,  and  gave  the  patient  a morphia 
pill  to  procure  sleep  at  night,  and  I repeated  the  mouth  wash  or 
chlorate  of  potash.  On  the  15ih  I prescribed  a tonic  of  gentian 
and  nux  vomica.  I cannot  say  whether  there  was  any  injection 
that  day  or  not.  On  the  18th  I prescribed  sulphate  of  mag- 
nesium and  tincture  of  jalap — a fairly  strong  purgative  of  Epsom 
salts,  but  that  was  not  taken,  however.  The  bismuth  mixture  was 
repeated  on  the  18th  with  the  bromide,  and  here  for  the  first  time 
I added  some  chloral  hydrate — 16  grains  to  be  taken  at  bed  time, 
which  is  a small  quantity.  On  the  19th  I added  morphia  to  the 
chloral  hydrate.  On  that  day  his  condition  had  improved.  On 
the  20th  the  chloral  hydrate  was  increased  to  20  grains,  and  the 
bromide  and  morphia  remained  the  same.  On  the  22nd  I see 
nothing  except  a mouth  wash.  On  the  24th  I gave  him  a mixture 
having  no  iierapeutio  action. 

Why  did  you  give  iti — ^Because  he  would  not  sleep.  I had 
tried  a strong  or  fairly  strong  narcotic,  and,  judging  the  nature 
of  my  patient,  I thought  it  might  make  him  sleep  by  giving  him 
a placebo,  giving  him  ten  drops  at  a time,  and  telling  him  that 
he  was  bound  to  sleep  after  it — ^in  fact,  a prescription  for  the 
imagination.  On  the  26th  I prescribed  a tonic,  which  was  also 
calculated  to  act  as  a slight  stimulant  to  the  digestive  organs  and 
is  a nervine  stimulant  also;  it  contained  phosphate  of  strychnine. 
On  the  26th  I began  the  vermifuges — ^the  worm  medicines — santo- 
nine  made  up  with  a little  combination  of  senna,  to  be  followed 
by  a draught  of  sulphate  of  soda  and  Urwick's  extract.  That  failed 
to  act,  and  then,  at  my  suggestion,  he  swallowed  the  draught  that 
was  prescribed  for  him  on  the  18th,  which  he  had  not  taken  until 
this  moment.  He  likewise  had  administered  to  him  by  himself 
two  small  globules,  each  containing  a fairly  good  dose  of  croton 
oil  for  aperient  purposes.  These  were  all  ineffectual,  and  I was 
194 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Dr.  Alfred  Leadi 

afraid  to  give  him  any  more.  On  the  28th  1 gave  him  an  emulsi- 
fied preparation  of  iodoform  with  bismuth  for  the  fungoid  state 
of  his  jaws. 

Is  it  a correct  description  of  this  treatment  to  say  that  it 
was  addressed  to  the  soothing  of  the  stomach,  sedative  and 
aperient? — So  far,  you  are  quite  right. 

An  innocent  and  ordinary  treatment? — ^1  hope  so.  1 found 
that  my  treatment  was  successful,  and  that  his  health  was  improv- 
ing every  day.  On  the  16th  December  Dr.  Roberts,  the  dental 
surgeon,  was  called  in.  He  used  cocaine,  and  on  the  Slat  1 
administered  nitrous  oxide  gas  for  the  performance  of  the  opera- 
tion. The  last  time  I saw  Mr.  Bartlett  alive  was  about  six 
o’clock  on  31st  December,  in  front  of  Dr.  Roberts’  door,  49  Chari- 
wood  Street.  He  had  just  had  a tooth  out,  but  previous  to  that 
1 think  1 may  say  that  he  seemed  better  than  1 had  ever  seen 
him  before.  I cannot  say  that  his  spirits  were  better,  but  they 
were  not  bad. 

From  what  did  you  derive  the  impression  that  he  was  better 
than  you  had  ever  seen  him? — Chiefly  from  his  acknowledging 
it,  saying  that  he  felt  he  was  better,  a thing  he  was  very  loath 
to  do.  On  the  30th  I said  I would  not  continue  to  visit  him, 
and  the  reason  for  that  was  that  he  had  made  up  his  mind  to 
have  continual  medical  attendance,  and  1 was  not  inclined  to 
continue.  " Of  course,  if  he  needed  it,  1 would  not  mind  attend- 
ing, but  1 did  not  think  that  he  continued  to  need  it — ^to  need  it 
daily,  I mean — and  to  see  him  twice  a week  would  have  been  quite 
enough. 

About  4 a.m.  on  1st  January  Mr.  Doggett’s  housemaid  came 
for  me.  I asked  her  whether  it  was  merely  one  of  his  notions  or 
whether  he  was  really  ill,  and  I think  she  said  he  was  dead,  but 
I scarcely  accepted  that  as  true.  She  could  only  say,  I know 
nothing  about  it;  Mrs.  Bartlett  only  tells  me  he  is  dead.”  1 got 
alarmed,  and  we  jumped  into  a hansom  and  went  to  Claverton 
Street.  When  I went  into  the  Iroom  I found  Mr.  Bartlett  was 
dead.  This  would  be  about  4.30  in  the  morning.  When  I got 
there  Mrs.  Bartlett  and  Mr.  Doggett  were  in  the  drawing-room; 
I am  not  quite  certain  whether  Mrs.  Doggett  was  there  also.  I 
found  the  deceased  lying  in  his  usual  place — a camp  bedstead 
near  the  window,  where  I had  always  seen  him.  I made  a formal 
examination  in  order  to  see  whether  he  was  dead  or  not,  although 
directly  1 entered  the  door  1 saw  that  he  was  dead.  He  had  on 
a nightdress,  and  I think  an  undervest,  and  he  was  lying  on  his 
back  with  his  arms  across  the  abdomen.  The  legs  were  up  a 
little;  the  fingers  naturally  closed,  and  the  surface  very  pallid 
and  very  cold ; the  eyelids  nearly  closed,  and  the  pupils,  for  him, 
very  much  dilated;  natural  for  death.  The  mouth  was  open,  and 
the  tongue  was  very  white.  I calculated  Aat  he  had  been  dead 

195 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 

Pr.  Allred  Uadb 

for  two  or  three  hours.  A little  later,  after  thinking  it  over  a 
day  or  two,  I thought  it  possible  that  he  might  have  been  dead 
longer,  but  I think  now,  on  giving  the  matter  very  careful  con- 
sideration, three  hours  is  as  nearly  accurate  as  I can  give.  I 
said  to  Mr.  Doggett  in  the  drawing-room  that  I thought  he  had 
been  dead  two  or  three  hours;  I am  not  sure  if  Mrs.  Bartlett  was 
present  then.  When  I smelt  the  body  I found  that  the  chest  smelt 
of  brandy.  I think  it  was  moist,  1 am  not  sure  of  that.  The 
mouth  had  no  odour  whatever.  The  brandy  that  1 smelt  was  on 
the  diest  itself.  It  was  a slight  smell.  I am  not  certain  as  to 
whether  there  was  any  moisture  on  the  vest  or  nightdress.  That 
was  the  only  smell  on  the  body  that  attracted  my  attention.  In 
the  room  there  was  that  natural  close  odour  of  a sleeping  room, 
the  odour  of  supper  and  of  condiments  and  of  brandy  and  of 
gas.  The  face  was  pale,  but  the  expression  was  natural.  The 
fingers  of  the  hand  were  slightly  flexed,  as  were  also  the  legs. 

Was  there  any  appearance  at  all  of  any  convulsive  action,  any 
paroxysms,  or  anything  of  that  kindl — ^No.  I looked  for  that.  I 
looked  for  froth  on  the  lips,  but  found  none.  The  eyelids  were 
so  closed  as  to  prevent  an  examination  of  the  pupils  without  draw- 
ing up  the  eydids.  1 lifted  the  eyelids  of  both  eyes  to  see  the 
pupils. 

Lying  ba<^,  as  you  have  described  him,  his  pupils  would  be 
in  the  direction  of  the  ceiling  ? — No,  they  were  more  in  the 
direction  of  the  wall  behind  him. 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills — Contracted  in  death?— Yes;  the  line 
of  vision  would  have  been  distinctly  above  the  horizontal  if  he 
had  been  standing  up. 

EtBOmi^aiion  con^vrmtd — could  form  no  opinion  at  all  as  to 
whether  his  eyelids,  in  the  state  in  which  I saw  them,  were  in  the 
state  in  which  he  had  died,  or  whether  anything  had  been  done 
to  them.  It  is  possible  to  draw  down  the  eyelids  so  as  to  close 
them  before  cadaveric  rigidity  sets  in. 

About  what  time  does  it  take? — k.  few  minutes  to  many  hours; 
roughly  speaking,  from  six  to  eight.  It  depends  on  the  cause  of 
death,  the  state  of  the  body  before  death,  and  on  surrounding 
circumstances  to  some  small  extent. 

The  temperature  of  the  room  ? — ^Tes,  but  very  slightly,  I 
think.  I scarcely  know  that  the  surrounding  circumstances  are 
important.^  I believe  the  cadaveric  rigidity  differs  between  bodies 
immersed  in  water  and  others.  I am  not  speaking  from  experi- 
ence; only  from  reading  on  the  subject. 

Will  you  please  describe  the  arrangement  of  the  room?  Was 
there  any  table  near  the  bed? — ^No,  the  table  was  in  the  middle  of 
the  room,  away  from  the  bed.  The  head  of  the  bed  was  towards 
the  wall  on  which  the  mantelpiece  was.  The  fireplace  projectea 
from  part  of  the  wall,  which  projected  also,  and  that  left  a kind 
196 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Dr.  Alfred  Leech 

of  very  ehallow  alcove.  The  head  of  the  bed  was  in  that  alcove, 
as  near  the  mantelpiece  as  the  alcove  would  allow  it  to  be. 

Did  you  observe  anything  on  the  mantelshelf  ? — ^Unusual? 

I did  not  say  unusual.  Did  you  observe  anything? — Yes,  a 
looking-glass,  a clock,  some  vases,  and  a small  bottle  of  dilorodyne. 
That  was  all.  The  bottle  of  chlorodyne  was  either  on  the  mantel- 
shelf or  a little  bit  on  the  other  side,  away  from  the  bed.  The 
size  of  the  bottle  would  be  about  an  ounce  bottle.  On  the  table 
there  were  the  remains  of  supper  and  a brandy  bottle,  a bottle 
containing  some  white  stufE,  1 ^ink  carbonate  of  soda — ^there  was 
nothing  of  importance  on  the  table.  I satisfied  myself  that  the 
bottle  contained  some  brandy,  but  I do  not  remember  how  much. 
There  was  also  a wineglass,  with  some  brandy  in  it,  on  a table. 
1 do  not  remember  whether  there  was  a whatnot  or  stand  at  the 
end  of  the  room  facing  the  mantelpiece.  I certainly  looked  for 
anything  that  could  throw  light  on  the  subject  I had  in  hand, 
but  I did  not  take  an  inventory  of  what  was  there  besides  the 
things  of  importance.  I would  call  bottles  things  of  importance. 

Was  there  anything  there  besides  the  bottle  of  chlorodyne  on 
the  mantelpiece  and  the  bottle  of  brandy  on  the  table? — ^Yes,  the 
glass  jar  with  white  powder  in  it — carbonate  of  soda,  I think — 
and  the  glass  with  a little  brandy;  beyond  that  I remember 
nothing.  There  was  a little  lock-up  ne:^  the  fireplace  which  I 
examined  along  with  Mr.  Doggett.  I forget  whether  it  was  locked 
or  not,  but,  if  it  was  locked,  we  unlocked  it.  We  did  not  have 
to  ask  for  the  key.  There  was  nothing  of  a suspicious  nature  in 
that  look-up ; there  were  no  bottles  in  it.  I smelt  all  the  glasses 
in  the  room.  Brandy,  a smell  of  supper,  and  so  forth  were  all 
the  things  noticeable  to  me.  I saw  a glass  of  Condy’s  fluid;  I 
am  not  sure  whether  it  was  on  the  corner  of  the  mantelpiece  or 
on  the  floor  just  below  it. 

When  you  say  a glass,  do  you  mean  a tumbler? — Yes,  with 
another  bottle  in  it,  but  1 am  not  quite  sure.  The  chlorodyne 
bottle  was  labelled  Chlorodyne^”  and  there  was  very  little  in 
the  bottle.  I looked  round  the  room  with  care,  and  searched 
carefully  to  see  whether  there  was  anything  in  the  place  that  might 
throw  light  on  the  matter,  anything  suspicious.  The  bedroom 
opened  from  the  drawing-room  by  folding  doors,  but  I do  not 
think  I entered  it. 

Was  there  anything  whatever  in  the  previous  conduct  of  the 
deceased,  in  your  observation  of  him  continuously  from  10th  to 
31st  December,  to  suggest  to  you  the  probability  of  death  from 
natural  causes? — ^No,  nothing. 

Did  you  say  anything  to  Mrs.  Bartlett,  or  did  Mrs.  Bartlett 
say  anything  to  you,  as  to  what  could  have  been  the  cause  of 
death? — ^Yes,  1 asked  her  to  give  me  an  explanation — any  assist- 
ance, any  elucidation  of  the  mystery,  but  she  said  she  was  unable. 
We  then  discussed  several  things,  and  then  I spoke  to  her  in  a 

m 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Dr,  Alfrad  Leadbi 

low  Yoice  60  that  Mr.  Doggett  might  take  the  hint  to  leave  the 
room.  When  he  was  gone  I thought  perhaps  some  matters  of 
delicacy  which  she  did  not  like  to  mention  before  him  might  come 
out,  but  she  was  unable  to  give  me  any  explanation,  and  then  it 
was,  I think,  that  we  discussed  the  subject  of  chlorodyne. 

Mr.  Clarke — ^If  the  witness  has  a note  that  may  assist  his 
recollection  of  that  1 am  quite  content  that  he  should  refer  to  it 
now. 

The  Attorott-Gbnbral— Either  my  friend  wishes  the  witness’s 
notes  read  or  he  does  not.  1 am  willing  to  take  the  course  he 
thinks  most  desirable,  but  I thought  it  was  best  to  get  an  inde- 
pendent recollection  of  this  gentleman  when  he  came  there  on  that 
morning. 

Mr.  Clarke — do  not  wish  for  anything  he  has  written 
as  a separate  independent  document,  but  if  he  has  a record  made 
at  the  time  by  him  which  will  give  him  full  recollection  of  the 
conversation  I am  willing  to  take  it. 

The  Attorket-Genbral — ^He  cannot  pick  out  little  bits;  either 
the  document  must  be  read  or  not. 

Mr.  Justice  Wills — We  had  best  leave  it  as  it  is,  I think. 
Mr.  Clarke  has  the  means  of  cross-examination. 

Examifiation  contimied — ^Was  anything  said  about  the  ques- 
tion of  the  necessity  for  an  inquest? — ^Yes.  I said  (this  was  while 
Mr.  Doggett  was  there,  I think),  **  I cannot  give  a certificate; 
there  must  be  a post-mortem.”  Mrs.  Bartlett’s  reply  to  that 
was,  ” Must  there  be  an  inquest?  ” I said,  ” There  must  be  a 
post-mortem.”  A little  later  on  I said,  ” Really,  this  is  a case 
that  I ought  to  report  to  the  coroner,  but  I have  no  suspicion  of 
foul  play,  I will  have  a post-mortem  made,  and  then,  if  the 
pathological  cause  of  death  is  found,  a certificate  will  be  given  in 
due  course.  I will  not  make  the  post-mortem  mvself : I will  have 
a pathologist.” 

Do  you  recollect  saying  anything  about  what  might  be  found 
on  examination  to  be  the  cause  •of  death? — ^Tes.  Mrs.  Bartlett 
asked,  “ What  is  he  dead  of  ? ” I replied,  ” I don’t  know;  I 
found  no  cause  of  death.  It  is  probably  due  to  the  rupture  of 
some  small  vessel,  some  aneurism — something  that  may  have  been 
possibly  overlooked  in  my  examination.  I can  hardly  think  that 
Ae  death  was  from  syncope.”  Whether  it  was  a rupture  of  some 
blood  vessel  or  some  aneurism  would  be  a matter  capable  of  proof 
or  disproof  by  a post-mortem  examination,  and  that  is  why  I 
mentioned  a pathologist,  and  not  a medical  jurist.  I suggested 
^5"  Grefin,  who  is  a noted  pathologist  and  a man  of  eminence  in 
his  profession;  he  is  physician  at  the  Charing  Cross  Hospital  and 
at  Brompton. 

I should  have  mentioned  earlier  that  when  I was  attending 
the  deceased,  Dr.  Dudley  was  called  in  on  one  occasion— either  on 
the  19th  or  the  20th.  On  one  of  my  visits,  after  talking  with 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Dr.  Alfred  Leach 

the  patient  and  saying  he  was  doing  well,  and  so  on,  some  con- 
versation ensued  which  I do  not  quite  remember.  I think  it  was 
in  reference  to  his  business,  the  partner  wanting^  him  back  or 
something  of  that  kind.  Mrs.  Bartlett  broke  in  with,  as  near  as 
I can  recollect,  these  words,  ''  Doctor,  will  you  excuse  what  I am 
about  to  say?  Mr.  Bartlett  is  very  contented  with  your  treat- 
ment, but  his  friends  have  on  more  than  one  occasion  requested 
him  to  let  them  send  a doctor  of  their  own  choosing.’^  She  added, 
Mr.  Bartlett's  friends  are  no  friends  to  me."  Mr.  Bartlett 
then  broke  in,  " We  intend  in  future,  doctor,  to  manage  our  own 
affairs,  and  not  to  be  interfered  with  by  my  friends  and  relations. 

I am  sorry  to  say  that  they  are  not  kind  to  my  wife."  I said, 
By  all  means  have  a consultation,  as  many  as  you  like."  He 
replied,  " No,  I will  not  have  a consultation  in  the  ordinary  sense 
of  the  term;  I will  not  see  any  one  they  send,  But  I will  see  any 
gentleman  you  choose  to  bring  to  see  me  once.  I am  getting 
better  than  I was.  I will  not  submit  to  any  other  treatment,  but 
I will  see  any  gentleman  once  I do  this  for  the  protection  of 
my  wife."  Either  before  or  after  that  Mrs.  Bartlett  had  said, 
" Doctor,  Mr.  Bartlett's  friends  will  accuse  me  of  poisoning  him 
if  he  does  not  get  out  soon — if  he  gets  worse — if  he  does  not  get 
better." 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills — ^Did  she  say  that? — She  said  that,  I 
think;  the  conversation  was  a joint  one;  I have  tried  to  pick  out 
who  it  was  that  said  the  different  things. 

By  the  Foreman — The  deceased  heard  it? — Oh,  yes,  we  were 
together. 

Examination  continued — ^Extraordinary  as  Mrs.  Bartlett's 
statements  were,  they  made  little  effect  on  me,  as  I hear  many 
strange  things,  and  I thought  it  referred  to  the  mercurialism  I 
had  found  on  my  first  visits.  I called  in  Dr.  Dudley.  He 
approved  of  my  treatment,  and  prescribed  a fresh  tonic  and  a 
combination  of  the  drugs  that  hitherto  I had  given  him  separately. 

To  go  back  to  1st  January,  J asked  Mrs.  Bartlett  whether  any 
time  had  elapsed  between  her  finding  her  husband  dead  and  calling 
the  servant  and  Mrs.  Doggett,  and  she  said  that  as  soon  as  she 
found  she  could  not  rouse  him  she  ran  up  for  the  servant  and  sent 
her  to  me.  She  told  me  that  she  was  sitting  beside  her  husband's 
foot  in  the  easy  chair,  where,  in  fact,  she  always  slept.  She  had 
her  left  arm  round  his  foot.  She  said  she  woke  and  heard  him 
snoring,  and  that  it  was  a peculiar  kind  of  snore.  But,  as  it 
was  not  unusual  for  him  to  snore,  she  dropped  asleep  again.  She 
evidently  tried  to  describe  to  me  the  stertorous  breailiing.  Then, 
later  on,  she  woke  up  with  the  cramp  in  her  arm  and  saw  him 
lying  on  his  face  in  an  uncomfortable  position.  When  she  said 
that  she  had  her  arm  round  his  foot  I came  to  the  conclusion  that 
she  meant  outside  the  bedclothes.  When  she  woke  and  found  him 
lying  on  his  face  she  rose  from  her  chair  and  went  towards  his 

199 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Dr.  Alfred  Ueeb 

head  to  turn  him  into  a better  position.  She  was  alarmed  at  his 
condition,  and  tried  to  rouse  him.  She  found  him  cold.  She 
applied  brandy — do  not  know  whether  she  said  she  poured  any 
down  his  throat,  but  I understood  she  rubbed  some  on  his  chest 
(probably  that  was  an  inference,  because  it  agreed  with  what  I 
discovered  myself),  and  sent  for  me.  She  told  me  she  sent  up  to 
the  servant’s  room. 

I do  not  think  you  need  follow  that 

By  Mr.  Glaeusib — think  we  must  have  the  whole  of  the  con- 
versation?— I think  it  has  a little  bearing  on  the  loss  of  time. 
She  went  up  to  the  servant’s  room  and  told  her  to  dress  and  come 
for  me.  The  servant  then  went  down  to  the  kitchen,  Mrs.  Bartlett 
said,  and  Mrs.  Bartlett  chafed  at  the  delay.  Of  the  rest  I am 
rather  doubtful.  She  called  Mrs.  Doggett. 

Mr.  CliABKB — ^This  is  evidently  nothing. 

Esaamination  contimbed — do  not  think  she  explained  to  me 
how  she  was  able  to  change  her  husband’s  position  from  lying  on 
his  face  into  this  position.  When  she  told  me  that  she  found  him 
lying  downwards  on  his  face  I did  not  understand  that  his  whole 
body  was  turned. 

All  you  mean  to  convey  is  that  his  head  was  twisted  round? — 
Yes,  and  his  shoulders.  I imagine  that  was  the  impression  con- 
veyed to  me  and  left  on  my  mind. 

On  that  same  1st  January  do  you  recollect  asking  Mrs.  Bart- 
lett about  poison ! — ^Yes,  we  discussed  all  the  poisons  I could  think 
of  that  were  rapid  in  their  action,  digitalis  and  prussic  acid.  I 
asked  her  if  it  was  possible  that  he  could  have  any  digitalis  or  any 
of  the  alkaloids  in  his  possession.  I knew  that  he  was  a friend 
of  some  wholesale  chemists,  and  she  said,  No,  he  could  have  had 
no  poison  without  my  knowing  it;  he  could  have  got  no  poison 
wi^out  my  knowledge.”  I asked  her,  ” What  is  this  chlorodyne 
doing  here?  ’’—for  I had  never  seen  it  before.  ” Oh,”  she  said, 
” Edwin  used  to  rinse  his  mouth  with  it  at  night.”  I said, 
” Binse  his  mouth  I Then  he  must  have  swallowed  some.”  She 
said,  “ No,  he  only  rubbed  his  gums.”  I asked  whether  he  ever 
went  into  the  bedroom  at  all,  and  she  said,  ” No.”  I said,  If 
he  rinsed  out  his  mouth  and  spat  out  the  chlorodyne,  we  must  find 
some  of  it  in  the  room.”  I looked  under  the  bed  into  the  most 
natural  receptacle  into  which  he  would  spit.  She  said,  ” No,  I 
think  not;  he  never  put  much  into  his  mouth;  he  only  rubbed  his 
gums.”  ^ Chlorodyne  is  a substance  that  smells  strongly.  I did 
not  perceive  any  smell  of  chlorodyne.  The  smell  of  chlorodyne 
that  lias  stood  for  some  time  is  extremely  like  that  of  pure  chloro- 
form. It  contains  one  in  eight  of  pure  chloroform. 

^ you  suggest,  supposing  he  had  used  chlorodyne  in  the  way 
Mrs.  Bartlett  described  for  his  gums,  that  accidentally  swallowing 
some  would  cause  death  ?— It  would  depend  on  how  much  he 
swallowed.  Drugs  had  a peculiar  action  on  the  man.  It  is 
200 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Dr.  Alfred  Uech 

known  that  as  little  as  a drachm  of  chlorodyne  has  killed.  1 
thought  it  might  possibly  be  so  in  this  case,  but  1 have  since  quite 
given  up  that  idea,  of  course. 

Whyl — Because  of  the  result  of  the  analysis  proving  the 
absence  of  the  other  ingredients  of  chlorodyne,  one  of  which  is 
prussic  acid,  but  the  more  stable  ones,  alkaloids. 

You  do  not  believe  at  all  it  was  death  from  chlorodyne? — ^No, 
and  I am  sorry  I entertained  that  belief  at  one  time. 

Were  you  aware  on  that  evening,  Ist  January,  that  there  was 
in  Mrs.  Bartlett’s  possession  any  quantity  of  chloroform? — ^1  knew 
nothing  of  that  till  twenty-six  days  afterwards.  It  then  came 
upon  me  as  a surprise. 

Did  Mrs.  Bartlett  on  that  occasion  in  any  way  refer  to 
chloroform? — ^On  some  occasion  Mrs.  Bartlett  asked  me,  Could 
he  have  died  of  chloroform?  ” 1 cannot  fix  the  date  when  the 

reference  was  made  to  chloroform,  but  I do  not  think  anything 
was  said  about  it  on  1st  January.  I cannot  remember  about  that, 
because  there  was  nothing  to  make  the  mention  of  chloroform  more 
remarkable  to  me  than  the  mention  of  digitalis  or  any  of  the 
others. 

The  post-mortem  examination  took  place  on  2nd  January. 
Dr.  Green  was  the  principal,  and  Dr.  Murray,  Dr.  DudW,  Dr. 
Cheyne  and  I assisted  in  various  capacities.  I think  Dr.  Dudley 
was  there  as  an  onlooker,  and  I was  there  from  the  natural  interest 
I took  in  the  case.  Being  there,  1 was  asked  to  take  the  notes, 
which  I willingly  did.  My  notes  were  written  at  the  time,  and 
they  are  as  accurate  as  I could  make  them.  The  notes  I wrote 
at  the  time  are  as  follows ; — ^Examination  38  hours  p.m.  Body 
well  nourished 

Does  that  mean  the  examination  took  place  thirty-eight  hours 
after  death? — ^It  took  place  at  half -past  two  on  2nd  January,  and 
Mr.  Bartlett  was  supposed  to  have  died  early  on  the  morning  of 
1st  January.  **  Rigor  mortis  present.  On  abdomen  much 
cutaneous  fat,  deep  yellow  coloui;,  no  appearance  of  subcutaneous 
haemorrhage  or  external  injury.  Heart,  on  opening  pericardium, 
nothing  abnormal.  Heart,  on  removal,  normal  in  size;  muscular 
tissue  a little  fiabby;  valves  free  from  disease;  tiny  patch  of 
atheroma  at  root  of  aorta.”  Atheroma  means  the  degeneration 
of  one  of  the  coats  of  the  blood  vessels,  and  the  aorta  is  one  of  the 
large  blood  vessels.  ” The  p.m.  staining  of  lining  membrane  of 
the  cavities  and  large  vessels  abnormally  deep;  blood  in  cavities 
dark  and  quite  fluid.  Aorta,  with  exception  of  a few  small 

f>atohes  of  degeneration,  is  normal.  Lungs  and  pleura  normal; 
iver  normal.  Spleen  normal;  kidneys  normal.  Esophagus  (the 
gullet)  lower  part  abnormally  vascular  and  irregularly  denuded 
of  its  epithelium  ” — ^that  is,  its  scaly  lining.  “ Pharynx,  upper 
part  of  oesophagus  and  trachea  present  nothing  abnormal. 
Stomach,  after  being  ligatured  at  both  ends,  removed;  contents 

201 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Dr.  Alfred  Leach 

placed  in  a clean  stoppered  bottle/'  The  word  “ clean  " was 
put  in  afterwards.  Nearly  an  ounce  of  contents,  consisting  of 
brownish  grumous  liquid  varying  in  consistence,  the  more  solid 
portions  paler  in  colour,  and  look  something  like  thick  mucus  j 
smells  strong,  pungent  ethereal  odour  resembling  a combination 
of  chloroform  and  garlic.  Cardiac  end  of  stomach — ^the  mucous 
membrane  is  of  a dusky  pink  colour,  which  to  the  naked  eye  looks 
uniform,  but  under  a lens  there  is  a distinct  punctiform  and 
capillary  hypersemia."  That  means  the  end  of  the  stomach 
nearest  the  spleen;  the  mucous  membrane  there  is  of  a dusky  pink. 
To  the  naked  eye  the  colour  looked  of  uniform  distribution,  but 
under  a lens  it  indicated  that  the  minutest  blood  yessdis,  the 
capillaries,  were  congested  with  blood — ^not  inflamed,  congested. 

The  surface  of  membrane  at  this  part  of  stomach  is  covered 
with  an  abnormal  amount  of  thick,  tenacious  mucus  or  lymph.  At 
the  most  dependent  part  of  the  stomach  there  is  a patch  about  the 
size  of  a five-shilling  piece,  where  the  mucous  membrane  presents 
a rough,  irregular  appearance  as  though  it  were  partially 
destroyed.  Here  the  membrane  is  more  easily  removed  by  the 
finger  nail  than  elsewhere.  In  other  parts  of  the  cardiac  end  of 
the  stomach  the  mucous  membrane  is  not  easily  removable.  Pyloric 
end  of  stomach  is  of  a pale  greenish  colour,  covered  with  a 
tenacious  mucus,  but  otherwise  normal.  Head — on  removing  the 
calvarium,  the  dura  mater  is  found  abnormally  adherent.”  By 
that  1 mean  that  on  removing  the  skullcap  some  difiBiculty  was 
experienced  in  tearing  it  from  the  membraneous  envelope  of  the 
brain.  With  the  exception  of  rather  more  p.m.  staining  than 
usual,  the  surface  of  brain  presents  nothing  abnormal.  A careful 
examination  of  the  brain  throughout  fails  to  reveal  anything 
abnormal.  Intestines — on  removing,  the  contents  of  the  small 
intestine  were  allowed  to  run  into  a glass  jar.  They  present  the 
same  peculiar  odour  as  those  of  stomach,  only  in  less  marked 
degree  and  less  pungent.  On  opening  bowels,  nothing  abnormal 
in  the  mucous  membrane  is  discoverable.  Some  small  pieces  of 
what  appear  to  be  mango-chutney  found  in  intestines  throughout 
their  whole  length.  One  or  two  pieces  of  the  same  were  observed 
in  the  stomach.  Large  intestine  contains  much  fsecal  matter, 
also  containing  considerable  amount  of  half-digested  mango. 
Lower  jaw,  incisor  surface  necrosed.” 

Now,  let  me  ask  you,  does  that  examination  or  does  it  not 
disclose  a healthy  state  of  all  the  vital  organs? — ^Yes. 

There  is  a reference  there  to  something  abnormal  in  the  con- 
dition of  the  stomach  ? — ^Tes,  but  I take  it  you  do  not  include  that 
among  the  vital  organs. 

Was  there  anything  abnormal  or  unusual  in  any  other  part 
of  the  physical  system  of  this  man? — From  the  notes  I have  read 
I gather  that  the  only  abnormalisms  present,  except  those  of  the 
stomach,  are  fluidity  in  the  blood,  with  a dissolving  out  of  the 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Dr.  Alfred  Leaoh 

colouring  matter  staining  the  tissues;  and  what  I should  scarcely 
perhaps  allude  to  is  a certain  amount  of  adhesion  present  in  the 
dura  mater.  There  was  nothing  at  all  suggestive  of  the  cause 
of  death,  excepting  in  the  stomach,  and  the  blood  acted  upon 
through  the  contents  of  the  stomach.  The  contents  of  the  intes- 
tines were  put  into  a bottle,  but  I did  not  take  any  active  part  in 
the  post-mortem,  and  I did  not  see  the  sealing  process.  All  the 
bottles  that  could  be  found  in  the  back  room,  which  all  belonged 
to  the  deceased — all  the  bottles  and  jars  containing  the  results  of 
the  post-mortem  were  carried  by  my  directions  into  the  front  room. 
The  undertaker  did  it,  I think,  it  being  understood  that  the  front 
room  was  going  to  be  locked.  I could  not  say  whether  the  front 
room  was  locked  and  the  key  handed  to  Mr.  Wood,  the  solicitor. 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills — ^The  post-mortem  took  place  in  the 
back  room,  the  bedroom. 

Examination  continued — ^Did  you  notice  anything  about  the 
tongue  of  the  dead  man  ? — ^Yes,  a very,  very  white  condition  of  the 
whole  tongue,  but  this  had  passed  off  before  the  post-mortem  was 
made. 

Was  it  so  peculiar  a condition  as  to  present  itself  to  your 
mind  as  something  striking? — Yes,  but  I only  learnt  to  interpret 
it  some  days  afterwards  by  reason  of  an  experiment  1 made  upon 
myself. 

What  was  that  ? — Swallowing  chloroform.  I took  3^  drachms 
into  my  mouth,  and,  to  the  best  of  my  belief,  swallowed  20  or  30 
drops  of  it ; I then  ejected  the  remainder,  and  was  surprised  when 
I looked  in  the  looking-glass  to  find  my  tongue  was  very  white. 
The  interpretation  of  what  1 had  then  seen  in  the  dead  body  came 
to  me.  1 may  add  that  this  condition  of  my  own  tongue  passed 
off  in  a few  hours.  I have  no  experience  at  all,  from  any  previous 
post-mortem  examination,  of  the  effect  of  chloroform  taken  into  the 
stomach.  I do  not  remember  to  have  seen  Mrs.  Matthews  on  let 
January,  and  I donH  think  I saw  Mr.  Dyson  then.  After  the 
post-mortem  examination  on  2nd  January  the  other  doctors  made 
me  their  spokesman.  To  the  best  of  my  recollection,  I said,  in 
the  presence  of  Mrs.  Bartlett,  ‘‘  These  gentlemen  wish  me  to  state 
that  we  have  very  carefully  examined  the  body  of  the  deceased, 
and  we  are  unable  to  discover  any  pathological  lethal  cause — ^that 
is  to  say,  any  natural  or  obvious  cause — of  death.  The  contents 
of  the  stomach  are  suspicious,  and  we  have  preserved  them.” 
That  was  a correct  statement  of  the  result.  I just  remember  now 
that  it  was  I who  went  downstairs  to  summon  the  relatives  from 
the  smoking-room,  and  there,  in  the  presence  of  Mrs.  Bartlett  and 
the  others,  I said  something  to  the  ^ect  that  the  contents  of  the 
stomadi  had  a pungent  ethereal  odour.  I may  have  said  ” Dr- 
Green,”  or  one  of  the  doctors,  ” suggests  chloroform  ” — probably 
did  mention  chloroform — ” but  if  it  is,  it  is  the  chlorodyne.”  I 
was  under  that  impression  then,  but  that  delusion  has  entirely 

203 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Dr.  Alfred  Leech 

disappeared  since.  On  the  occasion  of  the  post-mortem  on  the 
2nd  no  search  was  made  of  the  drawers  in  the  back  room.  I still 
adhere  to  my  statement  that  Mrs.  Bartlett  said  nothing  to  me 
about  her  having  possession  of  chloroform  until  26th  January. 
On  the  occasion  when  I made  the  reference  to  the  chloroform,  when 
announcing  the  result  of  the  post-mortem,  Mrs.  Bartlett  made  no 
answer,  so  far  as  I can  remember. 

Mrs.  Bartlett  called  on  me  on  Wednesday,  6th  January.  I 
informed  her  then  that  I wished  to  be  put  in  possession  of  any 
facts  surrounding  the  death  of  the  deceased  which  would  enable 
me,  on  the  following  day,  to  lay  some  clear  statement  before  the 
inquest  which  had  been  fixed  for  the  7th.  I likewise  asked  her 
to  repeat  the  hurried  account  she  had  given  on  the  morning  of 
my  visit  to  the  corpse.  I am  not  quite  sure  but  that  she  brought 
to  me  on  that  occasion  notes  of  how  the  time  had  elapsed  between 
her  husband’s  return  from  the  dentist  and  my  appearance  at  four 
o’clock  in  the  morning.  1 asked  her  to  jot  down  a memorandum 
of  how  the  time  had  passed  while  the  events  were  still  fresh  in  her 
memory.  I think  it  was  on  this  occasion  she  read  it  to  me.  I 
said  I thought  that  it  was  satisfactory,  but  1 did  not  take  a note 
of  it,  because  I did  not  wish  to  burden  my  mind  with  things  that 
had  been  observed  by  another  person,  and  which  I thought  she 
would  like  to  give  in  evidence  herself.  I thought  she  would  make 
the  statement  giving  the  evidence  herself.  She  was  not  at  any 
time  examined  before  the  coroner.  I have  some  very  brief  notes 
here  of  her  visits.  May  I refer  to  them? 

Mr.  Clabkb — I do  not  object  to  the  notes  of  the  conversation 
being  referred  to,  provided  they  were  written  at  the  time  the  con*- 
versation  is  described,  and  used  as  assistance  to  memory. 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills — am  not  speaking  of  the  detailed 
thing  that  I drew  up  afterwards.  These  notes  were  not  made  at 
the  time;  I do  not  know  when  they  were  made,  but  1 see  that  they 
are  on  Police  Court  paper.  I have  no  notes  of  importance  re- 
garding 6th  January.  » 

Bxwmifuition  contirmed — ^Was  any  reference  made  to  the  im- 
possibility of  his  swallowing  chloroform  on  that  occasion? — I think 
all  tte  conversation  about  the  impossibility  had  taken  place  much 
earlier.  No  doubt  on  this  occasion  chlorodyne  was  again  referred 
to,  because,  unfortunately,  I continued  to  harp  upon  that  subject. 
She  reiterated  the  same  statement,  that  he  could  not  have  swallowed 
it.  I saw  Mrs.  Bartlett  on  6th,  14th,  18th,  and  26th  January. 
By  the  26th  1 had  heard  the  statement  as  to  the  result  which  the 
analysis  had  shown.  Mrs.  Bartlett  called  on  me  on  the  26th,  after 
I had  heard  the  statement,  and  she  was  with  me  for  an  hour  or 
more.  I began  the  conversation  by  saying,  ‘‘  Mrs.  Bartlett,  I 
think  I have  some  good  news  for  you.”  I knew  she  was  much 
worried,  and  I thought  it  was  good  news.  I said,  ” The  report 
now  is  that  the  Government  analyst  is  going  to  give  acetate  of 
204, 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Dr.  Alfred  LmcIi 

lead  as  the  cause  of  death,  which  is  nonsense,  for  there  was  no 
lead  in  the  stomach.  Likewise  the  report  says  that  he  is  going 
to  return  a verdict  of  chloroform  as  the  cause  of  death,  which  is 
very  improbable.  At  any  rate,  either  one  or  the  other — ^that 
should  set  your  mind  at  rest;  but  had  it  been  one  of  the  secret 
poisons  given  in  small  amounts,  and  which  could  be  administered 
without  the  patient  knowing  it,  you  would  have  most  certainly 
been  very  seriously  accused  of  having  poisoned  him  by  some 
people. She  then  very  much  surprised  me  by  saying,  “ I am 
afraid,  doctor,  it  is  too  true.  I wish  anything  but  chloroform 
had  been  found.*'  Naturally  that  led  me  to  ask  the  question, 
“ Why,  what  do  you  mean?  " or  something  of  that  sort,  and  she 
then  proceeded  to  a long  statement. 

Mr.  Clarjoi — ^If  you  have  a note  of  that  statement  I have  no 
objection  to  your  reading  it. 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills — The  statement  is  dated  6th  February, 
and  I have  it  here. 

Mr.  Glares — make  no  objection  to  Dr.  Leach  reading  the 
note  which  he  made  of  that  statement. 

The  Attorney-General — am  entirely  in  your  lordship's 
hands  about  it.  Of  course,  it  is  not  a case  in  which  any  admission 
will  do. 

Mr.  Justice  Wills — ^No;  to  my  mind  it  is  quite  outside  what 
is  usually  admitted  as  contemporaneous  record.  Mr.  Clarke  is 
in  this  position  of  advantage:  if  there  is  anything  in  the  con- 
versation he  can  bring  it  out  in  cross-examination,  if  he  thinks 
it  of  advantage;  but  I do  not  think  it  would  be  right  to  have  it 
read  as  part  of  the  examination -in-chief. 

Examination  continued — Mrs.  Bartlett  began  by  giving,  as  I 
understand  her  story,  a preface  containing  a sketch  of  her  married 
life.  That  sketch  was  simply  this,  that,  being  married  young, 
she  had  been  induced  to  enter  into  a marriage  compact,  scarcely 
understanding  the  meaning  of  its  terms;  and  this  marriage  com- 
pact was,  that  the  marital  relatipns  of  the  pair  were,  in  deference 
to  certain  peculiar  views  held  by  her  husband,  to  be  of  an  entirely 
platonic  nature;  sexual  intercourse  was  not  to  occur. 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills — ^The  terms  of  this  compact  wore 
adhered  to,  with  a solitary  exception  when  a breach  of  the  terms 
was  permitted  in  consequence  of  her  fondness  for  children  and  her 
anxiety  to  become  a mother.  After  her  confinement  the  former 
terms — that  is  to  say,  those  of  a platonic  nature — ^were  resumed, 
she  being  indifierent  on  the  matter.  Her  husband  was  kind  to 
her.  They  were  affectionate,  although  the  wife  on  one  occasion 
objected  to  the  use  of  the  term  affection.*’  That  is  only  a 
•quibble  in  words.  Her  husband  was  affectionate,  and  each  strove 
in  every  way  to  fulfil  each  other’s  wishes,  and  succeeded  in  living 
upon  most  amicable  terms,  the  happiness  of  which  was  on  one 
occasion  disturbed  by  her  husband’s  father.  She  then  entered 

205 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Dr.  Alfred  Leach 

into  some  family  details,  which  really  have  quite  slipped  my 
memory. 

Exammation  contirmed — By  “ family  details  I mean  the 
conduct  of  her  husband's  father,  but  I do  not  remember  them,  and 
if  I made  any  attempt  to  give  them  I should  be  giving  more  what 
I have  heard  since.  Her  husband's  brother  was  not  referred  to. 
She  told  me  she  had  consented  to  her  husband's  father  living  with 
them,  but  he  made  her  life  miserable  by  his  constant  insults  j and 
when  she  appealed  to  her  husband  to  resent  those  insults  he,  in 
his  mild  way,  did  not  act  upon  her  suggestion  with  the  zeal  that 
she  thought  the  occasion  demanded.  She  consequently  left  her 
husband's  house  and  hid  herself  from  him — I think,  in  the  house 
of  her  aunt — I forget  for  how  long;  and  she  only  consented  to 
return  upon  an  ample  apology  being  made.  That  was  the  end 
of  it.  This  was  the  only  break  in  their  conjugal  happiness.  She 
then  said  that  her  position  had  not  been  an  easy  one : it  might  be 
almost  called  cruel,  for  her  husband,  though  meaning  no  cruelty, 
put  her  in  a very  difficult  position  for  a woman  to  maintain.  No 
female  friends  or  relations  were  ever  invited  to  the  house,  but  he 
had  always  liked  to  surround  her  with  male  acquaintances.  She 
said,  He  thought  me  clever;  he  wished  to  make  me  more  clever; 
and  the  more  attention  and  admiration  I gained  from  these  male 
acquaintances  the  more  delighted  did  he  appear.  Their  attention 
to  me  gave  him  pleasure,  or  seemed  to  give  him  pleasure."  Now 
we  come  to  the  latter  end  of  his  life.  During  the  last  few  months 
of  his  life  the  man's  nature  seemed  to  be  somewhat  changed.  " We 
became  acquainted  with  Mr.  Dyson.  My  husband  threw  us 
together.  He  requested  us  to  kiss  in  his  presence,  and  he  seemed 
to  enjoy  it."  She  gave  me  to  understand — in  fact,  she  used  these 
words,  " He  had  given  me  to  Mr.  Dyson." 

Do  you  mean  then  and  there,  or  in  the  event  of  his  death? — 
I do  not  know  and  I did  not  ask.  Now,  her  husband  having  fully 
efiected  the  transfer — mean  still  in  the  platonic  sense 

The  transfer  to  Mr.  Dyson  ? — Tes — constantly  developing 
symptoms  of  wishing  to,  I cannot  say  resume,  but  wishing  to 
assume  those  marital  rights  which  he  had  never  before  claimed, 
you  understand  my  meaning  ? 

You  mean  desiring  to  have  sexual  intercourse  with  his  wife  ? — 
Tes;  she  put  it  in  as  delicate  a manner  as  she  could,  and  that  is 
the  meaning.  This  she  said  she  resented  in  those  words.  She 
said,  " Edwin,  you  know  you  have  given  me  to  Mr.  Dyson;  it  is 
not  right  that  you  should  do  now  what  during  all  the  married 
years  of  our  life  you  have  not  done,"  and  he  agreed  that  it  was  not 
right.  She  said  it  was  a duty  to  her  womanhood  and  to  the  man 
to  whom  she  was  practically  affianced,  at  his  wish,  and  he  agreed 
that  she  was  right.  Now,  as  he  got  better,  while  I was  treating 
him,  these  manifestations  of  his  becaxne  very  urgent,  and  she 
thought  for  meazui  the  more  thoroughly  to  emphasise  her  appeal  to 
206 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Dr.  Alfred  Leach 

him  or  to  prevent  his  putting  his  impulses  into  effect.  One  of 
the  means,  unfortunately,  was  the  possessing  herself  of  a quantity 
of  chloroform. 

She  said  so,  did  she? — She  said  so.  Now,  I had  no  idea  till 
1 heard  it  in  Court  how  long  she  had  had  that  in  her  possession, 
but  she  said  that  the  presence  of  that  chloroform  in  my  drawer 
troubled  my  mind.'’  She  said  that  her  object  was  to  sprinkle  some 
of  the  chloroform  upon  a handkerchief  and  wave  it  in  his  face 
every  time  it  was  necessary,  thinking  that  thereby  he  would  go 
peacefully  to  sleep.  I told  her  the  danger  she  would  have  run  if 
she  had  put  that  into  practice — the  danger  of  their  being  chloro- 
formed by  the  bottle  being  upset — and  I informed  her  that  her 
plan  would  have  been  ineffectual.  I said  to  her,  ''  Trying  to  put 
ohloroform  upon  your  handkerchief  and  waving  it  in  the  face  of 
your  husband,  he  would  have  resisted  it,  a struggle  would  have 
ensued,  the  bottle  would  have  capsized  and  chloroformed  the  pair 
of  you.  It  is  not  the  first  time  that  chloroform  has  been  upset 
in  a bed,  and  the  stopper  come  out.”  She  said,  ” I never  kept  a 
secret  from  Edwin,  and  the  presence  of  that  chloroform  in  my 
drawer  troubled  my  mind.”  The  words  were  in  my  possession  ” 
or  “ in  my  drawer,”  but  I think  she  said  in  my  drawer.”  She 
went  on,  And  1 was  also  troubled  with  some  scruples  as  to 
whether  putting  my  plan  into  practice  would  have  been  right, 
whether  1 should  be  doing  a right  or  a wrong  thing;  and  on  the 
last  day  of  the  year,  when  he  was  in  bed,  I brought  the  chloroform 
to  him,  and  gave  it  to  him.”  She  said  she  gave  the  bottle  to 
him,  and  informed  him  of  her  intention,  but  she  gave  me  no 
details  of  the  conversation  with  him.  I asked  her,  ” Was  not 
your  husband  very  cross  with  you,  or  alarmed,  or  what  was  his 
demeanour?  ” She  replied,  ” No,  he  was  not  cross;  we  talked 
amicably  and  seriously,  and  he  turned  round  on  his  side,  and 
pretended  to  go  to  sleep,  or  to  sulk,”  or  something  of  that  kind. 
In  answer  to  a question  from  me,  she  told  me  that  she  had  looked 
at  the  chloroform.  I believe  sh^  told  me  that  it  was  in  a large 
round  bottle,  or  that  it  was  in  a large  bottle  labelled  ” Chloro- 
form,” and  corked,  not  tied  down  with  leather  or  anything  of  that 
sort,  and  not  full.  He  looked  at  the  chloroform,  and  put  it  by 
the  side  where  he  was  sitting  or  lying,  on  the  mantelpiece  at  the 
corner.  The  next  thing  me  told  me  was  that  she  fell  asleep, 
sitting  in  the  chair  where  she  always  slept,  I may  add  that  she  had 
slept  there  ever  since  I had  attended  the  patient,  notwithstanding 
my  remonstrances.  She  went  to  sleep  with  her  arm  round  his 
foot.  Then  she  awoke  and  heard  him  snoring,  and  woke  again 
and  found  he  was  dead.  She  had  given  me  that  part  of  the  story 
on  the  morning  of  the  death.  I asked  her,  Did  you  look  at  the 
bottle)  ” — ^the  ohloroform.  ” Was  there  much  gone  from  it?  ” 
She  said,  ” I do  not  know  whether  much  was  gone  from  it  or  not.” 
I did  not  ask  her  when  she  got  the  chloroform,  but  I asked  her 

207 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Dr.  Alfred  Leach 

■who  got  it  for  her.  She  did  not  answer,  and  I saw  it  was  a 
question  to  which  no  answer  would  be  given.  She  just  said, 
“ Some  one  got  it  for  me,*'  and  I asked  no  more  questions;  but 
later  on  there  was  no  secret  about  it. 

The  mantelpiece  was  not  far  from  the  head  of  the  bed.  There 
was  no  chloroform  bottle  on  the  mantelpiece  on  the  morning  of  1st 
January.  There  was  nothing  on  the  mantelpiece  but  what  I have 
already  described.  1 asked  Mrs.  Bartlett  on  26th  January  what 
she  had  done  with  the  bottle  on  1st  January,  and  she  said  that 
she  took  it  from  the  mantelpiece  and  put  it  away  in  her  drawer 
about  breakfast  time.  1 am  quite  clear  that  it  was  not  on  the 
mantelpiece  on  Ist  January,  because  both  Mr.  Doggett  and  I 
searched  the  room  in  her  presence.  Mrs.  Bartlett  never  left  the 
room  while  we  were  searching  it. 

Did  you  ask  her  on  26th  January  how  it  came  that  she  had 
not  mentioned  it  to  you  on  1st  January  when  she  saw  you  searching 
the  room  I — do  not  think  I did,  for  it  seemed  obvious  to  me. 

Did  she  volunteer  any  explanation  of  it  9 — No,  she  did  not 
say  specially. 

Specially  or  otherwise) — ^Well,  generally  that  she  wanted  to 
know  what  he  was  dead  of.  She  told  me  that  the  bottle  remained 
in  her  drawer  until  Wednesday,  the  6th,  when  she  took  her  things 
away,  and  she  said  she  took  the  bottle  of  chloroform  with  her, 
■emptied  it  out  of  the  carriage  window,  and  threw  the  bottle  away 
into  some  water — 1 think  she  said  from  the  train.  She  did  not 
tell  me  why  she  did  that,  nor  did  I ask  any  reason.  She  told  me 
when  she  first  suspected  the  real  cause  of  her  husband's  death, 
probably  she  told  me  that  day,  but  1 quite  forget  what  she  said. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  Clabke — understand  prior  to  the 
10th  of  December  you  had  no  knowledge  of  Mr.  Bartlett  or  his 
wife? — No  knowledge  of  their  existence. 

And,  so  far  as  you  know,  you  were  called  in  because  the  place 
where  you  practise  is  conveniently  near  where  they  lived  ? — ^It  faces 
their  street.  • 

On  10th  December  till  the  last  of  his  life  had  you  plenty  of 
opportunities  of  seeing  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Bartlett  together? — Twenty 
or  twenty-one. 

I bdieve  there  were  some  days  upon  which  you  visited  him 
twice  or  even  thrice? — ^Yes. 

And  there  was  at  least  one  visit  when  you  spent  several  hours 
there  ? — ^Yes. 

So  far  as  you  could  see  and  judge,  during  the  whole  of  the 
time  was  Mrs.  Bartlett  tending  her  husband  with  anxious  afiection? 
— So  far  as  I could  see  and  judge,  decidedly. 

Gould  you  have  thought  or  wished  for  a more  devoted  nurse 
for  him?— No ; what  I should  have  wished  for  was  one  with  a little 
better  memory,  that  is  all. 

I think  her  memory  was  the  only  thing  in  your  mind  as  to 
208 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Dr.  Alfred  Leadi 

her  defects  as  a nurse,  and  that  was  supplied  by  her  hoping  a 
written  record? — ^Yes;  she  used  to  pin  it  on  the  mantelpiece. 

Did  she  tend  him  night  and  day? — ^Yes;  she  was  most  affec- 
tionate— in  fact,  I could  not  wish  for  a better  nurse.  It  is  only 
right  that  I should  say  that  emphatically. 

1 believe  he  himself  spoke  with  gratitude  of  the  way  she  was 
devoting  herself  to  him? — do  not  remember. 

Do  you  remember  her  speaking  of  herself  breaking  down  and 
being  tired? — ^No. 

Did  you  notice  it  yourself? — ^Yes. 

And  comment  upon  it  to  him? — ^In  his  presence. 

You  were  told  that,  night  after  night,  during  his  illness  she 
had  sat  and  slept  sitting  at  the  foot  of  his  bed? — ^Yes. 

Never  getting  for  herself  one  night  of  restful  sleep? — ^Well, 
she  said  she  slept  comfortably  in  the  chair ; she  never  went  to  bed. 

Do  you  remember  how  long  it  was  after  your  first  visit  that 
you  noticed  it  was  telling  on  her? — ^Noj  I think  very  soon  after 
my  first  visit  I asked  her  to  go  to  bed. 

And  she  refused? — She  refused.  I asked  her  on  several 
occasions  to  go  to  bedj  each  time  die  had  some  excuse. 

And  would  not  do  it? — And  would  not  do  it. 

It  was  obvious  to  you  that  she  needed  rest  and  was  suffering 
in  strength,  was  it  not? — ^It  was. 

Did  she  tell  you  on  any  occasion  what  would  happen  if  she 
did  go  to  bed — ^whether  her  husband  would  sleep  or  be  restless? — 
Yes;  that  would  be  about  the  middle  of  the  third  week  of  my 
attendance — about  the  beginning  of  the  last  week  of  December.  I 
said,  Now,  Mrs.  Bartlett,  there  is  no  excuse  for  you  not  going 
to  bed.”  She  said,  What  is  the  use  of  my  going  to  bed,  doctor? 
He  will  walk  about  the  room  like  a ghost.  He  will  not  sleep 
unless  I sit  and  hold  his  toe.”  The  drollness  of  the  expression 
fixed  itself  upon  my  mind. 

On  10th  December,  when  she  came  to  you,  I think  she  told  you 
something  about  the  case — ^when  ^he  came  to  call  you  in  ? — Yes, 
the  first  time;  she  gave  me  a sketch  of  the  case  I was  going  to 
visit. 

Do  you  remember,  in  outline,  what  it  was? — No,  I am  sorry 
to  say,  I have  tried  to,  and  cannot  remember  what  she  said,  but  I 
remember  my  reply. 

What  was  your  reply? — This  appears  to  be  a very  peculiar 
case;  I will  come  as  soon  as  I can.” 

You  cannot  remember  your  inquiry,  but  she  gave  you,  as  far 
as  she  could,  a true  account  of  the  condition  of  her  husband,  did 
she?— She  did  not  give  me  a full  one,  or  I should  have  remembered 
it. 

When  you  first  went  to  see  him,  had  she  preserved  his  motions 
for  you  to  see? — ^Yes;  and  she  continued  to  do  so  regularly,  motions 
and  vomit  also. 


Adelaide  Bartlett 


Dr.  Alfred  Leach 

I may  just  dispose  of  that  in  one  sentence — she  kept  motions 
and  vomit  for  you  during  the  illness,  and  I think  on  one  occasion, 
if  not  more,  the  urine  was  sent  to  you  to  analyse? — ^Yes. 

On  more  than  one  occasion? — ^It  was  only  analysed  once,  but 
it  was  fre<]^uently  sent  to  me.  1 did  not  trouble  to  analyse  it 
again,  because  I knew  his  kidneys  were  sound,  but  everything  was 
preserved  for  me. 

10th  December  was  the  first  day  you  saw  him.  Did  you  see 
him  more  than  once  that  day? — You  will  have  to  supply  me  with 
the  list,  1 think. 

Have  you  a copy  of  your  account? — have  not. 

That  may  assist  you  (handing  one  to  the  witness)? — ^Yes,  it 
will — ^two  visits  on  the  10th. 

On  10th  December  there  were  two  visits,  were  there? — ^Yes; 
this  list  has  the  visits  marked  which  I paid,  but  some  which  1 paid 
I never  entered. 

That  day  you  did  not  see  him  three  times ; you  only  charged 
for  two  visits? — think  I saw  him  twice  that  day. 

On  that  occasion  did  you  find  ertreme  nervousness  and  great 
prostration? — ^Yes,  nervous  prostration;  the  man's  muscular  system 
was  good  enough. 

I quite  understand;  the  physical  state  of  the  man,  as  far  as 
you  could  test  it,  was  not  seriously  wrong  ? — ^Not  seriously  impaired 
— ^he  was  suffering. 

He  was  suffering,  was  he  not,  from  diarrhoea  ? — ^Yes,  there  was 
more  than  diarrhoea,  it  was  melsena — diarrhoea  with  blac^  motions. 

And  the  black  motions  contained  indications  of  haemorrhage 
from  the  bowels,  did  they  not? — ^Yes. 

He  complained,  1 think,  of  pains  in  the  abdomen? — Yes;  in 
the  left  side,  I should  rather  say. 

Will  you  put  your  hand  on  the  place? — Just  above  here 
(putting  his  hand  above  his  hip),  and  there  was  a peculiar  dullness 
on  percussion. 

Which  indicated  what,  to  yOur  mind? — ^Which  percussion  led 
me  to  try,  and  at  the  post-mortem  I tried,  to  find  something  to 
account  for  it,  but  I could  not. 

You  have  no  doubt  that  there  was  a dullness? — ^No;  and  it 
passed  off  after  three  or  four  days  of  treatment. 

Did  he  tell  you  that  he  had  been  overworked  in  business  ? Do 
you  rem^ber  that? — ^Yes. 

He  said  he  had  been  overworked  in  business,  and  did  you 
advise  him  to  see  nobody  connected  with  business  until  he  got 
better  ? — Yes — did  not  say  until  he  got  better ; it-  was  part  of  my 
prescription,  I said,  to  see  nobody  connected  with  his  business. 

Did  he  complain  of  sickness? — Oh,  yes,  and  vomited. 

On  that  day? — ^Yes;  when  I first  saw  him  he  had  vomited,  and 
he  continued  to  vomit  for  about  a couple  of  days,  I think. 

With  pain  in  the  sides,  and  with  diarrhoea  and  haemorrhage 
210 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Dr.  Alfred  Leadi 

from  the  bowels,  his  physical  condition  was  not  very  satisfactory, 
was  it? — ^No  j he  was  in  a very  bad  state. 

You  have  described  his  condition  then  as  one  of  nervous 
exhaustion  and  depression  1 — That  likewise  was  present. 

Was  his  breaAi  particularly  foetid? — Very. 

And  the  pulse  was  poor,  and  small^  and  slight? — ^Yes,  it  was. 

There  was  something  else  which  specially  attracted  your  atten- 
tion, was  not  there—the  condition  of  his  mouth? — Yes.  He  had 
a blue  line  round  the  edges  of  his  gums;  his  gums  were  red  and 
spongy;  and  there  was  some  small  amount  of  salivation — an  extra 
large  flow  of  saliva. 

And  that  condition  of  his  mouth  suggested  to  you  that  he  had 
taken  mercury,  did  it  not? — ^It  did,  at  once. 

And  you  asked  him  the  question,  whether  he  had  taken 
mercury? — I first  examined  him  carefully  for  any  signs  of  the 
reason  for  taking  mercury — in  other  words,  for  syphilis. 

And  you  found  no  signs? — I found  no  signs. 

And  with  regard  to  asking  him  the  question  about  his  gums  ? 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills — ^You  must  have  seen  something  very 
much  more  than  what  would  be  accounted  for  by  an  overdose  of 
blue  pill? — have  considered  that  question  very  carefully,  both  at 
the  time  and  since,  and,  if  permitted,  I will  submiit  to  you  a 
reasoned  opinion  upon  it. 

It  seems  to  me  very  inconsistent. 

Cross-examination  continued — ^Having  regard  to  the  indica- 
tions in  the  mouth,  I think  you  waited  till  Mrs.  Bartlett  left  the 
room? — do  not  think  I did  on  that  occasion.  I think  it  was 
on  the  second  visit  I asked  him  the  question  privately. 

After  a quarter  of  an  hour,  did  he  say,  “ Well,  doctor,  what 
is  the  matter  with  me?  ” — ^Yes;  either  he  or  Mrs.  Bartlett. 

And  you  said,  Mercurial  poisoning  ''  ? — ^Yes,  I said  it 
sharply,  thinking  to  take  him  unawares  and  make  him  admit  it 
— ^not  admit  it  ^en,  but  to  sho;^  him  that  there  was  no  hiding 
away  secrets  from  me. 

And  then  he  said,  How  could  it  come  about?  ’’  and  you  said, 
“ From  taking  mercury  ''? — ^Yes. 

Then,  I think,  he  answered,  **  I have  not  taken  any  ’*? — Yes. 

And  you  said,  “ Think  it  over  ''  ? — ^Yes. 

You  did  not  accept  the  answers? — ^No. 

Your  experience  is  that  sometimes  the  answer  is  not  to  be 
relied  upon  ? — Not  to  be  relied  upon — especially  when  a third  party 
is  present. 

And  when  the  third  pariy,  Mrs.  Bartlett,  had  left  the  room, 
you  asked  him  whether  be  had  not  been  taking  medicines? — ^Yes. 

He  told  you  so  ? — ^He  told  me  so. 

And  then,  I believe,  you  did  not  press  the  question,  but  you 
had  in  your  mind  the  idea  that  he  had  been  in  tlxe  hands  of  some 
quack  or  practitioner  who  had  given  him  mercury  for  real  or 

211 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Dr.  Alfred  Leach 

Gupposed  syphilid  1 — ^It  flashed  through  my  mind,  but  I could  not 
disturb  him  after  his  answer.  He  had  not  had  syphilis.  I 
thought  he  had  had  syphiliphobia. 

You  have  made  notes  ? — ^Yes. 

Is  this  your  account : “ When  Mrs.  Bartlett  was  out  of  the 
room,  I asked  him  if  he  could  account  for  it — ^had  he  not  been 
taking  medicines.  He  assured  me  he  had  not.  I did  not  then 
press  the  question  further,  because  1 thought  he  must  have  been  in 
the  hands  of  quacks  for  a real  or  supposed  secret  disease,  and  was 
ashamed  to  own  it  — Yes,  perhaps  that  is  so. 

Was  that  the  account  you  set  down  on  paper  1 — ^Yes.  I would 
stand  by  that  more  than  what  I say  vivd  voce^  for  when  1 have  a 
pen  in  my  hand  I do  not  make  mistakes. 

You,  upon  that,  told  him  to  be  careful  not  to  take  anything 
you  did  not  prescribe  while  you  were  attending  him,  did  you  not? 
— ^Yes. 

You  were  anxious  that  he  should  not,  naturally? — ^Yes. 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills — ^Did  you  find  out  what  was  the  origin 
of  that  condition? — I think  I did. 

What  was  it? — He  himself  attributed  it,  and  I have  no  reason 
to  doubt  he  was  right,  to  having  taken  a pill  of  unknown  strength 
and  unknown  constituents. 

Cross-examination  contmued — Keep  that  matter  entirely 
apart.  December  11th.  This  morning,  or  the  evening  of  yes- 

terday, he  told  me  he  had  found  a clue  to  the  mercury.  A few 
days  previously  he  took  a pill.  In  a moment  of  abstraction,  not 
feeling  well  at  the  time,  he  picked  a pill  out  of  a drawer  full  of 
sample  pills,  and  had  no  idea  what  pill  it  was.  For  want  of  a 
better  explanation  I accepted  this  one,  and  reasoned  thus — * This 
man  years  ago  was  badly  used  by  some  dentists,  who  put  him  in 
a plate  of  false  teeth  without  drawing  his  stumps.  The  latter 
rotted,  and  he  had  to  discard  the  plate.  A fresh  plate  was  made, 
and  some  teeth  that  should  have  been  drawn  were  filed  off.  These 
rotted  also,  and  he  gave  up  plate  No.  2.  He  could  not  clean  his 
teeth,  and  his  mouth  became  foul,  and  sulphides  were  naturally 
among  Ihe  products  of  decomposition.  Having  got  a dose  of 
mercury  into  the  system,  the  sulphides  seized  upon  all  that  circu- 
lated through  the  margin  of  the  gums,  and  formed  a deposit  in 
their  edges  of  black  sulphide  of  mercury.’  The  general  mercurial 
symptoms  .1  accounted  for  by  supposing  him  to  have  an  idiosyn- 
crasy for  the  drug.  I communicated  this  argument  to  him  and 
his  wife,  and  it  seemed  acceptable  to  both.”  That  accurately 
reports?— That  accurately  reports. 

Now,  his  final  condition  began  to  improve  from  the  very  first 
— ^that  is,  the  bowel  and  the  physical  symptoms? — ^Yes. 

But  the  spirits  did  not  improve? — ^No. 

And  he  continued,  I believe,  to  complain  of  deeplessness? — 
Oh,  yes. 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Dr.  Alfred  Leech 

Now,  on  the  12th  again  you  certainly  saw  him  twice  j was  that 
80?— Yes. 

And  I think  that  in  the  eyening,  after  the  chemist’s  shop  had 
closed,  you  saw  him  and  made  another  draught  for  him? — think 
after  my  second  yisit  1 let  his  messenger  come  home  with  me  and 
I made  up  a draught  for  him. 

Was  that  a bromide? — ^A  bromide  draught?  Yes. 

Now,  the  13th  was  Sunday.  I want  to  note  this  day.  Your 
lordship  may  remember  a former  witness  has  mentioned  the  113th. 
On  the  13th,  Sunday,  I think  you  yisited  him  three  times? — did. 

And  on  that  day  for  the  first  time  you  found  it  necessary  to 
inject  morphia  ? — ^Yes.  I should  like  to  refer  to  my  notes  to  know 
the  exact  reason  of  that  if  you  please. 

Yes,  look  at  any  note  you  haye.  If  you  look  at  your  docu- 
ment, you  will  find  it  mentioned? — ^Yes.  I was  doubtful  whether 
it  was  giyen  him  for  dental  purposes,  but  eyidently  it  was  giyen 
him  to  procure  some  sleep. 

You  had  already  giyen  him  some  fair  doses  of  narcotics  and 
bromide? — ^Yes,  1 haye  no  doubt  I had,  or  I should  not  haye 
resorted  to  morphia. 

But  it  was  a peculiarity  in  him  that  it  made  him  yery  restless 
in  large  doses? — ^Yesj  large  doses  of  bromide  he  declared  were 
stimulants,  and  they  were  the  yery  reyerse. 

Now,  about  the  14th,  I think,  the  blue  line  began  to  give  way 
— ^the  blue  line  round  the  teeth  began  to  disappear  ? — ^Yes,  it  did. 

**  The  blue  line  now  began  to  give  way  to  a grey  sloughing 
margin,  and  I brought  in  a surgeon-dentist  in  consultation,  and 
his  view  favoured  mercury  and  not  tartar  ” ? — ^Yes. 

On  the  14th  you  visited  him  twice,  and  on  the  15th  twice,  and 
again  injected  morphia? — On  the  16th  twice,  and  on  the  15th  I 
did  again  in  the  night  visit  inject  morphia. 

On  the  15th  the  sleeplessness  was  getting  worse.  That  was 
the  time  his  sleeplessness  was  getting  bad? — ^Yes.  That  was  the 
time,  I have  no  doubt;  his  teeth *were  beginning  to  pain  him  then. 

His  sleeplessness  was  caused,  not  by  the  former  cause,  but  his 
teeth  were  getting  painful? — ^Yes. 

Now,  on  the  16th  we  find  there  were  two  visits,  and  he  com- 
plained of  pain  in  the  tongue,  did  he  not? — ^In  the  lower  lip,  I 
think. 

You  gave  him  a tonic,  nuz  vomica  and  gentian  and  pepper- 
mint, to  produce  appetite,  and  allay  the  pain  in  the  tongue,  and 
to  allay  flatulence? — do  not  remember  pain  in  the  tongue. 

Was  the  pain  in  his  tongue  caused  by  his  teeth  ? — ^It  did  in  the 
lips,  yes — ^the  under  surface  of  the  tongue. 

On  the  16th  he  had  two  teeth  ta^en  out,  two  central  incisor 
roots,  and  it  was  determined  to  extract  the  loose  roots  ” ? — They 
were  extracted. 


213 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 

Dr.  Alfred  Leech 

And  they  were  all  very  much  decayed  and  horrible  ” ? — ^That 
fairly  describes  them,  and  loose. 

Decayed,  and  was  there  a foul  fungoid  growth  at  the  roots  f — 
Not  on  the  17th. 

What  do  you  call  horrible  1 — ^They  were  in  such  a bad  state  of 
decay. 

And  the  gums  round  them — ^were  the  gums  bad? — ^Yes,  the 
gums  were  still  bad,  and  in  front,  near  the  incisor  teeth,  the  grey 
slough,  which  succeeded  the  blue  line,  had  sloughed  ofi,  leaving  a 
jagged  margin. 

On  the  19th,  I think,  when  he  got  rid  of  those  teeth  or  roots, 
you  began  to  talk  to  him  about  getting  out  of  doors? — Quite  as 
early  as  that. 

At  all  events,  whether  you  pressed  him  or  not,  he  refused? — 
Yes;  he  said  it  would  kill  him.  He  really  was  so  obstinate  about 
going  out  of  doors  that  he  almost  at  one  time  made  me  believe 
that  I had  overlooked  something  serious  in  him.  He  was  so 
reasonable  on  some  points  that  1 could  scarcely  have  put  it  down 
to  sheer  folly. 

But  you  recommended  going  out  of  doors,  and  Dr.  Dudley 
recommended  it  also? — That  was  Dr.  Dudley’s  chief  advice — ^to  get 
out. 

And  it  was  of  no  use? — ^No,  he  passively  resisted. 

And  did  he  tell  you  that  he  liked  to  lie  still  and  feel  happy  ? — 
Yes,  he  did. 

1 am  not  going  back  to  the  detail  of  what  you  have  given  in 
your  evidence-in-chief,  but  a couple  of  days  before  the  19th  he 
talked  to  you  about  the  family  wanting  to  send  another  doctor,  did 
he  not? — ^Yes.  Dr.  Dudley  came  on  the  19th,  and  it  was  on  the 
USth  he  told  me  that. 

You  were  told  that  his  family  wanted  to  send  down  a doctor, 
were  you  ? — ^Yes ; I was  told  what  I stated  to  the  Attorney-General. 

He  would  know  that,  but  he  was  content  to  get  an  independent 
opinion  at  one  visit,  and  would  leave  you  to  choose  somebody  to 
come? — Yes,  that  was  it. 

And  you  chose  whom? — chose  Dr.  Dudley,  because  he  lived 
near,  and  he  was  a hospital  physician,  and  he  seemed  a most 
appropriate  person  to  call  in. 

Now,  on  that  occasion  when  the  conversation  took  place,  did 
you  say  that  you  had  almost  done  with  him,  and  that  he  only  re- 
quired an  outing  to  be  well,  and  that  he  ought  to  go  to  the  south 
coast? — think  you  are  running  two  statements  into  one. 

I do  not  want  to  do  that,  but  the  actual  words  can  be  referred 
to.  Let  me  read  your  account : 18th  December.  During  my 
visit  Mrs.  Bartlett  said,  ' Doctor,  I have  something  very  unpleasant 
to  say.’  ” — ^Excuse  me,  it  was  pointed  out  to  me  by  the  Treasury; 
it  was  **  I hope  you  won’t  be  ofiended.” 

* His  relations,  who  are  never  contented  with  anything  I 


214 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Dr.  Alfred  Leadi 

do,  want  to  send  him  a physician  of  their  own  choosing.’  I 
answered  at  once,  ' Well,  let  them  send  him  one;  I have  almost 
done  with  him.  He  only  requires  an  outing  to  be  quite  well,  and 
then  he  ought  to  go  to  the  south  coast  ’ ” ? — Yes,  that  is  the  quarter 
— ^that  is  correct. 

You  turned  to  Mr.  Bartlett  for  an  explanation  of  that  state- 
ment, and  he  sat  up  in  bed  and  said,  ''  Yes,  that  is  all  true.  I 
am  sorry  to  say  my  friends  are  not  friends  to  my  wife  ” ? — ^It  is 
not  in  my  entry,  but  certainly  he  said,  **  I am  determined  to 
manage  our  own  affairs.” 

Did  not  he,  after  that,  say,  “ We  are  determined  to  manage 
our  own  afiairs,  and  not  to  trouble  about  other  people  do 

not  know;  it  is  there. 

Now,  on  that  very  day  did  you  supply  a sleeping  draught  t — 
Which  day,  please? 

The  18th? — ^Not  that  I know  of. 

1 think  you  will  find  chloral  hydrate,  hydrochlorate  of 
morphia,  syrup  of  red  poppy? — On  the  18th? 

Yes? — I prescribed  it  on  the  19th. 

Very  v^ell;  it  was  the  19th,  I understand.  On  the  19th  was 
he  in  a decidedly  depressed  mental  condition  ? — On  the  19th,  yes — 
pretty  much  as  usual. 

Would  you  let  me  read  from  your  deposition ; ‘‘  I do  not 
remember  any  difierence  on  the  day  I agreed  with  Dr.  Dudley  that 
the  deceased  was  suffering  from  sub-acute  gastritis,”  which  re- 
mained, only  it  nearly  had  disappeared? — ^Yes. 

A ” depressed  mental  condition;  according  to  his  own  account, 
he  had  been  suffering  from  great  sleeplessness  for  a considerable 
time  ” ? — ^Yes. 

Then  on  the  next  day,  the  20th,  you  increased  the  dose  of 
chloral  hydrate,  I think? — ^Yes,  I did. 

And  that  sleeplessness — ^you  attributed  that  as  partly  due  to 
the  teeth,  1 think,  because  on  the  21st  the  lower  incisors  were 
removed? — ^Yes;  principally  the -teeth  were  at  fault  then. 

What? — Yes;  the  teeth  were  principally  at  fault,  so  that  we 
have  very  little  left  to  complain  of. 

Now,  the  gums — the  teeth  were  removed — ^the  gums  were 
getting  sloughy  round  those  teeth? — ^Yes,  they  were. 

Now,  at  that  time  did  Mrs.  Bartlett  tell  you  before  her 
husband  ” He  still  talked  about  dying,  and  he  will  still  talk  about 
dying  *'? — ^It  was  about  that  time  probably;  I am  not  sure  but 
that  fifhe  said  it  more  than  once. 

You  said  that,  in  your  view,  he  had  little  to  recover  from;  but 
did  you  promise  then,  on  his  agreeing  to  go  to  Torquay  after 
Christmas,  to  take  him  down  and  put  him  under  the  care  of  a 
medical  man  down  there,  Dr.  Dalby? — ^Tes;  I said  I would  accom-* 
pany  him,  and  I mentioned  Dr.  Dalby  because  I thought  it  would 

2)5 


Adelaide  Bartlett 


Dr.  AIIM  Leaeh 

giye  him  confidence  that  he  would  be  looked  after.  He  required 
no  looking  after  practically. 

Now,  wae  it  about  that  time  you  spoke  of  Mrs.  Bartlett  being 
so  fatigued  9 — cannot  remember. 

You  wanted  him  to  go  to  Torquay  alone? — Oh,  yes. 

That  was  for  some  reason,  was  not  it? — No,  pardon  me;  1 
wanted  to  get  him  away  and  send  him  to  Torquay  alone.  That 
was  one  reason  why  1 ofiered  to  accompany  him.  He  was  prac- 
tically a hysterical  patient  about  that  time,  and  his  wife  petted 
him  very  much.  What  would  have  done  him  good  would  have 
been  to  have  sent  him  a sea  trip,  with  no  one  to  nurse  him,  and 
hold  his  toe,  and  that  sort  of  nonsense. 

If  he  had  been  obliged  to  take  care  of  himself  he  would  have 
been  all  right,  you  think? — ^Yes,  that  was  it.  I wanted  to  get 
him  to  Torquay  by  himself.  He  wanted  dental  care,  but  from  a 
medical  point  of  view  he  was  out  of  hand. 

That  was  the  state  of  things,  you  say,  between  the  21st  and 
23rd,  but  on  the  23rd  you  prescribed  this  placebo  ? — The  24th. 

On  the  24th  you  prescribed  the  placebo.  We  quite  understood 
that  was  a thing  which  would  do  him  neither  harm  nor  good, 
except  so  far  as  he  imagined  it  was  going  to? — ^That  is  just  it,  and 
I did  not  tell  his  wife  the  secret  of  it. 

Mr.  JusTiOB  Wills — ^That  is  38,413. 

Cross-examimation  contimAtd — ^Yes,  that  innocent  placebo— was 
the  amount  which  you  prescribed  10  drops? — 10  drops  were  to  bo 
given  in  wine  and  repeated,  if  necessary,  an  hour  later,  if  the  pain 
was  severe,  and  1 think  I said  he  was  to  be  careful  not  to  take  a 
third  dose. 

He  had  been  getting  better  physically  up  to  that  time? — ^Ycs. 

On  the  26tlh  something  appeared  that  upset  the  whole  thing? — 
Was  that  the  worm? 

Yes,  the  worm? — Oh,  yes;  that  threw  everything  back  again. 

I beg  your  pardon,  doctor,  1 have  assisted  you  to  a wrong 
date;  the  25th,  was  it  not? — On  the  23rd  I saw  a lumbricoid  worm 
— ^yes,  he  passed  it  on  the  23rd. 

That  was  what  threw  him  back? — ^Yes,  he  was  in  such  a 
condition 

Such  a condition  what  ? — ^About  it,  that  I put  ofi  the  treatment 
for  a couple  of  days,  partly  to  see  if  any  more  passed,  and  partly 
to  let  him  gather  up  pluck  and  spirit. 

Do  you  mean  he  was  so  mudh  depressed  and  shocked? — ^Yes, 
he  was  so  much  depressed  by  it;  he  thought  certainly  he  had  some- 
thing wrong  with  him  then,  and  that  he  had  proved  then  that 
there  was  something  wrong  with  him. 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills — ^The  date  was  not  the  26th,  was  it; 
the  placebo  was  38,413,  and  the  worm  was  38,420? — ^Vermifuge 
course  two  days  after  the  lumbricoid  was  seen. 

ccmtiavaed^-^ou  say  he  was  shocked  and 

216 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Dr.  Alfred  Leadi 

upfiet  by  it,  and  you  say  he  thought  there  was  certainly  now  more 
mischief  about  him  than  you  had  found  out? — ^Tes. 

And  he  told  you  on  tiiat  day  or  a day  or  two  afterwards  that 
he  felt  worms  wriggling  up  his  throat? — ^Yes,  the  next  day,  I 
think,  and  kept  to  it. 

It  was  a delusion,  I suppose? — I do  not  know.  Two  or  three 
days  ago  I saw  a worm  that  did  wriggle  up  a patient's  throat  and 
was  vomited. 

Then  he  may  have  felt  that? — ^Yes,  he  may  have,  but  I think 
in  his  case  it  was  a mistake,  because  I asked  tihe  doctors  to  search 
for  a lumbricoid  in  the  post-mortem,  and  his  motions  were  watched 
from  that  day  to  the  day  of  his  death  for  a lumbricoid. 

He  felt  worms  wriggling  up  him? — ^No;  he  always  described 
them,  in  my  presence,  as  in  his  throat. 

That  would  be  the  imagination  of  a very  nervous  man  upset 
by  this  having  happened? — ^Yes. 

Would  not  that  be  so? — ^What  do  I commit  myself  to  by 
answering  this? 

Only  for  a suggestion  which  I make  to  you.  Supposing  he 
was  to  describe  himself  as  feeling  worms  wriggling  about  him,  from 
his  legs  upwards,  that  would  be  the  delusion  of  a nervous  man 
upset  and  shaken  by  what  had  happened  to  him  ? — ^A  nervous  man  ? 
'V^at  I say  is  that  I am  not  inclined  to  set  down  every  man  as 
nervous  who  says  that,  because  worms  might  be  there. 

Worms  could  not  really  be  there? — do  not  know;  1 have  no 
basis  to  form  an  opinion  on. 

You  are  entitled  to  guard  yourself  in  that  way.  I understand 
what  you  say  about  his  nerves  and  depressed  condition  at  that 
time  is  not  necessarily  connected  with  this  imagination  about 
worms? — ^Yes,  that  is  so. 

Now,  you  say  that  the  appearance  of  that  worm  had  thrown 
everything  back? — ^Yes. 

And  he  was  in  a more  depressed  troubled  condition  after  that 
time,  was  he  not? — ^Yes,  for  a day  or  two. 

Well,  did  a very  curious  matter  take  place  within  the  next 
day  or  two  after  that  with  regard  to  mesmerism  or  magnetism? — 
I cannot  fix  the  date  of  it  from  memory. 

Well,  somewhat  earlier  in  your  attendances  at  Claverton 
Street  had  he  mentioned  to  you  the  subject  of  mesmerism  ? — can- 
not say  when  he  did,  but  I think  I have  notes  of  it  somewhere.  ^ I 
think  the  Treasury  have  them.  I think  I must  have  parted  with 
my  original  copy.  Oh,  I have  it  here;  probably  on  the  26th.  It 
was  on  the  26th. 

It  was  on  the  26th,  was  it  ? — Yes. 

Was  it  on  the  26th  that  he  told  you,  or  was  it  on  the  night 
of  the  26th  you  think  he  said  it  happened  ? — ^Are  we  talking  of  the 
same  subject? 

On  my  word,  I do  not  know.  What  I am  putting  to  you  is 

217 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Dr.  Alfred  Leeeh 

that  he  gave  you  an  account  of  something  that  happened  one  night 
with  regard  to  his  standing  up  for  two  hours } — ^Yes. 

Did  you  understand  his  doing  that  had  happened  on  the  night 
of  the  26th,  or  was  it  on  the  night  of  the  26th  he  told  you? — ^Noj 
1 think  it  must  have  happened  a couple  of  days  earlier  than  the 
26th,  or  a couple  of  days  later,  because  he  told  it  me  one  morning 
when  1 went  in  and  asked  what  kind  of  a night  he  had  passed. 

There  had  been  a previous  conversation  between  you  about 
mesmerism  ? — ^He  told  me  an  extraordinary  tale  on  the  night  of  the 
26th. 

An  extraordinary  rigmarole? — ^Yes. 

About  the  possibility  of  being  under  somebody’s  influence  from 
a distance? — ^Yesj  he  thought  he  and  his  wife  had  both  been  mes- 
merised by  a friend. 

You  say,  on  going  in  one  morning  he  made  a statement  of 
something  that  had  happened  in  the  night? — ^Yes,  a very  peculiar 
one;  shall  I relate  it? 

Do,  please? — I said,  Well,  Mr.  Bartlett,  how  have  you 
slept?  ” He  said,  I could  not  sleep;  I was  nervous  and  rest- 
less when  I saw  my  wife  asleep  in  the  easy-chair,  so  I got  up  and 
went  and  stood  over  her  like  this  ’’  (holding  up  his  hands) — he 
was  in  a very  excited  state  then — for  two  hours,  and  I felt  the 
vital  force  being  drawn  from  her  to  me.  I felt  it  going  into  me 
through  my  Anger  tips,  and  after  that  1 laid  down  and  slept.’’ 
And  his  wife  said,  **  That  is  a nice  story.  Imagine  him  standing 
for  two  hours  and  doing  anything.” 

So  that  Mrs.  Bartlett  treated  it  as  a mere  delusion  on  his 
part?— Yes.  I imagined  he  had  stood  for  two  minutes  and  felt 
the  vital  force,  as  he  imagined  it. 

You  did  not  imagine  he  had  stood  over  her  for  two  hours 
extracting  the  vital  force  from  her  ? — I did  not  imagine  he  would 
stay  two  hours  doing  anything.  I was  of  Mrs.  Bartlett’s  opinion 
on  that  matter. 


The  Court  •adjourned. 


218 


Fourth  Day— Thursday,  ISth  April,  1886. 


Dr.  Alfred  Leaoh,  recalled,  and  further  cross-examined  by 
Mr.  Clarke — ^You  told  us  yesterday  that  you  had  found  that  the 
sedatives  did  not  produce  their  expected  effect  upon  him? — ^That 
is  so. 

Did  you  find  the  same  thing  happen  with  respect  to  purga- 
tives ? — ^Yes. 

On  the  26th  you  subjected  him  to  somewhat  persistently  severe 
treatment  in  order  to  open  the  bowels,  I think? — Very. 

There  were  two  draughts  then;  there  were  two  globules  con- 
taining croton  oil? — ^Yes;  those  he  called  stimulants. 

I was  going  to  ask  you  as  to  that.  With  regard  to  croton-oil 
pills,  those  ought  to  have  been  very  effectual  for  their  purpose? — 
Yes;  and  very  rapid  too. 

But  he  attributed  to  them  precisely  an  opposite  effect? — ^Yes. 

He  said  he  felt  stimulated  by  them? — ^Yes;  he  said  they  were 
warming  and  pleasant — ^to  his  stomach  comforting. 

Then  you  got  him  his  hot  tea  and  coffee  with  the  intention  of 
inducing  those  remedies  to  act? — ^Yes. 

And  that  tea  and  coffee  did  not  have  the  desired  effect? — ^No; 
nothing  had. 

I believe  you  applied  galvanism  to  the  abdomen? — ^Yes. 

And  that  failed? — That  failed. 

And  you  practically  gave  it  up  in  despair? — did.  I may 
mention  that  he  was  not  suffering  from  constipation  previously; 
it  was  not  constipation  that  I was  treating  him  for,  but  the  veriui- 
fuge  (worm  powder)  that  had  to  be  driven  out  of  the  digestive 
organs.  He  had  swallowed  the  worm  powder,  and  I naturally  had 
to  give  purgatives  to  clear  that  cfut. 

What  would  have  been  the  effect  of  the  worm  powder  if  it  had 
remained  there,  and  no  purgatives  had  been  administered? — ^It 
would  have  made  him  very  miserable;  he  would  have  seen  every- 
thing green ; he  would  have  suffered  from  buzzing  in  the  ears,  and 
all  sorts  of  troubles,  which  I did  not  wish  to  subject  him  to. 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills — ^Did  he  have  all  these  troubles? — ^No, 
he  did  not ; he  should  have  had  them ; I know  that  from  personal 
experience. 

C^osB-escaminxition  continued — You  expected  him  to  have  them  ? 
— ^Yes.  I have  tried  the  same  drug  upon  myself,  and  always  try 
to  avoid  letting  any  patient  experience  what  I experienced  on  that 
occasion. 

As  a matter  of  fact,  do  vou  know  whether  it  was  carried  off 

219 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Dr.  Alfred  Leach 

from  hia  bowels — ^for  two  or  three  days,  at  all  events? — don^t 
remember — ^yes,  it  must  have  been. 

Do  you  remember? — ^Yes,  I recollect  now.  He  did  not  suffer 
from  constipation  afterwards. 

You  have  told  us  that  the  stools  were  preserved  for  you? — 

Yes. 

On  what  day  after  that  did  you  see  a motion  ? — saw  a motion 
the  necct  morning  when  I called — a small  one,  I grant. 

Not  satisfactory? — ^No. 

Now,  on  the  30th  I think  it  was  that  you  said  you  would  not 
visit  him  any  more  ? — The  day  before  I said  I would  not  visit  him 
on  the  30th;  the  30th  was  Wednesday,  I believe. 

You  said  on  the  29th  that  you  would  not  come  on  the  30th;  is 
that  so? — ^If  the  30th  was  Wednesday,  that  is  so. 

Mr.  Justice  Wills — ^Yes,  it  was  the  30th. 

OrosB-eamn/inxition  coniimitd — Then  you  told  him  on  the 
Tuesday  that  you  would  not  visit  him  again? — ^Yes,  I did. 

He  was  apparently  distressed  at  that,  was  he  not? — ^Yes,  he 

was. 

What  did  he  say  about  it? — don’t  remember. 

Except  that  you  saw  he  was  distressed  apparently  at  your 
saying  that? — ^Yes,  he  was.  I know  it  was  not  the  first  time  I 
had  ^reatened.  Nothing  specially  fixed  that  in  my  memory. 

The  idea  had  always  distressed  him  of  your  not  continuing  to 
attend  him? — ^Yes,  it  had;  and  Mrs.  Bartlett  said,  You  had 
better  come,  doctor,”  on  previous  occasions.  That  was  why  I 
visited  him  so  often  as  1 did  during  some  portion  of  the  time.  She 
said,  ” You  had  better  come,  doctor;  he  will  be  anxious,”  or  some- 
thing of  that  sort. 

Had  ho  crying  fits  about  this  time? — I saw  none. 

But  you  heard  of  them  and  spoke  to  him  about  them? — Oh, 

yes. 

When  you  spoke  to  him  about  his  crying,  did  he  tell  you  that 
he  could  not  help  it  ? — don’t  remember ; he  made  some  reply  of  a 
queer  nature,  I know- 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills — suppose  that  is  just  exactly  what 
hysterical  and  nervous  patients  do  ? — Oh,  yes ; it  was  a reply  quite 
fitting  the  case. 

Grosa-eoBommation  continued — am  only  reminding  you,  Dr. 
Leach — I am  quite  sure  you  wish  to  tell  us  all  about  it.  Was  this 
what  you  said  before  the  coroner : ” I was  told  by  Mrs.  Bartlett 
on  several  occasions  that  the  deceased  had  had  one  of  his  crying 
fits 'M— Yes. 

And  on  speaking  to  him,  he  said  that  was  so? — ^Yes. 

” Mrs.  Bartlett  said,  * Edwin  sits  in  his  armchair  and  cries 
an  hour  at  a time;  and  when  I ask  him  about  it,  he  says  it  was 
because  he  was  so  happy  ’ ” ? — Yes. 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Dr.  Alfred  Leach 

“ If  that  was  true,  I should  have  put  it  down  to  male 
hysteria  ? — ^Yes. 

''  When  I asked  him  why  he  cried,  he  said  he  could  not  help 
it  1 — ^That  is  most  probably  true,  because  the  facts  were  better 
in  my  mind  then.  ^ Mrs.  Bartlett’s  reply  I remember  distinctly. 
She  said,  ''  He  cries  because  he  says  he  is  so  happy.”  That  I 
distinctly  remember,  even  now. 

That  struck  you  as  being^  odd,  I suppose  ? — It  could  not  fail  to. 

But  that  was  said  in  his  presence? — Oh,  yes. 

Was  he  a man  who  used  to  discuss  medical  matters  at  all? 
Did  he  dwell  upon  his  condition  and  talk  to  you  about  it,  and  so 
on? — ^N6;  he  was  not  a talkative  man. 

Not  talkative? — No.  The  only  time  that  I saw  him  what 
might  be  called  talkative  was  the  time  that  he  told  me  about  his 
being  mesmerised ; then  he  fired  up  with  quite  unwonted  eloquence. 

Now,  during  the  last  two  or  three  days  of  his  life  the  jaw 
symptoms  became  alarming,  did  they  not? — ^Tes. 

I think  it  was  on  the  29th,  the  30th,  and  the  31st  that  his  jaw 
symptoms  became  alarming.  I am  reading  from  your  deposi- 
tions: ” It  was  on  the  29&,  the  30th,  and  the  Slst  that  the  jaw 
symptoms  became  alarming  ” ? — Yes,  that  is  so. 

That  pointed  to  necrosis? — ^It  did,  of  a superficial  kind. 

If  you  please,  but  alarming? — ^Yes.  I don’t  use  that  word 

in  its  worst  sense. 

Mr.  JusTion  Wills — ^I  wanted  to  know  what  was  meant  by 
that,  because  it  is  a vague  word. 

Oross-emminatton  continued — ^You  have  said  to-day  they  were 
alarming? — They  were  alarming;  they  alarmed  me. 

When  you  say  that,  you  do  not  use  the  word  in  its  worst  sense; 
necrosis  may  often  be  a very  terrible  matter  indeed.  As  a matter 
of  medical  science,  when  you  find  that  necrosis  has  set  in,  it  is 
very  difficult  to  set  a limit  to  its  mischief,  is  it  not? — ^It  depends 
upon  the  constitution  of  the  patient.  This  necrosis  being  due 
to  local  causes,  I had  no  great  fear  as  to  its  ultimate  result. 

That  is,  not  a result  as  afieoting  his  life,  you  mean? — ^As 
affecting  his  life;  that  is  what  I wish  particularly  to  explain. 

That  is  the  limit,  ^en? — Yes. 

But,  short  of  that,  you  were  alarmed  as  to  the  consequences 
that  might  follow? — ^Yes.  • ^ ^ 

Just  let  me  a^  you,  as  a matter  of  medical  science  again, 
what  is  the  principal  cause  of  necrosis — ^the  most  common  cause  of 
necrosis? — ^Injury  to  the  bone  or  periosteum. 

But  injury  how  caused  ? — ^By  traumatic  or  chemical  causes. 

Shall  I suggest  to  you  the  ordinary  causes  of  necrosis?— Pray 
<do  so. 

Well,  necrosis  may  follow  a blow?— That  is  a traumatic  cause. 

It  may  follow  on  a fever?— Yes,  indirectly. 

221 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Dr.  Alfred  Leacb 

Of  course,  in  a particular  form,  it  follows  on  phosphorus 
poisoning? — ^Yes. 

What  is  called  a lucifer-match  necrosis? — ^Tes;  caries  begins 
the  process  then. 

1 said  in  a particular  form  ; but  the  most  ordinary  cause 
by  far  of  necrosis  is  mercury,  is  it  not? — No;  syphilis. 

Syphilis  is  the  most  common,  is  it? — The  most  common;  I 
don^t  exclude  mercury,  mind. 

As  a matter  of  fact,  there  have  been  a good  many  cases  where 
necrosis  has  followed  upon  taking  mercury  even  in  small  doses 
where  syphilis  has  not  been  present  at  all  ? — >1  have  no  doubt  that 
is  so. 

Tou  have  told  us  that  when  you  first  saw  Mr.  Bartlett  you 
told  him  that  he  was  sufiering  from  mercurial  poisoning? — ^Yes. 

Don't  you  connect  necrosis  with  mercury? — There  was  no 
necrosis  then. 

But  when  necrosis  did  appear? — ^Yes,  indirectly. 

By  Mr.  Justiob  Wills — ^Will  you  explain  what  you  mean  by 
that? — ^Explain  it  in  its  immediate  cause? 

Explain  what  you  mean  by  connecting  it  indirectly.  Do  you 
think  the  one  had  anything  to  do  with  the  other  ? — ^Decidedly. 

In  what  way  do  you  think  they  were  both  due,  to  syphilis  or 
what? — No,  my  lord.  I take  it  to  be  that  mercury  was  one  of 
the  causes  in  the  chain  of  events  that  led  up  to  necrosis. 

In  one  sense,  of  course  it  would  be.  A thing  that  has  hap** 
pened  before  in  the  course  of  a man's  life  is  part  of  the  chain  of 
events  that  leads  up  to  his  present  condition.  Do  you  think  that 
one  extra  dose  of  some  mercurial  poison  would  lead  to  necrosis  of 
his  jaw — an  extra  dose  of  some  pill  which  contained  mercury?  Do 
you  think  that  caused  the  necrosis,  or  had  any  serious  operation 
in  producing  the  necrosis,  of  his  jaw? — I thank  your  lordship  for 
putting  it  to  me  so.  I can  answer  **  Yes  " to  that. 

Mr.  Justice  Wills— I beg  your  pardon,  Mr.  Clarke,  but  I 
wanted  to  understand  this  vagueiexpression,  for  this  does  not  help 
me  a bit. 

Cross-examinaUon  continued— 1 am  obliged  to  your  lordship 
for  putting  it.  Now,  Dr.  Leach,  on  the  afternoon  of  the  31st,  I 
think  you  privately  arranged  with  Mrs.  Bartlett  about  his  going 
to  the  dentist's? — ^Yes. 

Was  that  in  order  to  spare  him  the  dread  of  looking  forward 
to  that  visit? — ^Yes. 

I think  when  you  left  on  that  evening  you  arranged  to  come 
and  see  him  again  on  the  following  day? — ^Yes,  after  he  left  me 
that  evening. 

He  understood  that  you  would  come  and  see  him  on  the  follow* 
ing  morning? — On  the  following  day. 

So  that  in  the  ordinary  course  of  things  you  would  have  been 
there  on  the  1st  of  January? — ^Yes. 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Dr.  Alfred  Leedi 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills — Did  he  leave  you  at  the  dentist's 
door,  or  did  you  go  back  with  them  to  Claverton  Street? — ^He  and 
his  wife  left  me  at  the  dentist's  door,  and  they  went  back  to 
Claverton  Street  in  a hansom. 

OroBB-exommxition  continued — ^Now,  I am  not  going  over  again 
the  account  which  you  gave  us  yesterday  as  the  account  which  Mrs. 
Bartlett  gave  you  of  that  particular  evening.  1 understand  that, 
before  you  gave  your  evidence  before  the  coroner  the  first  time  you 
gave  it,  you  asked  her  to  put  you  in  a position  to  give  evidence. 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills — Before  we  have  that,  I should  like  to 
ask  about  a thing  to  which  reference  has  been  made  once  ot  twice, 
but  about  which  no  question  has  been  asked.  It  was  said  that, 
when  they  were  driving  to  the  dentist’s  together,  the  deceased 
referred  to  the  very  happy  life  which  they  had  had,  and  said  he 
should  like  to  be  married  again.  Was  that  in  your  presence?— 
That  was  in  my  presence. 

Was  it  on  that  evening? — On  the  evening  of  the  31st. 

Was  it  upon  the  way  to  the  dentist’s? — On  the  way  to  the 
dentist’s. 

Mr.  Justice  Wills — It  has  been  referred  to  by  somebody,  but 
never  proved. 

Mr.  Clarke — It  was  in  the  opening,  my  lord. 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills — That  was  on  the  way,  was  it? — ^Yes, 
in  Denbigh  Street. 

Tell  Tis  what  happened? — ^As  we  were  approaching  the  corner 
of  Denbigh  Street  and  Charlwood  Street,  the  conversation  ran 
upon  the  subject  of  recent  marriages  in  the  locality.  Mrs.  Bart- 
lett said  to  me,  This  morning  Edwin  and  I,  doctor,  were  talking 
about  the  number  of  our  friends  who  are  getting  married,  and  we 
were  saying  we  wished  almost  that  we  were  unmarried  that  we 
might  have  the  pleasure  of  marrying  each  other  again.”  I turned 
to  the  deceased,  and  said,  ” That  is  very  flattering  to  you,  Mr. 
Bartlett,  after  so  many  years’  experience  of  jrours,”  and  his  reply 
was  not  quite  clear,  for  he  was  muffled  up,  his  mouth  was  covered 
with  wraps.  On  the  way  to  the  dentist’s  he  said,  **  Tes,  we  suit 
one  another  very  well;  we  agree  in  our  views,”  or  “ in  our  ways,” 
I am  not  sure  which  he  said,  and  then  the  conversation  dropped 
before  we  arrived  at  the  dentist’s. 

Orose-examination  continued — ^Although  you  had  very  kindly 
tried  to  spare  him  the  hour’s  dread,  he  did  know  then  that  he  was 
on  the  way  to  the  dentist’s  to  have  the  operation  performed?— -Oh, 
yes;  I refcurned  to  Claverton  Street  to  take  him  to  the  dentist’s 
myi^f,  and  I found  that  he  was  already  dresrod. 

And  was  it  your  impression  that  his  wife  was  lively  and 
cheerful,  trying  to  keep  up  his  spirits  on  the  way? — Oh,  yes,  die 
always  did  that;  you  are  quite  right,  on  leaving  the  house  she 
tried  to  cheer  him  in  every  way.  j 

I win  take  you  to  the  morning  when  you  went  there,  and  the 

223 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Dr.  Alfred  Uaeh 

death  that  happened.  Was  Mrs.  Bartlett  apparently  very  much 
distressed  9 — ^Yes. 

She  burst  out  crying,  I think,  in  speaking  of  her  husband  to 
you  ? — ^Let  me  say  what  actually  did  occur. 

By  all  means;  that  is  what  1 want? — ^Directly  1 entered  the 
room  she  said,  coming  up  to  me,  Is  he  really  dead?  and  then 
it  was  that  1 made  the  formal  examination,  really  thinking  in  my 
mind  at  the  time,  ''  How  can  1 best  put  it  to  this  poor  woman; 
how  can  1 best  really  break  the  news  to  her?  and  I turned  round 
and  said,  Yes,  Mrs.  Bartlett,  I am  afraid  he  is,'^  or  something 
to  that  effect,  and  then  she  burst  out  crying  bitterly. 

I won't  go  through  the  whole  story,  because  you  have  told  us; 
then  she  said,  ''  What  can  he  be  dead  of?  "? — ^Yes,  a little  later, 
that  was  to  say,  she  was  crying,  and  when  the  crying  was  over,  we 
began  to  talk  about  the  possible  cause  of  death,  and  she  said, 
“ What  is  he  dead  of,  doctor?  " or  “ What  can  he  bo  dead  of?  " 
I am  not  sure  of  the  words,  and  my  answer  was,  I don't  know." 

Well,  then  I think  you  asked  if  he  could  have  got  prussic 
acid? — Yes,  that  was  the  most  rapid  poison  that  suggested  itsdf 
to  my  mind. 

xou  asked  that? — ^1  asked  that. 

And  she  said,  " Oh,  no  " ? — She  said,  **  He  could  have  got 
at  no  poison  without  my  knowledge  and  then,  soon  after  that 
reply,  I suggested  to  her  digitalis  and  other  alkaloids  that  he  had 
got,  anything  which  his  friend  Quires  had  had,  or  anything  that 
he  had  had  by  him ; all  those  things  were  said. 

And  she  negatived  everything? — She  negatived  everything. 

Did  she  appear  anxious  to  find  out  and  get  at  any  suggestion 
as  to  Ihe  death? — So  far  as  1 could  judge,  most  emphatically  yes. 

Her  conduct  was  perfectly  natural — ^the  natural  conduct  of  a 
loving  wife  who  had  just  sustained  that  shock? — ^You  are  asking 
me  to  judge  of  things  rather  beyond  my  ken.  I have  no  hesitation 
in  giving  my  opinion  for  what  it  is  worth  on  the  matter. 

Well,  did  her  conduct  appear  to  you  perfectly  natural? — ^It 
may  be  after-events  had  biassed  my  mind;  she  seemed  not  only 
grieved,  but  very  much  alarmed,  very  much  scared — ^that  is  the 
impression  on  my  mind  now;  of  course,  I did  not  think  it  then, 
but  I do  now. 

Not  only  grieved,  but  did  she  appear  startled  by  the  sudden- 
ness of  the  thing  ? — don't  know. 

Was  something  said  about  pills? — ^Yes,  yes;  when  speaking  of 
poisons,  of  course  I mentioned  morphia  and  opium  amongst  others, 
and  she  said,  There  are  the  two  opium  pills  which  he  had  had 
by  him  some  time;  he  asked  me  to  give  him  one  last  night,  but  I 
am  very  glad  I did  not."  I went  to  the  cupboard  and  saw  the 
pills. 

You  had  prescribed  opium  pills? — ^Yes. 

And  she  said  she  was  very  glad  she  didn't  give  him  one? — ^Yes. 

224 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Dr.  Alfred  Leach 

And  then  you  went  to  the  cupboard  and  saw  that  the  pills  were 
there  ? — That  they  were  there. 

Then  we  hear  that  you  said,  There  must  be  a post-mortem 
examination/'  and  she  said^  Must  there  be  an  inquest?  " — ^Tes. 

Did  she  wish  to  have  a post-mortem  examination  made  as 
quickly  as  possible  ? — She  certainly  did.  She  chafed  at  the  delay 
till  next  day.  When  1 told  her  that  Dr.  Green  could  not  come 
that  afternoon,  she  said,  Can’t  he  be  persuaded  to  come?  ” 

Persuaded  to  come  in  order  that  he  might  make  the  post- 
mortem examination  on  that  very  day? — On  that  very  day. 

And  did  she  say  this  to  you,  Spare  no  expense;  get  any 
assistance  you  want;  we  are  interested  in  knowing  the  cause  of  the 
death  ”? — think  she  said,  “ We  are  all  interested  the  other 
words  she  did  certainly  say.  It  was  on  the  strength  of  that  per- 
mission that,  when  Dr.  Green  telegraphed  to  me,  or  wrote  to  me 
(I  am  not  sure  which),  saying,  1 will  come  and  look  on,  if  you 
will  do  the  post-mortem  ” — it  was  on  the  strength  of  that  per- 
mission that  I replied  to  him  by  telegraph,  No;  bring  an 
assistant  with  you ; 1 will  take  no  part  in  it.”  1 have  ^e  telegram 
here.  I can  tell  you  the  exact  words. 

I don’t  think  the  exact  words  matter,  but  it  was  on  the 
strength  of  her  saying  that  to  you,  Spare  no  expense;  get  any 

assistance  you  want  ” ? — That  I felt  justified  at  once  in  telling 

Dr*  Green  to  bring  with  him  whatever  gentleman  he  chose. 

Did  she  speak  of  the  death  as  a mystery  that  she  wanted  to 
have  cleared  up?— Yes.  Dr.  Green,  in  replying  that  he  could 
not  perform  the  post-mortem  on  that  day,  suggested  that  I should 

rtt  some  one  else,  and  said,  Please  act  independently.”  Then 
telegraphed  to  him,  **  Can  you  fix  this  for  to-morrow  morning? 
Remuneration  adequate.”  Then  he  said,  “ To-morrow.  Tour 
house,  2.15.” 

I am  very  much  obliged  to  you;  then  she  pressed  that  the 
examination  should  take  place  at  once? — She  did. 

And  if  Dr.  Green  had  been'*  able  to  come  that  afternoon  it 
would  have  taken  place  that  afternoon? — ^Yes. 

And  it  was  your  waiting  till  the  next  day,  not  thinking  it 
necessary  to  employ  any  one  else? — ^Yes;  I wanted  to  employ  Dr. 
Green,  for  I thought  there  might  be  some  peculiar  pathological 
question  involved  here. 

And  Dr.  Green  is  an  eminent  pathologist? — ^An  eminent 
pathologist. 

There  was  one  occasion  upon  which  she  made  a statement  to 
you  as  to  what  took  place  with  a view  of  your  giving  evidence 
before  the  coroner ; that  was  the  first  time,  I think,  that  you  gave 
evidence  i^Tes. 

Now  a good  deal  later,  on  26th  January,  she  made  another 
communication  to  you  with  r^ard  to  her  having  had  the  chloro- 
form in  her  possession  ?— Yes. 

Q 235 


Adelaide  Bartlett 


Dr.  Allred  Uach 

Was  that  a communication  which  you  considered  at  the  time 
was  spoken  in  confidence  to  you? — Yes. 

1 think,  when  you  were  before  the  coroner,  you  were  somewhat 
reluctant  to  give  it  in  evidence,  on  the  ground  that  it  had  been 
spoken  in  confidence  to  you? — ^Pray  don't  take  me  over  what  I did 
that  afternoon  before  the  coroner.  I went  before  the  coroner  not 
thinking  I should  give  that  evidence,  thinking  that  she  was  going 
into  the  box  and  would  give  it  herself,  and  that  1 Should  never  be 
called  upon.  I felt  utterly  incompetent  to  give  the  narrative 
straight  ofi  without  thinking  it  over,  and  I equivocated  by  saying 
I was  so  confused  that  I did  not  know  what  to  answer ; but  as  soon 
as  1 got  out  of  the  Court  I wrote  it. 

Pray  understand,  Dr.  Leach,  I am  not  disputing  or  going  to 
challenge  in  the  least  degree  the  accuracy  of  what  you  said.  The 
point  is  this ; 1 think  you  said  that  you  considered  what  was  said 
was  said  in  confidence,  and  then,  when  it  was  very  properly  pointed 
out  that  you  were  bound  to  repeat  it,  you  did  so  ? — ^Yes,  it  was  so, 
in  confidence;  in  that  sense  decidedly. 

You  did  consider  it  was  in  that  sense? — Yes. 

^ Then  in  the  statement  she  then  made  there  was  one  word  which 
I wish  to  refer  to.  I think  you  said  that  she  told  you,  after  she 
had  explained  the  matter  to  her  husband  why  She  had  got  possession 
of  the  chloroform,  and  when  she  had  given  him  the  bottle,  he 
seemed  grieved,  and  turned  over? — Yes,  those  were  her  words  so 
far  as  I remember;  in  fact,  it  was;  yes,  I am  sure  of  it. 

You  said  this : She  gave  the  bottle  into  his  hand,  ^ey  talked 
affectionately  about  their  relations  to  one  another  for  a short  time, 
and  he  seemed  much  grieved  "? — ^Well,  the  “ grieved  " was  hers, 
the  much  " would  be  mine. 

I am  reading  from  your  depositions,  Dr.  Leach.  And  you 
were  desired  to  say  what  she  told  you? — ^Yes. 

Did  she  then  say  that,  at  Ihe  time  of  the  death — ^the  idea  of 
his  having  swallowed  the  chloroform  did  not  enter  her  head  at  that 
time? — She  certainly  did  not  say  that  it  did  not  enter  her  head; 
if  that  is  in  my  depositions 

I am  reading : ''  She  said,  * Is  he  really  dead?  ' She  further 
said  (it  was  on  f£e  26th)  that  the  idea  of  hie  having  swallowed  the 
chloroform  did  not  enter  her  head  " ? — ^Have  you  finished  the  sen- 
tence, may  1 ask? 

I will  begin  the  whole : ‘‘  She  got  up  to  turn  him  into  a more 
comfortable  position,  and  was  greatly  alarmed  at  his  .condition. 
She  rubbed  his  chest  and  applied  brandy,  but,  becoming  frightened, 
she  sent  a servant  for  me.  On  my  arrival,  her  words  were,  * Is 
he  really  dead?  ' She  further  stated  to  me  on  the  26th  that  the 
idea  of  his  having  swallowed  the  chloroform  did  not  enter  her  head 
at  the  time,  and  mat  she  did  not  remove  the  bottle  from  the  mantel- 
piece where  he  last  placed  it  for  hours,  or  some  time  after  I had 
seen  the  body.  When  she  first  mentioned  the  dbloroform,  Mrs. 

226 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Dr.  Alfred  Leeeh 

Bartlett  told  me  that  it  was  labelled  ‘ Chloroform/  and  that  it  was 
a large  bottle.  She  continued,  that  about  breakfast  time  she  placed 
the  bottle  in  a drawer  in  the  next  room,  where  it  remained  nearly 
a week.  She  said  that  her  first  real  suspicions  as  to  the  cause  of 
death  were  aroused  when  she  heard  it  stated  that  the  contents  of 
the  stomach  smelled  of  chloroform  (that  statement  was  made  after 
the  post-^mortem),  but,  hearing  me  say  that  that  smell  might  be  due 
to  the  deceased  having  swallowed  some  chlorodyne  he  had  in  his 
possession,  she  refrained  from  making  any  suggestions  that  would 
necessarily  throw  grave  suspicions  upon  Wself  — ^Yes;  and  she 
told  that  to  me  more  than  two  or  three  times.  1 have  not  read 
that  evidence  since  I gave  it  before  the  coroner.  That  statement 
was  written  a little  rapidly ; if  I had  to  write  it  now,  I should  say 
to-day  that  it  did  not  seriously  enter  into  her  head,  and  her  first 
suspicions  in  that  case  were  these.  1 did  not  mean  to  say  that  she 
did  not  say  that  the  idea  did  not  fiash  across  her  mind,  but  that 
she  had  failed  to  entertain  it. 

That  evidence  was  given  at  a time  very  much  nearer  to  the 
conversation  than  the  time  of  which  we  are  now  speaking;  it  was 
much  sooner  after  the  conversation  this  evidence  was  given,  was  it 
xxot  ? — ^Yes ; this  is  a pai-t  of  the  depositions  which  I wrote  and  gave 
to  the  coroner. 

It  is  a part  of  the  coroner’s  note,  and  you  signed  it  on  Monday, 
8th  February — ^the  conversation  took  place  on  26th  January,  and 
you  wrote  it  out  on  ith  February? — ^Yes;  please  remember,  too 
much  stress  must  not  be  put  upon  any  word  or  sentence,  because, 
by  direction  of  the  coroner,  I went  home  and  wrote  it  out  very 
plainly,  and  could  not  eay  accurately  every  word  I said. 

Mr.  Justice  Wills — ^Probably  that  was  all  for  the  best;  if  you 
did  not  think  so  much  of  the  literary  eSect,  and  would  tell  us  what 
happened,  it  would  bo  better  for  everybody. 

Mr.  Clarke — ^That  was  on  4th  February,  and  we  are  now  at 
16th  April. 

The  Witness — ^My  lord,  parddh  me  if  I say  that  it  is  not  the 
literary  effect,  but  the  accuracy,  I strive  to  attain. 

Mr.  Justice  Wills — ^We  do  not  strive  to  get  any  phenomenal 
accuracy.  Just  tell  us  what  happened. 

(JroBs-txamination  continued — ^It  was  when  the  circumstance 
was  well  known  that  chloroform  was  found  you  said  it  was  not 
dhloroform,  but  the  chlorodyne,  he  had  swallowed? — ^Yes. 

And  when  you  suggested  that  he  had  swallowed  chlorodyne,  she 
combated  that  idea?-^he  certainly  did. 

And  pointed  out  that  the  chlorodyne  he  used  was  simply  to  rub 
the  gums? — ^Yes. 

She  would  not  accept  the  suggestion  that  it  was  chlorodyne? — 
No,  die  refuted  it. 

Now,  after  the  post-mortem  examination  had  revealed  the 
necessity  of  further  inquiry  into  the  contents  of  the  stomach,  she 

227 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Dr.  dAUred  Leach 

was  told  that  she  must  not  remain  in  the  rooms,  1 think  ? — I don’t 
Iu20w — don’t  remember  any  one  telling  her  so.  1 thought  she 
said  she  would  not  remain. 

It  was  an  understood  thing,  at  all  events,  that  she  was  going  f 
—Tea. 

Did  she  take,  or  ask  to  take,  anything  with  her  9 — ^Pray  divide 
that  question. 

Did  she  give  you  her  keys? — ^Yes;  in  answer  to  your  question, 
she  did  take  something,  but  she  did  not  ask  to  take  anything. 

What  was  it  she  took? — ^Her  hat,  1 think. 

She  took  her  hat,  but  it  happened  thus — she  handed  you  her 
keys  and  asked  you  to  go  to  the  drawer  and  get  her  hat  out? — 
Tes,  because  the  hat  was  in  the  room  where  the  corpse  was  lying. 

You  took  the  keys  and  fetched  the  drawer,  I think? — ^Yes,  I 
brought  the  whole  drawer. 

And  she  took  her  hat  from  it  ? — Yes. 

Her  cloak  was  given  her  by  Mr.  Bartlett,  was  it  not? — I 
don’t  remember. 

You  put  the  drawer  with  its  contents  back  into  its  place  and 
locked  it,  did  you  ? — ^Yes ; and  brought  the  keys  back  to  her. 

Did  she  ask  you  then  to  keep  the  keys? — She  did;  and  I 
suggested  that  Mr.  Wood  ^ould  take  them. 

You  suggested  that  Mr.  Wood,  her  solicitor,  should  take 
them? — ^Yes;  and  I looked  round  to  my  colleagues,  the  doctors,  to 
get  a suggestion  from  them. 

You  did  keep  them  ? — did  accept  them,  and  took  them  home. 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills — Mr.  Wood  took  them,  did  he? — ^No. 
I did  accept  them,  and  took  them  home.  There  has  been  some 
slight  misunderstanding  about  those  keys,  and  I wish  it  to  be 
plainly  understood  that  those  are  the  circumstances  under  which 
I took  them. 

Gross-eosafnmaiion  continued — ^Beally,  I think  you  are  afraid 
some  one  is  blaming  you;  I assure  you  I am  not? — ^Well,  t^ese 
things  go  into  the  papers  and  *are  misunderstood  by  the  public. 

Mr.  Justice  Wills — am  very  reluctant  to  say  anything,  but 
if  you  would  think  less  about  your  own  share  in  the  matter,  and 
more  about  the  solemn  character  of  the  matter  we  are  engaged  in, 
it  would  assist  us.  This  perpetual  self-consciousness  detracts  from 
the  value  of  what  you  have  to  say. 

The  Witness — I take  your  instructions,  my  lord,  and  will 
fallow  them. 

Oross-easamination  continued — There  is  one  question  I have 
to  ask  you  as  to  a part  of  the  communication  she  made  to  you 
on  the  26th.  I am  obliged  to  read  to  you  a longish  passage  in 
order^  to  found  the  question.  It  is  at  page  23  of  the  coroner’s 
depositions.  She  proceeded  to  a statement,  the  exact  words 
of  which  1 will  not  pretend  to  remember.”  I want  you 
kindly  to  listen  to  this  passage,  and  I will  tell  you 
228 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Dr.  Alfred  Leadi 

beforehand  the  question  I am  going  to  ask  you,  that  you  may 
follow  it  in  your  mind  as  I read  it.  You  say  this : I was  per- 
sonally cognisant  of  those  facts  up  to  this  point;  they  had  been 
partly  told  me,  partly  implied,  and  partly  from  observation,  the 
rest  was  nearly  all  news  **  9 — ^Yes. 

Now  1 will  read  the  passage  which  precedes  that  statement: 
‘‘  She  proceeded  to  a statement,  the  exact  words  of  which  I will 
not  pretend  to  remember,  but  from  which  I gathered  the  following : 
— ^Mr.  Bartlett,  deceased,  was  a man  with  one  or  two  strange  ideas. 
Among  them  was  that  a man  should  have  two  wives,  one  for  love, 
and  the  other,  as  he  expressed  it,  for  use.  At  the  age  of  sixteen 
years  she  was  selected  by  him  in  the  former  capacity,  viz.,  as  a 
life  companion  for  whom  no  carnal  feeling  should  be  entertained. 
The  marriage  compact  was  that  they  should  live  together  as  loving 
friends,  and  not  know  each  other  sexually.  This  rule  was  faith- 
fully observed  for  about  six  years  of  their  married  life,  and  then 
broken  at  the  earnest  and  repeated  entreaty  of  the  wife  that  she 
should  be  permitted  to  be  really  a wife  and  become  a mother.  A 
single  act  of  coition  occurred,  and  the  result  was  a child  that 
died  at  its  birth.  From  that  moment,  now  about  six  years,  she 
grew,  so  far  as  child-bearing  was  concerned,  disheartened.  Her 
entreaties  ceased,  and  the  two  lived  together,  but  their  relations 
were  not  those  of  matrimony.  The  deceased  made  no  secret  of  his 
views  on  marriage.  He  spoke  freely  of  them  to  his  relations,  and 
the  doctor  who  delivered  Mrs.  Bartlett  was  given  to  understond 
that  the  child  was  the  result  of  a single  coitus.  The  deceased  lived 
on  terms  of  great  affection  with  his  wife,  and  with  two  exceptions 
they  had  no  differences,  and  they  only  quarrelled  once,  but  the 
terms  of  their  cohabitation  remained  ultra-platonic.  He  en- 
couraged her  to  pursue  studies  of  various  kinds,  and  this  she  did 
to  please  him,  for  he  desired  her  to  be  very  learned  in  all  subjects. 
He  affected,  too,  to  admire  her  (physically),  and  he  liked  to  sur- 
round her  with  male  acquaintances,  and  enjoy  their  attentions  to 
her.  The  position  was  a trying  •one  for  a woman  to  comport 
herself  in,  not  to  say  cruel.  Mrs.  Bartlett’s  words  to  me  were: 

* I was  a consenting  party  to  this  marriage  contract,  and  felt 
bound  by  it,  and  never  complained,  although,  when  I agreed  to 
the  tenns  it  proposed,  I did  not  understand  what  they  meant.’ 
She  was  married  at  sixteen  or  thereabouts.  I was  personally  [t.e., 
the  witness]  cognisant  of  these  facts  up  to  this  point.  Th^  had 
been  partly  told  me,  partly  implied,  and  partly  from  observation  ” 9 
— ^Pardon  me,  for  one  thing,  if  you  please  {referring  to  his  notei}^ 
**  1 personally  was  to  some  extent  cognisant,” 

I am  reading  from  your  deposition,  Dr.  Leach : **  I was  per- 
sonally cognisant  of  these  facts  ” 9 — ^Then  it  is  a mistake  in  the 
depositions.  I think  the  Treasury  once  possessed  the  exact  copy. 

Pray  do  not  think  of  the  Treasury! — I was  not  cognisant  of 
those  facts  except  at  a certain  part. 

SS9 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Dr.  Alfred  Leach 

I have  thought  over  beforehand  with  great  fairness  what  I 
am  now  going,  to  ask  you.  Tell  me  how  far  you  did  know  these 
facts  from  personal  cognisance,  and  how  far  from  observation  t — 
I beg  your  pardon,  1 am  a little  confused  this  morning.  1 am 
sorry  1 am  such  a bad  witness.  In  this  way ; Mrs.  Bartlett  had 
consulted  me  two  or  three  times  since  her  husband’s  death,  and  I 
had  become  aware  of  facts  during  that  consultation  that  some- 
what paved  the  way  to  my  accepting  what  she  told  me  on  the 
26th. 

You  had  become  aware  of  facts  with  regard  to  herself  1 — ^Yes; 
which  came  to  me  from  her  lips. 

Came  to  you  as  a medical  man  advising  her  as  to  herself  t — 
Exactly  so.  I therefore  put  it  there.  The  statement  did  not  alto- 
gether surprise  me.  It  was  not  altogether  new. 

All  the  matters  which  you  had  observed  and  which  came  to 
your  knowledge  with  regard  to  her  prepared  you  for  it  to  some 
extent,  I understand  you  i — ^Exactly. 

And  at  all  events  justified  you  in  accepting  that  statement  as 
a correct  one? — Yes;  that  contributed  to  it — ^her  marrying  her 
husband,  and  several  things  which  I do  not  remember,  all  pre- 
pared me  to  accept  a statement  which,  coming  from  other  parties, 
would  have  seemed  almost  too  extraordinary  for  credence. 

Do  you  mean  that  certain  things  took  place  in  her  presence! 
— ^Yes. 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills — Do  try  and  recollect;  we  know 
nothing  about  these  matters,  and  we  must  depend  upon  you  as  to 
what  you  really  mean  ? — ^My  lord,  I wish  I could  particularise. 

This  was  a very  extraordinary  communication,  and  a most 
important  thing?— I am  aware  of  it. 

And  we  are  entitled  to  have,  and  we  must  have — ^I  shall 
have  it  before  it  is  done  with — the  grounds  upon  which  you  made 
that  statement.  Do  not  understand  me  as  indicating  anything 
to  disturb  you  at  all.  All  1 mean  is  this : that  we  take  nothing 
for  granted  in  a Court  of  justice,  and  we  cannot  accept  the  ipse 
dioBit  of  anybody ; and  we  must  really  know  what  is  meant  by  this 
vague  statement.  It  must  come  some  time  or  other.  It  may  as 
well  come  now  as  come  afterwards  at  my  intervention.  This  is 
the  natural  time  to  know  what  is  meant  by  those  somewhat  vague 
words? — ^If  I may  be  permitted,  I will  look  for  the  statement  and 
tell  you,  as  I know  it,  how  this  very  inconsistent  fact  suggested 
itself  to  me. 

Cross-examination  continued — ^I  told  you  beforehand  what  this 
^atement  was  likely  to  be.  Mr.  Bartlett  was  a man  of  very  strange 
ideas? — ^That  goes  without  saying. 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills — ^No,  nothing  goes  without  saying  here. 
Please  to  take  that  as  an  axiom.  What  were  the  one  or  two  strange 
ideas? — ^The  one  or  two  which  Mrs.  Bartlett  now  alluded  to  were 
those  on  matrimony — ^relating  to  matrimony. 

230 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Dr.  Alfred  Leacli 

What  were  they  ? What  have  you  heard  from  him  ? — ^Nothing 
ateut  matrimony,  but  very  vague  ideas  about  mesmerism  and 
vital  force,  and  things  too  insignificant  to  make  a note  of,  which 
conveyed  to  my  mind  the  impression  that  my  patient  was  one  of 
the  most  extraordinary  men  I ever  had  to  deal  with — though  a 
very  pleasant  and  nice  man. 

Oross-eaammatzon  continued — ^Let  me,  before  you  go  any 
further,  ask  you  this.  You  say  that  he  was  one  of  the  most  extra- 
ordinary men  you  ever  had  to  deal  with.  Had  the  extraordinary 
communication  about  mesmerism  been  such  that  you  actually  sus- 
pected him  of  insanity  ? — ^At  one  time  I did,  and  I tried  to  find  the 
key  to  it. 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills — ^With  regard  to  this  matter  about  two 
wives,  one  for  use  and  one  for  companionship — ^that  did  not 
come  from  him? — ^Not  in  the  least.  1 never  heard  him  allude  to 
it. 

That  came  from  her? — ^Naturally;  not  for  the  first  time. 

Not  for  the  first  time.  Are  you  personally  cognisant  of  that 
fact? — ^Permit  me,  my  lord;  I said,  in  my  written  statement,  I 
was  personally  to  some  extent  cognisant. 

Oross-escamination  continued — ^Tou  are  not  bound  to  read 
that  written  statement? — ^Tee,  I think  1 am. 

Mr,  Justice  Wills — ^Mr.  Poland,  have  you  got  that  written 
statement  ? 

Mr.  Poland — ^Yes.  I think  it  was  put  in,  my  lord.  (To  v/it- 
ness) — Just  look  at  that — is  that  the  one? — That  is  the  one — I 
was  married  at  sixteen,  or  thereabouts.” 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills — ^This  does  contain  the  phrase,  ” I 
was  to  some  extent  perfectly  cognisant  of  the  fact,  Mr.  Bartlett, 
the  deceased,  was  a man  of  strange  ideas  ” ; and  that  is  struck 
through  with  a pencil — which  I can  corroborate.”  Did  you 
strike  that  through? — I think  it  was  struck  through  by  myself  at 
the  coroner’s  table.  I think  I am  right  in  saying  that. 

Mr.  Clabee — must  ask  yohr  lordship  to  let  me  look  at  it. 

Cross-easammation  conivn/aed — ^You  say  that,  with  regard  to 
the  relations  of  marriage,  nothing  was  said  by  Mr.  Bartlett? — 
No. 

Had  not  that  been  mentioned  in  his  presence  at  any  time  ? — 
No. 

Are  you  sure? — have  said  no. 

You  are  not  angry  with  me  for  asking  you  whether  you  are 
sure? — ^No;  but  your  suggestion  does  not  bring  back  anything  to 
my  mind.  I am  as  sure  as  I can  be  at  this  distance  of  time. 

Just  let  me  suggest  something  to  you.  You  told  me,  yester- 
day, that  Mrs.  Bartlett  was  breaking  down,  or  her  husband  thought 
die  was  breaJking  down,  and  her  husband  bought  she  was  sufiering 
from  the  strain  of  watching? — Yes. 


231 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 

Dr.  Alfred  Leadb 

Did  you  ever  suggest  that  they  should  both  go  to  bed  in  the 
back  room? — did. 

When? — do  not  remember. 

What  was  the  answer?  What  did  Mr.  Bartlett  say? — I do 
not  remember.  I remember  what  you  have  mentioned  up  to  now» 
but  I do  not  remember  his  answer. 

He  did  not  do  it? — He  did  not  do  it;  oh,  no. 

Did  he  give  you  any  reason? — ^No. 

Is  not  it  the  fact  he  did  not  do  that,  although  you  suggested 
it?  Was  not  that  one  of  the  things  in  your  mind  that  supported 
that  statement? — ^Yes;  the  fact  that  I knew  he  had  always  slept  on 
a camp-bedstead,  and  I had  a strong  impression  of  having  been 
reminded  by  that  that  they  did  not  always  occupy  the  same  bed 
even  before  they  came  to  Glaverton  Street,  but  the  impression  is  so 
vague  that  I cannot  say  more. 

You  cannot  say  more,  but  you  have  the  impression  that  you 
have  heard  it  before  ? — Yes,  and  I think  in  his  presence.  The  words 
mix  up  with  me,  somehow. 

Now,  did  not  the  recollection  of  this  thing  come  to  your  mind 
as  supporting  the  statement  that  Mrs.  Bartlett  was  making  to 
you  ? — I have  no  doubt  it  did ; all  that  I knew  about  the  deceased 
and  his  wife — everything  that  passed,  came  in  review  through 
my  mind  at  the  time,  and  enabled  me  to  accept  that  statement. 

Now,  will  you  kindly  go  on,  just  looking  down  the  passage? — 
''  He  had  two  wives — one  for  companionship,  and  the  other  for 
use.” 

Are  you  sure  you  had  not  heard  that  about  two  wives? — I 
think  I should  have  remembered  it — certainly,  if  it  had  been  in 
those  words. 

Very  well.  Will  you  just  look  down  over  the  account? — At 
the  age  of  sixteen  she  was  selected  by  him  in  the  former  capacity.” 
1 knew  she  had  been  married  very  young  before. 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills — ^It  is  not  so  much  being  married  very 
young,  as  that  she  had  been  selected  for  companionship.  It  is 
very  remarkable? — That  I was  not  cognisant  of.  I had  no  time 
to  stop  and  think  when  I was  writing  that.  “ For  whom  no 
carnal  feeling  should  be  entertained.”  I think  I could  say  some- 
thing upon  that,  but  I hardly  know  how  to  say  it.  Having  ob- 
served as  narrowly  as  I did,  I did  not  fail  to  observe  the  de- 
ceased’s manner  towards  other  people — ^his  manner  towards  his 
wife.  The  picture  of  it  came  back  into  my  mind  while  she  was 
telling  me  this j and,  although  I remember  signs  of — great  signs 
of — afiection,  signs  of  kindness  and  interest,  and  everything  else, 
I cannot  say  ^at  there  was  anything — certainly  can  say  there 
was  nothing — ^in  his  demeanour  to  her  to  make  me  doubt  that.  That 
is  as  far  as  I can  go.  That  weighed  with  me  at  the  time.  Nothing 
in  his  behaviour  to  her  led  me  to  doubt  that— I can  believe  that 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Dr.  Alfred  Leach 

what  I witnessed  during  my  attendance  on  my  patient  was  the 
affection  of  brother  and  sister.  I can  believe  that,  I don't  say 
it  was. 

CrosS’txaTfimaUon  contiimed — ^At  all  events,  your  mind  had 
received  that  impression  which  to  that  extent  supported  that  state- 
ment?— Yes.  “ The  marriage  compact  was  that  they  should  live 
together  as  loving  friends,  and  not  know  each  other  sexually." 

Just  run  your  eye  down  it? — have  nothing  to  say  to  that. 
“ That  rule  was  faithfully  observed  for  about  six  years."  I 
had  heard  that. 

Prom  whom? — I had  heard  the  child  was  born. 

You  had  heard  her  first  pregnancy  was  six  years  before? — 
Yes,  for  I had  at  some  time  or  other  heard  that  a child  had  been 
born  some  years  previously.  It  was  while  he  was  alive;  but  I 
see  what  you  moan,  I hesitate  very  much  to  speak  of  a professional 
consultation,  to  go  into  the  details  of  it,  but  this  was  quite  true. 
The  first  professional  consultation  that  I had  with  Mrs.  Bartlett 
led  to  questions  that  certainly  support  this  statement,  that  her 
first  pregnancy,  her  only  pregnancy,  had  occurred  about  six  years 
ago. 

By  Mr,  Justice  Wills — ^Is  this  what  you  mean,  that  what  die 
first  communicated  to  you  was  consistent  with  her  having  had  a 
child  about  six  years  ago? — ^Yes. 

Do  you  mean  that  (I  must  define  the  extent  of  what  you  mean, 
you  know) — professional  delicacy  is  out  of  the  question  in  an  in- 
quiry of  this  kind,  and  you  must  put  it  aside.  I don't  want  to 
go  into  details  unnecessarily,  but  I want  to  know  what  you  mean 
by  the  expression  you  have  used.  It  may  mean  a great  deal,  or 
it  may  mean  nothing  ? — I mean  this : that  in  the  course  of  a con- 
sultation with  her,  I learnt  from  her  that  she  had  only  been  preg- 
nant once,  and  that  some  years  previously.  That  consultation 
would  be  on  Hth  January;  I see  by  my  prescription  that  it  was. 

Your  extreme  delicacy,  excuse  my  saying  it,  I think  is  mis- 
placed. There  is  nothing  to  shocjk  the  ears  of  anybody  in  that? — 
No ; it  was  hesitation  to  reveal  professional  secrets. 

Cross-examination  continued — ^I  have  a question  to  ads:  you  on 
that.  At  the  consultation  on  14th  January  the  conversation  in 
which  she  mentioned  that  to  you  was  independent  of  this  case  or 
any  question  with  regard  to  his  death? — Quite.  I fancy  little  was 
said  on  that  day  about  her  husband. 

I need  not  go  into  detail,  but  the  statement  was  made  when 
you  were  consulting  with  her  by  herself? — Yes;  a purely  medical 
consultation  that  was. 

Now,  just  cast  your  eye  over  the  next  two  or  three  lines, 
and  see  if  it  is  necessary  to  read  them? — Yes,  I certainly  know 
she  was  fond  of  children.  Earnest  entreaties  that  she  diould 
become  a mother."  I know  she  was  fond  of  children;  that  I had 
heard  before. 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Dr.  Alfred  Leedi 

That  you  had  heard  during  her  husband's  lifetime? — ^Yes; 
children  and  dogs.  I had  heard  her  say  how  fond  she  was  of  both. 

She  told  you  about  that  in  his  presence? — Tes.  And  the 

child  born  died  at  its  birth."  That  was  new.  " From  that 
moment^  now  about  six  years  ago,  she  grew,  as  far  as  child-bearing 
was  concerned,  disheartened,  her  entreaties  ceased,  and  the  two 
lived  together,  but  their  relations  were  not  those  of  matrimony." 
I see  nothing  to  comment  on  there. 

Was  that  new — ^that  their  relations  were  not  those  of  matri- 
mony?— ^Yes.  I have  explained  in  what  sense  it  was  new  to  me, 
''  The  deceased  made  no  secret  of  his  views  on  marriage."  That 
was  new  to  me,  although  I have  not  put  it  in  this  statement.  She 
told  me  something  about  the  trouble  the  deceased  had  with  one 
of  his  relatives  (his  aunt,  I think)  for  having  mentioned  in  her 
house  his  views  on  matrimony.  " He  spoke  freely  of  them  to 
his  relations,  and  the  doctor  who  delivered  Mrs.  Bartlett  was 
given  to  understand  that  the  child  was  the  result  of  a single 
coitus."  I knew  a doctor  had  attended  Mrs.  Bartlett  at  one 
time. 

Did  you  hear  the  name  of  Dr.  Woodward  as  the  doctor  who 
was  called  in? — ^No,  I did  not;  not  to  my  recollection.  I thought 
it  was  Dr.  Barraclough.  That  may  be  the  name  of  the  doctor  that 
Mr«  Bartlett,  senior,  mentioned  to  me  once. 

As  having  attended  Mr.  Bartlett? — don't  know. 

That  is  immaterial? — " The  deceased  lived  on  terms  of  great 
affection  with  his  wife."  That  I have  told  before.  " And,  with 
two  exceptions,  they  had  no  differences."  That  I am  quite  pre- 
pared to  accept.  " And  they  only  quarrelled  once;  but  the  terms 
of  their  cohabitation  remained  ultra-platonic.  He  encouraged  her 
to  pursue  studies  of  various  kinds,  and  this  she  did  to  please  him." 
That  1 was  quite  prepared  to  accept.  1 had  seen  how  die  tried 
in  every  way  to  please  him,  and  some  facts  had  come  before  me 
of  her  studies — what  they  were  I don't  remember  at  the  .present 
moment.  « 

Had  you  heard  anything  of  her  going  in  for  examination  ? — I 
am  not  sure.  I think  I did.  Yes,  it  is  very  probable  I did;  I 
cannot  call  it  to  mind  with  certainty.  " For  he  desired  her  to  be 
very  learned  on  all  subjects."  Yes,  it  is  less  words  than  looks  that 
I am  thinking  of  now  when  reading  this:  " he  desired  her  to  be 
very  learned  on  all  subjects."  I remember  distinctly  on  one 
occasion,  when  in  the  presence  of  the  deceased — I think  it  was 
the  first  time  I saw  Dyson  there.  1 can  see  the  deceased  sitting 
with  a look  of  being  lost  in  admiration  at  Eis  wife,  while  she  was 
discussing  some  subject  or  other  with  Dyson,  and  1 a-m  not  sure  but 
that  1 took  part  in  the  conversation,  although  I was  chiefly  in- 
terested in  watching  my  patient;  he  sat,  never  uttering  a word, 
but  watching  them  talking.  It  was  some  rather  remote  subject 
th^  were  talking  about. 

234 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Dr.  Alfred  Leedi 

He  was  admiring  herl — ^Yes,  admiration  that  fitted  in  with 
this  sentence.  He  affected,  too,  to  admire  her  physically.^’ 
That  I don’t  know.  And  he  liked  to  surround  her  with  male 
acquaintances.”  That  sentence  explained  a good  deal  that  had 
puzzled  me  about  Dyson. 

Had  you  seen  Mr,  Dyson  there  from  time  to  time? — Tes.  It 
had  occurred  to  me:  This  minister  is  about  here  a good  deal.” 
That  certainly  had  occurred  to  me. 

And  had  you  noticed  the  husband  seemed  quite  to  take  it  as 
a matter  of  course? — Oh,  yes,  he  was  as  welcome  to  one  as  to  the 
other,  I saw;  and  the  deceased  had  spoken  to  me  of  Mr.  Dyson 
in  terms  of  the  highest  admiration  and  affection,  so  far  as  he 
would  be  likely  to  talk  on  the  subject  of  affection.  Oh,  yes,  they 
were  very  proud  of  Mr.  Dyson,  1 know.  They  had  his  photograph 
in  the  room. 

When  you  say  they  were,  you  mean  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Bartlett? — 
Yes ; I think  it  was  he  who  once  remarked  to  me  how  very  highly 
educated  Mr.  Dyson  was ; and  they  spoke  in  terms  of  great  affection 
too.  The  position  was  a very  trying  one  for  a woman  to  com- 
port herself  in.” 

I think  that  passage  is  only  a repetition  of  what  you  have 
stated  before? — I hope  I have  made  clear  how  much  I knew  before 
— ^how  mudi  I was  able  to  accept. 

At  all  events,  you  have  gone  through? — ^The  sentence,  “ T was 
personally  cognisant,”  was  put  in  to  mark  the  beginning  of  abso- 
lutely new  facts. 

Now,  I think  we  have  got  the  whole  statement  of  what  you 
really  had  noticed.  Now,  I think  there  is  only  one  other  question 
1 want  to  ask  you  on  a matter  of  fact.  From  the  bed  on  which 
Mr.  Bartlett  lay,  one  could  reach  the  mantelpiece  or  something 
on  the  mantelpiece  without  getting  up? — One  could. 

You  could  not,  I believe,  reach  it  if  lying  down  flat? — ^No. 

But  by  rising  on  the  left  arm  it  would  be  easy  to  reach  it? — 
It  would.  » 

Were  bottles  kept — ^medicine  bottles,  I mean — ^kept  on  the 
mantelpiece? — ^Not  as  a rule;  they  were  chiefly  kept  in  the  bedroom. 
I mentioned  once  to  Mrs.  Bartlett.  ” Why  don’t  you  keep  his 
medicines  near  him?”  and  she  said,  ” I like  to  make  this  room  as 
little  like  an  invalid’s  room  as  possible,”  so  that  there  were 
really  no  bottles  on  the  mantelpiece. 

Now,  just  a few  questions  on  a different  subject,  Dr.  Leach. 
In  your  experience,  you  have  not  seen  a case  of  death  from  poison- 
ing by  liquid  chloroform  at  any  time? — No. 

And,  so  far  as  you  know,  that  is  extremely  rare,  isn’t  it?— • 
Tes;  it  certainly  is  among  the  rare  causes  of  death  from  poison. 
It  has  occurred,  of  course ; it  is  rare. 

Have  you  seen  a case  of  death  from  inhalation? — Yes;  at 
least  it  was  supposed  to  be. 


Adelaide  Bartlett 


Dr.  Alfred  Leadb 

Have  you  yourself  administered  chloroform  from  time  to  time? 
— ^Tes;  about  two  hundred  times. 

It  is  an  operation  that  requires  to  be  very  carefully  and  skil- 
fully done,  1 think? — It  is  an  anxious  one. 

As  a matter  of  fact,  the  use  of  chloroform  as  an  agent  for 
producing  anses^esia  has  been  a little  lessened  of  late  years,  has 
it  not,  and  chloric  ether  used  instead  ? — ^You  mean  ether,  not 
chloric  ether.  Chloric  ether  is  merely  chloroform  and  spirit; 
in  fact,  it  is  the  old  name  of  the  old  London  Pharmacopoeia. 
There  is  no  chloric  ether  nowadays. 

You  mean  to  say  no  chloric  ether  is  used? — ^There  is  a con- 
fusion of  terms.  Do  you  mean  chloroform  or  chloroform  mixed 
with  spirit?  That  certainly  is  not  used  for  inhalation. 

Take  ether,  then?  Has  ether  been  substituted  for  chloroform? 
— ^Yes. 

Do  you  know  why? — ^Because  it  is  less  dangerous  in  most  con- 
ditions. 

And  not  only  that  it  is  less  dangerous ; but  that  some  things 
incidental  to  chloroform  are  not  so  often  found  with  ether;  vomit- 
ing, for  instance? — Yes;  quite  so. 

By  Mr.  Justiob  Wills — ^You  mean  vomiting  is  constantly 
found  with  inhalation  of  chloroform? — ^The  patient  usually  vomits 
afterwards,  and  even  during  the  administration. 

continued — ^In  many  cases  the  vomiting 
begins  almost  immediately,  does  it  not? — ^It  depends;  there  is  a 
class  of  oases  in  which  it  does. 

Of  course,  it  depends  very  much  on  the  condition  of  the 
stomach? — Oh,  yes;  if  food  has  been  given  previously. 

I was  going  to  say,  if  you  had  made  up  your  mind  to 
administer  chloroform  to  a patient,  you  would  take  care  with 
regard  to  diet  six  hours  or  so  before? — ^At  least  four,  and  that 
must  only  be  beef  tea  or  some  liquid  easily  got  rid  of — easily 
digested,  I mean  to  say. 

If  you  had  any  indigestible  substance  in  the  stomach,  such, 
for  instance,  as  a substantial  quantity  of  mango-chutney  it  would 
almost  certainly  produce  vomiting? — ^It  might. 

It  would,  would  it  not? — ^I  rfiould  not  like  to  say  it  would. 

I diould  not  like  you  to  prophesy,  certainly,  but  you  would 
expect  it  to? — Yes;  it  is  a very  likely  suggestion. 

Have  you  ever  administered  chloroform  to  an  adult  in  sleep- 
ing ?— — No. 

Did  you  ever  hear  of  such  a thing  being  done? — ^In  the  PoZZ 
Mali  Gazette  only. 

Which  you  do  not  accept  as  a medical  authority? — ^I  think 
not.  I am  hot  saying  it  could  not  be  done. 

^ I do  not  want  to  take  the  answer  as  meaning  more  than  you 
desire  it  to  mean.  You,  at  all  events,  have  never  done  it?~No. 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Dr.  Alfred  Leach 

And  you  have  never  heard  an  authentic  case  of  its  being 
done? — No. 

Are  you  familiar  with  post-mortem  indications  of  death  from 
inhalations  of  chloroform? — ^No.  I am  glad  to  say  I am  not,  if 
you  mean  from  personal  experience. 

As  a matter  of  personal  experience  or ? — ^As  a matter  of 

general  knowledge,  1 am. 

As  to  what  the  post-mortem  appearances  would  be? — ^It  would 
depend  upon  the  quantity;  if,  as  in  that  case,  where  16  drops 
killed  by  inhalation,  you  came  to  make  a post-mortem  examina- 
tion, there  you  would  find  no  signs  whatever  either  in  the  eyes 
or  nose  or  anything,  because  it  is  sudden  inanition  of  the  heart’s 
functions,  and  death. 

That  is  to  say,  if  death  occurred  from  so  small  a quantity, 
it  is  rather  death  from  some  disturbance  of  the  heart’s  functions 
than  the  entrance  of  chloroform  into  the  stomach? — ^Yesj  the  mix- 
ture of  air  and  chloroform — ^the  mixture  of  too  strong  a percent- 
age of  chloroform  in  the  lungs. 

In  administering  chloroform  you  have  to  be  very  careful 
as  to  the  mixture  of  chloroform  vapour  with  the  air? — ^Very;  you 
must  not  go  above  4 per  cent. 

Not  above  4 per  cent? — ^Not  if  you  can  help  it ; it  is  dangerous 
if  you  do. 

1 had  not  finished.  In  cases  of  death  from  such  a small 
quantity  of  chloroform,  there  is  no  indication  of  it  whatever? — 
Tor  the  reason  I suggested  to  you. 

The  death  is  sudden? — ^In  cases  where  the  patient  has  died 
after  chloroform,  and  narcosis  is  thoroughly  produced,  you  will 
find  the  smell  of  chloroform  in  the  lungs,  in  all  probability.  It 
would  depend,  of  course,  on  the  length  of  time. 

We  are  dealing  with  the  case,  I mean,  of  a real  inhalation  of 
chloroform? — Yes,  we  are  dealing  with  chloroform  narcosis;  in 
popular  language,  until  the  man  is  chloroformed. 

Tes,  there  would  be  the  &iell  of  chloroform  in  the  lungs; 
what  else? — ^There  would  be  probably,  not  necessarily,  some 
amount  of  congestion  of  the  lungs.  The  same  as  regards  the  brain. 
In  cases  of  death  from  an  excessive  amount  of  chloroform,  there 
would  be  fluidity  of  the  blood  and  staining  of  the  brain  mem- 
branes, and  the  brain  itself  smelling  of  chloroform.  You  will  find, 
in  the  three  instances  I,  have  noticed,  very  nearly  the  same  effects 
as  you  would  find  in  a case  of  poisoning  by  liquid  chloroform, 
except  that  there  would  be  more  to  be  seen  about  the  lungs. 

There  would  be  more  to  be  seen  about  the  lungs? — Yes. 

And,  although  I do  not  want  to  confuse  my  lord’s  not^,  I 
do  want  to  draw  a scientific  distinction  between  death  from  liquid 
chloroform  and  that  from  inhalation — in  death  from  swallowing 
liquid  chloroform,  you  would  find  some  of  the  same  effects  on  the 

237 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Dr.  Alfred  Leaeh 

lungs  and  some  smell  in  the  brain? — ^Not  the  same  efiect  on  the 
lungs,  but  the  efiect  on  the  brain  would  be  the  same,  I think; 
there  might  be  less  congestion. 

As  regards  the  smell? — I think  it  would. 

Now,  about  the  condition  of  the  heart  when  a man  had  died 
from  inhalation  of  chloroform  or  died  from  swallowing  chloro- 
form?— ^There  need  not  necessarily  be  anything  peculiar  about  the 
heart,  but,  as  a matter  of  fact,  you  generally  find  that  those  who 
have  died  from  inhaling  chloroform  have  died  from  it  because 
their  heart  was  fatty — fatty  degeneration,  I mean. 

As  regards  the  post-mortem  appearances,  has  not  it  been 
found,  in  the  larger  proportion  of  cases  of  this  kind,  that  there 
has  been  engorgement  of  the  right  side  of  the  heart? — ^yes,  if  he 
died  from  asphyxia. 

If  he  died  from  asphyxia  through  an  overdose  of  chloro- 
form by  inhalation,  you  say  you  would  have  found  the  right 
side  of  the  heart  engorged  with  blood? — Tes,  and  the  lunge  too. 

Now,  it  is  just  as  well  I should  use  your  own  popular  ex- 
pression, “ chloroformed.^'  Suppose  a person  to  have  been 
chloroformed,  and  shortly  after  to  die,  you  would  expect  to  find 
some  post-mortem  indications,  only  in  a smaller  degree  than  if 
death  had  actually  happened  from  asphyxia? — ^As  I understand 
your  question,  I do  not  think  so. 

Assuming  that  shortly  before  death  a person  had  been  chloro- 
formed in  the  ordinary  sense  of  the  term? — ^Tes,  and  then  re- 
covered. 

No,  when  chloroformed,  say  shortly  before  death,  then  re- 
covery of  sensation  had  never  taken  place,  you  would  expect  to 
find  the  post-mortem  indicative  of  what  you  have  epoken? — Tes, 
not  necessarily  engorgement  unless  the  mode  of  death  were 
asphyxia. 

^ I beg  your  pardon;  I think  I was  careful  to  keep  that  limi- 
tation in  view? — ^Tes. 

Now,  is  ^ere  one  other  indfcation  to  be  found  in  the  post- 
mortem examination — one  other  indication  of  the  recent  inhala- 
tion of  chloroform? — ^To  be  found  at  the  post-mortem  room,  or  in 
the  laboratory? 

In  the  post-mortem  examination,  how  about  the  urine! do 

not  know. 

Now,  put  aside  the  question  of  the  heart  for  the  reason  which 
I quite  understood  with  regard  to  death  from  asphyxia.  With 
regard^  to  other  matters,  there  was  no  congestion  of  the  lungs  or 
smell  in  the  lungs? — I did  not  make  the  post-mortem  examina- 
tion. 

I am  much  obliged  to  you;  you  were  making  notes,  but  you 
TOre  taking  your  observations  from  the  skilled  pathologist  whose 
observations  were  recorded  in  those  notes?— -Yes. 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Dr.  Alfred  Lead! 

Be-examined  by  Mr.  Polakd — ^Was  there  anything  in  the 
notes  dictated  to  you  by  Dr.  Green  to  lead  you  to  the  conclusion 
that  death  had  ta^en  place  from  chloroform? — ^Not  at  the  time — 
no. 

Was  there  anything  in  the  post-mortem  examination  itself 
up  to  the  time,  or  since,  to  lead  you  to  the  conclusion  that  death 
took  place  from  chloroform? — Only  in  conjunction  with  the 
analysis. 

But  1 mean  independently  of  that,  from  the  post-mortem 
appearances  alone,  was  there  anything  to  lead  you  to  the  con- 
clusion that  death  had  taken  place  from  chloroform? — ^Not  euffi- 
cient  to  lead  one  to  the  conclusion,  but  suggestive  of  it. 

What  was  suggestive  of  it? — ^Well,  the  smell  in  the  stomach. 

1 am  speaking  of  the  post-mortem  appearances  of  the  diSerent 
parts  of  the  body? — They  would  have  been  overlooked;  they  would 
have  been  of  small  importance  except  as  regards  the  smell. 

Yes,  in  the  notes  I read;  just  turn  to  them,  please? — ^Yes,  I 
have  the  post-mortem  notes  here.  Well,  the  fluidity  of  the  blood, 
the  staining  of  the  tissues,  all  agree  with  chloroform  poisoning 
as  with  many  other  poisonings. 

By  Mr.  Clarke — ^As  with  many  other  poisonings? — ^Yes. 

Re-examination  continued — ^Yes,  only  those  two  signs? — 
must  stop  there. 

You  must  stop  there? — ^Yes;  you  exclude  the  stomach,  I think. 

Yes,  1 exclude  the  stomach.  Nothing  whatever  in  the  appear- 
ance of  the  brain.  Just  look,  please? — was  thinking  of  that  just 
now ; it  is  so  slight,  it  seems  merely  a waste  of  time  to  allude  to  it. 

By  Mr.  Clarke — shall  be  glad  if  my  friend  will  read  the 
exact  words? — With  the  exception  of  rather  more  post-mortem 
staining  than  usual,  the  brain  presents  nothing  abnormal  **  (read- 
ing the  passage).  Those  are  Dr.  Green’s  words.  1 could  not  feel 
justified  in  mentioning  that  as  one  of  the  indications. 

Be-exammation  continued — ^Now,  have  you  known  any  other 
case  of  death  through  swallowings  liquid  chloroform? — ^No,  never. 

When  you  told  my  learned  friend,  Mr.  Clarke,  you  thought 
the  effect  on  taking  liquid  chloroform  would  be  the  same  as 
when  the  chloroform  were  taken  by  inhalation;  that  is  only  your 
own  opinion? — ^Yes. 

Mr.  Clarke — ^Dr.  Leach  is  an  experienced  doctor.  My  friend 
seems  to  resent  my  taking  his  opinion.  He  is  not  entitled  to  tell 
the  witness  that  is  only  your  opinion,”  because  he  ie  a scientific 
witness  in  the  box.  I quite  assume  that  where  Dr.  Leach  did  not 
give  us  the  result  of  his  individual  experience  he  gave  us  the 
result  of  medical  science. 

Mr.  PoLAED — ^It  is  all  he  knows  about  it,  I take  it  for  granted. 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills — As  far  as  your  reading  and  knowledge 
enable  you  to  form  an  opinion,  that  is  your  opinion  ?-^Yes. 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 

Dr.  AIM  iMch 

Me-examination  continued — ^You  have  made  no  actual  experi- 
ments?— 'No, 

No  experiments  with  animals  or  persons  to  ascertain  whether 
the  opinion  you  form  is  correct  or  not? — No, 

And  until  this  case,  had  you  ever  read  of  a death  from  liquid 
chloroform? — Oh,  yes. 

Very  rare,  is  it  not? — ^Tes,  rare. 

And  have  you  at  all  studied  the  subject  since? — Yes,  1 have; 
1 have  read  up  cases  from  back  numbers  of  the  Lancet. 

Tell  me  with  regard  to  the  vomiting.  If  chloroform  is  inhaled, 
is  the  vomiting  a rare  thing? — ^No,  a very  common  thing. 

And  does  that  generally  arise  from  its  being  administered  too 
soon  after  a meal? — ^Yes,  generally — ^well,  that  was  not  quite — 
have  not  expressed  exactly  my  meaning  there.  If  it  be  adminis- 
tered too  soon  after  a meal,  you  are  pretty  sure  to  get  vomiting, 
but  1 won’t  accuse  the  hospital  authorities  of  giving  a meal  too 
soon  before  in  every  case  where  sickness  occurs. 

1 mean,  as  far  as  your  own  experience  goes,  what  would  be 
likely  to  cause  vomiting  woiild  be  the  administration  of  chloro- 
form too  soon  after  a meal? — ^Yes,  that  would  be  one  very  potent 
cause. 

Not  the  only  one.  And  the  usual  time  is,  how  long  after  a 
meal? — ^Four  hours  will  do  if  the  meal  consists  of  what  is  called 
the  ‘‘  chloroform  breakfast.” 

Do  you  mean  by  that,  a light  breakfast? — ^Beef  tea. 

Beef  tea  only? — ^It  depends;  in  some  places  they  give  beef  tea 
only. 

But  in  a case  of  an  ordinary  meal,  would  it  depend  on  what 
the  meal  was? — ^Yes,  and  on  the  digestive  power  of  ^e  patient. 

You  say  beef  tea,  and  then  four  hours  afterwards  would  be 
the  right  way  of  giving  it  by  inhalation? — ^Yes. 

That  would  be  calculated,  of  course,  to  avoid  the  vomiting? 
—Yes. 

Now,  will  taking  liquid  chloroform  produce  vomiting? — ^As  a 
rule,  where  a large  quantity  is  taken  it  seems  to  produce  vomit- 
ing. 

Large  quantities? — mean  such  quantities  as  4 ounces.  I 
have  a case  now  in  my  mind  where  a lady  walked  down  Sloana 
Street  swallowing  4 ounces.  She  vomited  afterwards. 

Have  you  liown  any  case  of  vomiting  froih  liquid  chloro- 
form from  a less  quantity,  or  is  that  the  only  case  known  of  ?— 
I am  in  touch  with  this  case,  but  I cannot  call  to  mind  reading 
any  other.  1 should  think  2 ounces  would  be  enough  to 
vomiting,  but  I am  guessing  now— I do  not  know. 

Have  you  at  all  formed  an  opinion  as  to  how  much  liquid 
chloroform  would  be  a fatal  dose?— Yes;  I should  say  the  smalleafi 
fatal  dose  known  for  an  adult  would  be  6 drachms. 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Dr.  Alfred  Leach 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills — That  is  three-quarters  of  au  ounce? 
— ^Yes. 

Rt-ttmmimLiion  conti/n/ued — ^Now,  I do  not  know  whether  you 
have  formed  any  strong  opinion  whether  chloroform  could  be 
given  by  inhalation  while  a person  is  asleep? — 1 have  heard  Dr. 
Stevenson  in  evidence  give  that,  and  1 accept  fully  anything  he 
says. 

I understand  from  that,  you  see  no  difficulty  in  that  being 
done? — ^No;  with  skill. 

Mr.  Clabee — ^With  skill?  This  does  not  arise  out  of  my 
cross-examination  in  the  least. 

Mr.  Justice  Wills — I do  not  think  it  does,  and,  after  all,  it 
only  goes  to  the  character  of  another  witness.  It  only  comes  to 
that  which  is  not  evidence,  according  to  our  usual  laws — ^his 
opinion  of  the  character  of  another. 

Mr.  Clarke — ^We  shall  have  to  deal  presently  with  Dr.  Steven- 
son. I leave  it  to  him.  The  question  is  a more  remote  and  re- 
condite part  of  this  subject.  1 do  not  like  to  have  put  on  me 
answers  which  are  not  provoked  by  my  cross-examination. 

Be^tmrrmycution  continuedr-^  ask  you  your  own  opinion, 
apart  from  Dr.  Stevenson’s.  According  to  your  own  opinion,  is 
there  any  difficulty  in  giving  chloroform  to  a patient  by  inhala- 
tion while  he  is  asleep? — ^Yes,  there  is  difficulty,  but  it  could  be 
done;  it  would  require  skill — ^that  is  what  I wish  to  say. 

Chloroform,  of  course,  in  that  way — its  inhalation  in  the 
ordinary  way? — ^Yes, 

Now,  one  or  two  other  matters  I wish  to  trouble  you  about. 
The  prisoner,  Mrs.  Bartlett,  first  consulted  you,  as  a medical 
man,  on  14th  January? — On  14th  January.  Yes. 

And  it  was  on  that  occasion  she  told  you  she  had  only  been 
pregnant  once? — think  so. 

Was  it  also  on  that  occasion  she  told  you  she  was  very  fond 
of  children? — ^No. 

That  was  a previous  occasion. 

Mr.  Justice  Wills — do  not  think  he  mentioned  that, 

Be-^exaTnmation  contimied — ^That  is  so,  is  it? — ^Yes,  on  a 
previous  occasion. 

Was  there  anything,  when  she  consulted  you  as  a patient, 
that  ehe  said  at  all  about  her  relations  with  her  husband — ^her 
relations  as  a wife  with  her  husband  ?--7No.  1 see  the  bearing  of 

your  question,  but  I say  no  to  that. 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills — ^If  you  will  kindly  not  trouble  your- 
self with  the  bearing  of  the  qu^ion? — I do  not  wish  to  be  mis- 
understood. 

Be~eixmn/^tion  contimied — ^As  a matter  of  fact,  when  she 
consulted  you  as  a medical  man,  did  she  tell  you  anything  about 
her  relatione  with  her  husband — mean  her  sexual  relations  with 
her  husband? — ^Yes,  die  alluded  to  that. 

R 241 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Dr.  Alfred  Leadk 

When] — ^On  14:th  January. 

What  did  she  tell  you  about  them] — forget  the  allusion. 
On  this  occasion  it  was  in  this  way — ^it  was  not  about  her  husband 
in  particular — it  was  on  the  general  subject  of  sexual  intercourse 
and  her  internal  conditions;  it  wae  in  connection  with  that  she 
consulted  me,  and  then  it  was  that  I learned  the  fact  of  her  having 
been  pregnant  once. 

Did  she  say  anything  with  respect  to  her  not  having  been 
pregnant  since] — assume  so. 

Did  she]  I want  to  know  what  she  said — ^what  she  told  you 
about  her  sexual  relations,  if  anything,  with  her  husband] — 
have  told  you  all  I know.  I do  not  remember. 

I mean  at  any  time.  I am  not  alluding  to  the  14th  January  ] 
— ^Then  we  come  to  the  26th.  Then  she  did. 

What  did  she  then  say] — ^What  I have  told  you. 

Only  what  you  have  already  detailed] — Yes.  I think  I have 
put  all  I know — certainly  I have  put  all  that  is  important — before 
the  Court. 

Now,  you  said  that  Mr.  Bartlett — ^you  never  heard  an3rthing 
from  him  at  all  that  his  married  life  was  other  than  the  ordinary 
state] — ^No;  I heard  nothing  about  his  married  life  from  him. 

Tell  me  what  you  mean  by  telling  us  that  they  seemed  like 
brother  and  sister.  What  do  you  mean  by  that] — It  is  a very 
difficult  question  to  answer.  I can  say  no  more  than  that  they 
appeared  to  me — have  neither  the  power  of  description  nor  the 
facts  to  go  upon. 

On  the  31st,  when  going  to  the  dentist's,  they  spoke  about 
their  happy  married  life,  and  said  that  they  would  like  to 
be  married  again,  to  be  happy  again  ] — ^Tes ; it  was  in  no  way  in- 
consistent. That  is  what  1 observed. 

You  observed  the  affectionate  terms  they  were  on — ^that  she 
sat  up  and  nursed  his  foot] — Yes. 

Then  what  did  you  mean] — I was  prepared  to  say,  in  that 
affection  I had  observed  there  Vas  nothing  sexual. 

Why] — do  not  really — ^if  you  will  help  me,  I will 

I cannot  suggest  any^ing  more  than  on  one  occasion  from 
his  speaking  to  you,  because  you  suggested  that  they  ehould  toth 
go  to  bed  in  the  back  room,  and  they  did  not.  Is  there  anything 
beyond  that] — ^Yes;  there  was  the  general  bearing  of  the  parties. 

What  general  bearing]  I want  you  to  describe  it] — I might 
as  well  try  and  describe  &e  general  expression  of  countenances.  I 
am  sure  his  lordship  sees  it. 

By  Mr.  Jttbtiob  Wills — have  not  this  delicate  discrimina- 
tion. I am  a plain  man,  and  it  seems  to  me  a very  unusual  state 
of  relationship  between  husband  and  wife;  and  it  seems  to  me 
that  if  I came  to  that  conclusion  with  regard  to  people  I knew, 
I should  probably  have  some  reason  to  give  for  it.  I cannot  say 
242 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Dr.  Alfred  Leach 

more.  If  you  cannot  tell  us,  you  cannot  tell  us? — It  is  not  deli- 
cacy, my  lord,  it  is  inability  to  express  more  than  I have  said. 

Have  you  seen  any  other  people  of  ‘whom  you  have  fancied  the 
same  thing? — ^No. 

It  is  an  unusual  thing  in  married  life,  is  it  not? — ^I  should 
say  a very  unusual  thing,  and  I do  not  say  it  did  not  strike  me 
at  the  time  it  was  so.  I have  merely  described  that,  from  what 
I remember  of  their  relations  from  one  to  another,  it  is  quite 
possible  that  may  have  been  so. 

Be-efmrndnation  continued — ^What  may  have  been  so? — That 
there  was  nothing  sexual  in  the  relations  1 witnessed. 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills — Did  you  ever  know,  from  your  ex- 
perience, a man  for  year  after  year  sleeping  in  the  same  bed 
with  his  wife,  and  nothing  occurring  between  them? — ^I  have  heard 
of  things  very  much  like  it. 

I understand  he  was  a great  deal  away  from  his  wife? — ^You 
mean  on  business? 

Yes;  he  had  long  business  hours,  and  I understand  he  was 
away  frequently? — ^You  do  not  mean  away  at  nights?  Do  you 
mean  away  travelling? 

I know  he  was  away  in  the  daytime,  and  1 assumed,  and  still 
assume,  he  was  sometimes  away  at  nights.  That  is  so  in  the 
majority  of  cases,  I believe.  ^ The  husband  goes  to  business  and 
has  long  hours,  and  is  sometimes  away  at  nights.  Is  there  any 
reason  for  supposing  that  they  do  not  forgather  with  their  wives 
in  the  usual  sense? — ^No;  but  1 am  not  talking  of  a normal  man. 
I am  talking  of  the  deceased. 

Mr.  PoLAim — ^Very  well. 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills — ^What  was  there?  I cannot  appreciate 
it.  I have  been  watching  most  carefully  to  see  what  were  the 
facts,  and  the  one  fact  1 have  gathered  is  that  he  talked  in  an  odd 
way  about  mesmerism,  and  you  suspected  at  once  his  sanity.  Is 
there  anything  else ; because  it  ^is  the  only  thing  you  have  men- 
tioned at  present? — I wish  I could  put  the  picture  before  your 
mind  that  1 have  in  mine. 

Se-examination  continued — will  not  trouble  you  further.  I 
only  wanted,  if  you  really  could,  to  say  anything  definite  that  you 
observed  that  led  you  to  make  the  observation  that  they  were  more 
like  brother  and  sister.  There  is  nothing  more.  I will  not 
trouble  you  further  if  you  say  there  is  nothing  more ; if  you  can 
think  of  anything  else,  say  it? — ^There  is  not  one  thing  that  comes 
forward  more  prominently  than  another.  I can  only  sum  up  by 
saying  that  their  general  bearing  to  one  another  was  asexual 

Forgive  my  saying  that  is  somewhat  vague.  You  say  there  is 
not  one  thing.  Give  us  two  or  three  things? — 1 am  afraid  I shall 
fail. 

Then  never  mind.  Now,  about  the  mesmerism.  Have  you 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Div  Alfred  Lcack 

studied  zaesznerism  yourself  1 — have  observed  its  eSecta  some- 
times ; I cannot  say  I have  made  a study  of  it. 

Do  you  know,  with  regard  to  mesmerism,  that  it  is  supposed 
that  the  vital  force  goes  out  from  one  person  to  another? — ^No; 
1 do  not  know. 

Do  you  not  know  that  it  is  supposed  something  proceeds  from 
one  person  to  another  which  is  called  the  vital  force? — call  it 
nothing. 

I am  talking  now  of  whether,  in  books  on  mesmerism ? — I 

have  read  none,  to  begin  with. 

You  do  not  know  what  the  mesmerists  suppose  themselves  able 
to  do? — ^Tesj  I know  that,  for  I have  had  my  attention  directed 
to  them  orally  to  a very  small  amount. 

Have  you  ever  read  a book  on  mesmerism? — Depot4s  I have 
looked  at. 

Have  you  read  any  books  on  magnetism? — have  not  even 
read  “ Braid  on  Magnetism.'' 

Have  you  heard  of  odic  force? — ^Yes. 

Odic  force  is  supposed  to  go  from  one  person  to  another 
without  touching  in  the  act  of  mesmerism? — ^Yes,  1 believe  it  is. 

There  was  nothing  strange  in  this  man  supposing  that  this 
force  proceeded  from  his  wife  to  him?  It  is  not  a symptom  of 
insanity,  is  it? — Oh,  no;  I do  not  say  he  was  insane. 

What  do  you  mean  by  saying,  at  one  time  you  suspected 
him  of  insanity?  Was  it  on  the  mesmeric  ground? — Chiefly. 
There  are  two  mesmeric  incidents.  You  have  alluded  to  one.  I 
did  not  suspect  him;  I had  to  find  the  key  to  my  patient's  char- 
acter. Shall  I read  the  notes  of  the  occasion? 

Y^;  if  you  think  it  will  assist  us,  do  by  all  means? — I do 
not  think  it  will  take  longer  than  my  trying  to  say  it  off.  “ Memo- 
randum of  conversation  with  Mr.  Bartlett,  deceased,  and  Mrs. 
Bartlett;  held  about  ten  p.m.,  most  probably  on  the  26th  December, 
1886."  That  was  the  night  that  I was  administering  purgatives 
to  get  the  worm  powder  away.  • 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills — ^Most  probably  the  26th.  I suppose  this 
was  made  at  a time  when  you  had  forgotten  the  occasion? — ^This 
was  made  on  the  9th  of  February,  and  most  probably  " I 
should  be  prepared  to  scratch  out  now.  It  was  that  night,  I am 
sure.  " Having  occasion  to  sit  some  hours  with  my  patient,  we 
conversed,  and  by  accident  the  word  ' mesmerism  ' wae  men- 
tioned. Deceased  became  all  alert  at  once,  and  asked  me  if  I could 
memerise.  I told  him  I had  never  tried,  and  did  not  mean  to, 
pvmg  as  my  reason  my  opinion  that  no  medical  man  should  seek 
to  become  a mesmerist.  But  he  again  adced  me  to  make  the 
experimmt  on  him,  and  I declined.  He  said,  ‘ Do  you  understand 
much  about  mesmerism? ' I told  him  I had  frequently  watched 
the  effects  of  skilled  mesmerists  and  had  applied  ^-oientific  tests 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Dr.  Alfred  Leach 

and  was  interested  enough  in  it  to  give  eome  study  for  the  psycho- 
logical problems  involved.  He  said,  ^ Can  you  tell  me  whether  I 
am  under  mesmeric  control  ’ (I  think  he  used  some  such  word)  ‘ at 
the  present  moment?  * Smiling,  I said,  ‘ Do  you  think  you  are?  * 
He  answered,  * Yes,  I do,'  and  proceeded  to  explain  ; ' Last  summer, 
a friend,  who  could  mesmerise,  visited  us,  and  I asked  him  on 
several  occasions  to  mesmerise  me,  but  he  always  refused.  Now, 
why  do  you  think  he  refused?  ' I told  Mr.  Bartlett  I could  not 
guess,  * Well,'  said  Mr.  B.,  ‘ I think  he  must  have  done  it  then, 
or  on  some  subsequent  occasion.'  Then  Mrs.  Bartlett  broke  in, 

' Oh,  Edwin,  how  absurd  you  are ! He  does  get  such  strange  ideas 
into  his  head  nowadays,  doctor.'  He  continued,  without  interro- 
gation, ‘ I think  he  mesmerised  me  through  my  wife.  Is  that  a 
possibility?  ' I said  I did  not  know,  but  that  the  subject  was  veiy 
amusing;  would  he  tell  me  some  more  about  it,  especially  the 
symptoms  that  led  him  to  a so  extraordinary  belief?  With  some 
pressing  i got  this  reply : ' Well,  I am  doing  such  absurd  things — 
things  against  my  common  sense;  in  fact,  both  my  wife  and  1 are 
doing  so.'  ' What  kind  of  absurd  things  are  you  both  doing?  ’ I 
asked.  His  only  reply  was  that  they  were  doing  things  that  were 
unusual  and  contrary  to  common  sense.  During  this  conversation 
he  had  emerged  from  his  usual  reserve,  and  was  speaking  with  an 
unaccustomed  vigour  and  excitement,  and  I was  growing  anxious 
about  his  night's  rest  ; but  thinking  I had  perhaps  to  do  with  one 
of  the  phases  of  insanity,  and  was  on  the  point  of  getting  a key  to 
his  peculiar  nervous  temperament,  I decided  to  push  my  inquiry. 

* Mr.  Bartlett,'  I said,  * if  my  brother  medicos  were  to  hear  us, 
they  would  think  Mrs.  Bartlett  the  only  sane  person  among  us 
three,  but  I do  not  despise  ideas  because  they  are  contrary  to  my 
every-day  experience;  pray  tell  me  more  about  yours,  especially 
about  the  nature  of  the  things  your  mysterious  friend  makes  you 
do.'  " Vulgarly,  I tried  to  draw  him.  “ Here  Mrs.  Bartlett  in- 
terposed remarks  calculated  to  turn  the  conversation.  She  said  it 
was  all  ridiculous  nonsense  he  "was  talking.  But,  persisting  in 
trying  to  find  my  key,  I obtained  her  permission  to  continue  the 
conversation  au  grand  Biriev^*  ' Do  you  ever  hear  voices  telling 
you  to  do  this  or  that,  Mr.  Bartlett? ' ' Oh,  no,'  he  said;  and  I 

regarded  his  reply  as  one  of  considerable  importance.  ‘ Do  you 
ever  converse  with  your  magician  when  he  is  not  near  you?  ' 
Again  he  said,  decidedly,  * No  ' ; giving  his  reply  in  a manner  to 
relieve  my  mind,  in  a medical  sense,  of  some  anxiety.  But  he 
persisted  that  he  was  under  a mesmeric  influence,  and  adked  if  I 
knew  of  no  method  for  discovering  the  truth  of  the  matter,  and  I 
promised  him  that,  if  he  would  fully  describe  to  me  his  feelings 
and  the  ground  for  his  suppositions,  1,  in  return,  would  consult  a 
very  high  authority  in  mesmeric  phenomena  concerning  the  case. 
I said,  ^ How  long  did  the  influence  last — ^1  mean,  how  long  did 

245 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Dr.  AUrad  UmIi 

you  continue  to  do  strange  things?  * He  replied,  * I am  still 
doing  them.^  1 said,  ‘ But  what  are  they?  ’ He  answered,  hesi- 
tating, ‘ Well,  perhaps  I should  not  be  here  if  it  were  not  for  the 
influence  ' (I  think  he  used  the  word).  'Where  would  you  be?  ’ 
He  said,  ' Elsewhere;  perhaps  at  the  seaside,  perhaps  abroad.’ 
Then  a suspicion  flashed  across  my  mind,  and  1 said,  ' Does  your 
mesmeric  friend  control  you  in  your  city  purchases — ^make  you 
spend  your  money  differently  to  your  ordinary  notions  9 Has  he 
ever  implanted  you  with  a flxed  idea  to  sign  any  cheque  or  draft, 
or  indorse  anything?  ’ To  all  these  questions  he  replied  in  a 
manner  to  indicate  that  I was  very  wide  of  the  mark,  and  per- 
sisted that  he  only  felt  impelled  to  do  ' queer  things,’  saying, 
' I am  acting  in  a way  different  to  what  1 should  do  if  1 were  not 
mesmerised,  and  that  is  all.’  Then  the  idea  struck  me  that  he 
might  really  be  in  terror  of  somebody  who  had  acquired  ascen- 
dancy over  him,  so  I asked,  ' Do  you  feel  a sinking  or  depression 
when  you  hear  him  coming;  or  do  you  shudder  when  he  ap- 
proaches? ’ 'Ho,  not  at  all;  I like  him.’  Then,  despairing  of 
making  head  or  tail  out  of  my  patient’s  mental  condition,  1 piit 
my  last  query : ' Do  you  feel  positive  that  your  supposed  friend  is 
really  a friend,  and  not  trying  to  work  out  his  own  ends  through 
his  influence  with  you — ^mesmeric,  or  otherwise?  ’ He  said  he  was 
sure  this  was  not  the  case.  I appealed  to  Mrs.  B.  for  her  opinion, 
and  she  said,  ' Edwin  and  he  are  the  best  of  friends,  and  he  is  a 
true  friend  to  both  of  us.’  I repeated  the  question  to  her  in 
private,  and  received  the  same  reply.  As  a sequel,  to  keep  faith 
with  my  patient,  I put  the  case,  at  his  request,  to  a distinguished 
student  of  things  mystical,  and  asked  the  latter  if  he  believed  it 
to  be  within  the  bounds  of  infinite  possibility  that  any  dominant 
idea  could  be  made  possess  a man  in  Mr.  Bartlett’s  state,  and,  if 
not,  how  could  I best  conjure  him  into  his  right  senses  again.  At 
a subsequent  visit,  1 assured  Mr.  Bartlett  that  his  delusions  had 
been  very  carefully  thought  over;  and  that  they  were  delusions,  I 
proved  to  him  in  argument.  Efb  was  convinced  then,  and  a few 
days  later  assured  me  that  he  was  thoroughly  of  my  opinion.  I 
may  add  that  I remember  these  events  so  accurately  by  reason  of 
my  being  permitted  to  discuss  them  at  the  time  with  my  occult 
acquaintance.” 

Se’^exannnation  continued — ^1  suppose  an  " occult  acquaint- 
ance ” there?  I suppose  you  know  some  people  think  they  are 
very  much  under  the  influence  of  others? — In  the  asylums,  or  out 
of  them? 

Out  of  them? — ^Under  the  influence  of  others,  yes. 

Only  one  other  question — ^Do  you  know  in  mesmerism  some 
mesmerists  daim  to  be  able  to  influence  people  although  they  are 
not  present? — Yes. 

Miles  away? — ^Yes. 

That  is  a common  belief  amongst  some  mesmerists  1r— 'Yes. 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Dr.  Alfred  Leach 

Only  two  or  three  other  matters — ^When  you  were  first  called 
into  Claverton  Street,  did  you  think  that  Mr.  and  Mre.  Bartlett 
had  been  recently  married  1 — did;  all  this  petting,  &c.,  led  me 
to  that  conclusion. 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills — ^You  could  hardly  have  supposed  then 
there  was  anything  like  brother  and  sister  in  their  relations,  could 
you? — have  distinctly  said  I did  not  at  that  time  suppose  it,  but 
even  going  back  now  to  my  recollection  of  that  day  on  which  I 
saw  them,  and  thought  they  were  recently  married,  I still  do  not 
hesitate  to  say  that  after  all  it  is  quite  possible  that  it  was  an 
asexual  relation. 

Re-examination  contimied — ^Did  you,  after  visiting  Mr.  Bart- 
lett, see  Mr.  Bartlett  and  Mrs.  Bartlett  remain  on  the  same  terms? 
— ^Yes,  the  whole  time. 

And  with  the  exception  of  the  mesmerism,  was  there  a single 
delusion  about  Mr.  Bartlett  that  you  saw? — ^Yes;  there  was  that 
thinking  he  had  a worm  in  hie  throat. 

Any  other? — ^No  doubt  I could  remember  some. 

Any  more  ? — Pray  let  me  think  a moment. 

Before  you  pass  from  that,  worms  do  come  up  the  throat,  1 
think  you  said? — ^Yes. 

And  he  had  a worm? — ^Yes. 

That  may  or  may  not  have  been  a delusion ; any  other  ? — can 
call  none  to  mind. 

When  you  were  examined  before  the  coroner,  did  you  say  he 
had  no  hallucinations? — He  had  no  hallucinations. 

You  say  that  now? — say  that  now. 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills — ^May  I just  ask  what  is  the  distinction 
between  a hallucination  and  a delusion? — ^Do  you  ask  it  from  me, 
my  lord? 

Yes? — ^A  hallucination  is  defined  as  being  a deception  of  the 
senses;  a delusion,  one  of  the  intellect.  That  is  like  a college 
examination  on  oath. 

I do  not  know  what  you  mean  by  your  distinction  between 
hallucination  and  delusion  j hallucination  is  deception  of  the  senses? 
— Of  the  senses. 

Delusion,  of  the  intellect? — Yes. 

Is  it  a hallucination  when  a man  sees  a thing  look  green 
which  is  not  really  green? — ^That  is  the  act  of  a drug. 

Hallucination  is  the  case  of  a man  seeing  a ghost? — Yes. 

Like  a man  that  has  delirium  tremens? — ^Yes. 

Re-examination  contiTywed — won^t  trouble  you  further.  The 
necrosis  you  referred  to,  you  said  there  was  no  immediate  danger 
from  that? — ^No,  none  ti.at  I^could  see. 

Alarming  from  the  after-consequences? — ^Yes. 

I suppose,  in  treating  your  patient,  you  did  not  alarm  him  in 
any  way  about  this  necrosis? — ^No. 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills — Did  you  say  anything  to  Mrs.  Bart- 

247 


Adelaide  Bartlett 


Dr.  Alfred  Leedi 

lett  about  the  necrosis — ^the  consequences? — ^Yes.  1 said  evidently 
under  that  fungoid  growth  there  was  necrosis  setting  in,  and  we 
must  have  dental  advice  about  it  at  once,  because  it  was  spreading 
to  the  canine  tooth  that  was  taken  out  the  last  day  he  went;. 

And  did  you  say  anything  as  to  the  extent  of  the  probable 
mischief — did  you  say  anything  to  alarm  or  to  comfort  her  when 
you  used  that  term  ? Tell  us,  so  far  as  you  can,  exactly  what  you 
told  her? — I told  her  he  must  have  it  taken  out  if  the  dentist 
advised  it;  because  she  had  rather  wished  him  to  Have  no  more 
teeth  out. 

Did  you  say  anything  to  indicate  danger  to  his  life  from  this? 
— Oh,  there  was  not  ever  any  danger. 

Can  you  give  us  anything  more?  Can  you  give  us  anything 
more  as  to  what  you  said  to  her  about  it?  Did  you  say  anything 
more  than  he  must  have  the  tooth  out  if  the  dentist  advised  it? 
Did  you  say  anything  about  what  necrosis  might  end  in^ — No; 
that  word  alarming  ’’  has  given  rise  to  some  misunderstanding. 
I used  it  for  brevity’s  sake,  without  due  consideration  to  accuracy, 
1 am  afraid. 

Now,  in  all  your  conversations  with  her  from  first  to  last,  did 
you  ever  encourage  the  idea  that  he  could  not  recover? — Oh,  on 
the  contrary.  I always  told  her  it  was  nonsense  for  him  to  say  he 
would  not. 

How  often  did  you  see  Mr.  Dyson  there? — cannot  remember, 
my  lord.  I should  think  perhaps  three  times. 

You  say  it  had  struck  you  he  was  a good  deal  about  the  place  ? 
— ^It  had  struck  me  he  was  on  very  intimate  terms  when  there,  and 
that  they  spoke  of  him  a good  deal  when  he  was  absent. 

Did  you  ever  hear  him  called  by  his  Christian  name? — I 
heard  an  individual  frequently  mentioned  as  Georgius  Bex,’’ 
and  I have  no  doubt — have  reason  to  know — ^that  was  the  name 
under  which  they  always  alluded  to  him.  For  a time  I did  not 
know  who  this  Georgius  Bex  could  be,  but  I know  now.  In  fact, 
I knew  before  the  deceased  died* 

I mean,  when  he  was  present,  how  was  he  addressed? — Oh,  as 
Mr.  Dyson. 

That  was  when  you  were  there? — ^That  was  when  I was  there; 
yes. 

Did  you  ever  hear  him  call  Mr.  Bartlett  “ Edwin,”  or  Mr. 
Bartlett  call  him  “George”? — ^No,  and  I think  it  would  have 
struck  me  if  I had. 

You  never  heard  him  called  by  his  Christian  name  by  either 
of  them? — ^Not  in  his  presence. 

And  I suppose  you  never  heard  him  call  either  of  them  by 
their  Christian  names? — ^No. 

One  more  question.  When  you  went  into  the  room  on  1st 
January,  did  you  notice  anything  about  the  fire? — did. 

What  was  it? — noticed  that  the  fire  was  not  a large  one*  I 
2i8 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Dr.  Alfred  Leach 

looked  at  it  with  a view  of  estimating  the  temperature  in  which  the 
corpse  had  been  lying,  and  my  chief  recollection  of  the  fire  was 
that  it  was  one  that  would  not,  to  any  extent,  have  influenced  the 
temperature  of  the  room,  and  it  was,  to  the  best  of  my  recollec- 
tion— and  I have  thought  seriously  over  the  matter — ^ere  were 
ashes  or  cinders,  and  it  may  have  been  piled  on  each  side  of  it, 
and  a large  piece  on  the  top,  but  there  my  observation  finished. 

There  was  nothing  that  called  any  sort  of  special  attention 

to  iti — ^No,  none  whatever.  ^ t i.*  i 

By  the  Foreman — I should  like  to  ask  one  question.  I think 
you  said  you  saw  a glass  with  brandy  in  it? — ^Yes. 

You  smelt  it? — Yes. 

If  chloroform  had  been  in  it,  would  you  have  detected  it? — I 
am  not  quite  sure. 

Did  you  detect  any? — ^No;  I am  not  quit©  sure  whether  it  could 
be  detected.  I think  brandy  dissolves  very  little  chloroform.  Had 
there  been  a large  quantity  I should  have  seen  it,  though  I am  not 
quite  sure  whether  I should  have  smelt  it.  I have  such  an  objection 
to  the  smell  of  brandy. 

By  a Juror — I think  you  said  death  had  occurred  three  hours 
previous?— I estimated  it  at  three  hours.  It  is  the  nearest  I can 
arrive  at,  and  I have  no  doubt  that  is  an  accurate  time. 

Did  the  fire  look  as  if  it  had  been  freshly  made  up  ? — I do  not 
pretend  to  know  what  a fire  looks  like  freshly  made  up — freshly 
stirred,  I suppose,  you  mean,*  and,  as  the  question  only  occurred 
some  time  after  1 saw  that  fire,  I am  utterly  unable  to  say.  It  did 
not  strike  me  as  such,  I may  say  that. 

By  the  Foreman — I suppose  if  any  chloroform  had  been  poured 
down  his  throat  you  would  have  noticed  some  signs  of  it  afterwards  ? 
— ^No,  because  chloroform  passing  over  mucous  membrane  leaves 
very  little  trace. 

There  would  be  no  inflammation? — ^No. 

By  Mr.  Clarke — If  chloroform  were  spilt  on  the  face  in  the 
process  of  administration,  would  it  not  produce  a sore  place? — 
If  left  some  time  it  would  blister ; it  may  produce  a little  chafing 
of  the  epithelium. 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills — ^How  long  would  that  last? — ^I  cannot 

say. 

A few  minutes? — I cannot  say. 

By  Mr.  Clarke — It  turns  to  a sore  place? — ^You  have  to  leave 
it  for  some  time  before  it  does.  A chloroform  blister  is  a very 
difficult  thing  to  raise. 

[It  was  here  observed  that  two  of  the  jury  had  left  the  box 
during  the  last  two  or  three  questions.  On  their  return] 

Mr.  Justice  Wills — Gentlemen,  while  two  of  your  number 
were  absent,  a question  was  asked.  Mr.  Clarke  will  repeat  that 
question  now. 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Dr.  Alfwd  Lewdi 

By  Mr.  Clarkb — ^With  regard  to  the  fact  of  spilling  chloroform 
on  the  skin,  if  chloroform  be  accidentally  spilt  in  the  process  of 
administration,  does  it  not  produce  a sore  on  the  skin  9 I am  now 
using  the  commonest  word? — ^Not  if  accidentally  spilt — ^you  mean 
sprinkled — it  does  not.  On  the  lips  of  the  pei'son  it  wifi  j but,  as 
a rule,  to  produce  a sore  with  chloroform,  you  must  hold  it  in  con- 
tact, and  if  left  for  some  time  it  will  raise  a large  blister,  and 
would  cause  a wound. 

By  Mr.  Justiob  Wills — On  the  skin? — ^Not  on  the  skin  of  any- 
thing but  a child. 

By  Mr.  Clarke — ^Are  you  sure?  The  ordinary  best  way  of 
administering  chloroform  is  to  roll  up  a handkerchief  and  put  it 
in  a glass,  and  then  sprinkle  chloroform  on  it,  is  it  not  ? — That  is 
so,  certainly ; but  I prefer  an  ordinary  cloth,  with  my  hand  under- 
neath it. 

That  other  way  I say  is  recommended? — ^Yes. 

Now,  in  holding  the  chloroform,  if  the  chloroform  be  spilt  from 
the  glass  on  to  the  akin,  do  you  mean  to  say  no  screness  is  pro- 
duced?— ^Not  once  spilling;  it  would  have  to  be  repeatedly  spilt. 

There  are  a great  many  chlorof ormists  who  habitually  practise 
the  ^ administration  of  chloroform — I mean  that  chloroform  is 
habitually  employed  in  the  practice  of  administration,  and  do  not 
they  smear  their  lips  with  grease? — Yes;  I do  myself. 

What  for  ? — To  save  any  chafing ; and  it  might  produce  a sore, 
but  I have  never  seen  it. 

That  is  why  you  use  the  grease? — I do  not  always  use  it. 

When  you  do  use  it,  that  is  the  reason? — ^Yes,  one  of  the 
reasons;  and  before  he  went  off  I should  not  like  to  touch  his  lips, 
so  I use  it  in  a subjective  sense. 

If  chloroform  is  put  on  the  skin  and  not  covered  up,  it 
evaporates.  Does  it  leave  any  mark? — It  leaves  a certain  mark 
which  you  can  see  in  a certain  light. 

You  say  that  you  could  perceive  it  in  a certain  light? — ^Yee. 
It  is  not  obvious;  you  have  to  look  for  it. 

And  even  then  how  soon  does  it  go  off  ? — I do  not  know.  When 
I have  made  any  experiments  upon  myself,  I have  forgotten  to  see 
the  end  of  them. 

If  chloroform  is  kept  confined  touching  the  skin? — Then  it 
would  make  a little  blister. 

If  covered  up  and  kept  upon  the  skin,  then  you  say  it  would 
make  a little  blister? — ^Yes. 

By  the  Foreman — ^You  say  a small  bottle  was  inverted  in  a 
glass?— Yes. 

Did  you  examine  that  bottle? — ^No,  I did  not. 

You  did  not  smell  it? — No;  I was  accustomed  to  see  a glass  of 
Condy’fl  fluid,  and  I took  it  to  be  that. 

By  Mr.  Justiob  Wills— The  small  bottle  you  recognised  as 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Dr.  Alfred  Leach 

containing  Condy’s  fluid,  you  say? — A.  small  tumbler  containing 
the  fluid.  It  always  stood  by  his  side.  It  had  contained  a draught 
which  1 had  sent  on  the  18th. 

By  Mr.  Clarke — ^Tou  said  just  now  you  recognised  the  bottle 
by  the  label? — ^No^  there  was  no  label. 

By  a Juror — You  were  a^ed  how  would  it  look  if  chloroform 
was  poured  into  the  mouth.  Would  it  affect  the  gums? — Oh,  yes, 
it  would  make  the  gums  feel  very  painful. 

Would  it  leave  any  trace  so  that  you  could  detect  it  after- 
wards?— If  it  was  left  there  some  time,  it  would;  it  would  cause 
a blister,  or  make  a sore  even,  if  found  in  the  stomach. 

Did  you  find  any  trace? — ^No;  the  mouth  was  examined,  and 
there  was  no  trace,  but  the  post-mortem  examination  will  tell  you 
more  accurately  than  I can. 

Dr.  John  Gardner  Dudley,  examined  by  Mr.  Poland — I am  a 
doctor  of  medicine  of  the  University  of  Cambridge  and  member  of 
the  College  of  Physicians,  London.  I practise  at  71  Belgrave  Koad. 
Dr.  Leach  called  me  in  to  see  Mr.  Bartlett  at  Claverton  Street  on 
19th  December.  I was  with  him  for  twenty-five  or  thirty  minutes, 
and  in  conjunction  with  Dr.  Leach  examined  him.  Dr.  Leach 
had  already  communicated  to  me  what  he  was  suffering  from,  and 
then  I tried  to  find  out  for  myself  what  his  ailments  were.  I found 
his  gums  to  be  spongy  and  inflamed,  I did  not  find  any  lime  on 
the  margin  of  the  gums.  He  had  a very  depressed  appearance, 
and  he  seemed  wanting  in  energy.  He  was  lying  in  an  easy 
posture,  apparently  free  from  pain.  He  told  me  that  he  required 
rest,  that  he  had  been  overworked — ^mentally  and  bodily;  that  he 
was  very  sleepless;  that  he  had  not  slept  well  for  a considerable 
time,  and  scarcely  at  all  the  last  few  nights.  I examined  him  to 
find  out  whether  he  was  suffering  from  any  disease,  but  I found  no 
signs  whatever.  The  organs  all  seemed  to  be  quite  healthy.  After 
I had  examined  him  1 told  him  that  he  was  a sound  man,  that  he 
ought  to  sit  up  and  go  out  for  a walk  or  a drive  daily.  I do  not 
think  he  made  any  reply.  I prescribed  a sedative  and  a tonic 
for  him.  I do  not  think  there  is  anything  else  that  is  necessary 
for  me  to  mention  with  regard  to  my  examination  of  him.  I only 
saw  him  on  that  one  occasion.  I afterwards  heard  of  his  death. 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills — ^Mrs.  Bartlett  was  present  throughout 
the  interview,  and  she  relied  to  several  questions  that  I put  to  her. 
She  took  a part  in  the  conversation  generally. 

Examvnatiovb  continued — ^I  think  I asked  her  some  questions 
with  regard  to  his  previous  health  and  his  habits.  Her  answers 
were  all  favourable,  that  his  habits  were  temperate,  and  that  his 
general  health  had  been  previously  good.  On  2nd  January  I 
attended  the  post-mortem.  There  was  nothing  from  the  appear- 
ance of  the  various  organs  to  account  for  death  from  any  natural 


Adelaide  Bardett. 


Dr.  Dodley 

cause.  In  the  stomach  there  was  an  erosion,  a patch  where  the 
mucous  membrane  was  destroyed  in  the  most  dependent  part  of  the 
stomach— on  the  dependent  part  of  the  stomach,  the  portion  that 
was  lowest  near  the  spinal  column.  That  would  be  occasioned  by 
some  noxious  agent  remaining  in  contact  with  it — an  irritant. 

Would  liquid  chloroform  account  for  it? — ^Yes,  very  likely. 
The  blood  was  very  fluid. 

If  death  had  been  caused  by  chloroform  would  that  cause  the 
blood  to  be  fluid? — Tes,  it  would.  When  the  stomach  itself  was 
opened  I smelt  it.  It  smelt  very  strongly  of  chloroform,  or  a com- 
bination of  chloroform  and  garlic.  The  whole  contents  of  the 
stomach  were  placed  in  a clean  glass-stoppered  bottle  in  my  presence 
and  sealed  with  my  seal.  1 smelt  the  contents  of  the  intestines, 
and  I found  that  they  had  the  same  smell,  but  in  a less  degree.  A 
quantity  of  the  contents  of  the  intestines — about  an  ounce — ^were 
put  into  another  jar  and  sealed.  The  stomach  itself  was  also  put 
into  another  jar  and  sealed  up.  There  was  also  placed  in  a bottle 
and  sealed  some  chutney  which  was  found  at  the  post-mortem. 
After  those  four  bottles  had  been  sealed  up  they  were  put  in  the 
front  room,  the  post-mortem  having  been  made  in  the  back  room. 
After  the  post-mortem  we  deputed  Dr.  Leach  to  announce  the  result 
to  Mrs.  Bartlett.  There  were  present  at  the  time  Mr.  Bartlett, 
senior,  Mr,  Wood,  the  solicitor,  and  Mr.  Dyson.  The  announce- 
ment was  made  in  the  front  room,  and  it  was  to  the  effect  that  we 
found  no  natural  cause  of  death;  but  that  there  were  suspicious 
appearances  in  the  stomach  and  with  regard  to  the  appearance  of 
the  stomach  itself;  and  that  it  would  be  necessary  to  make  the 
coroner  acquainted  with  the  facts.  I do  not  remember  that  there 
was  anything  said  by  any  one  to  that. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  Clabkb — ^When  you  went  to  see  him  on 
the  19th  I think  he  presented  a depressed  appearance? — ^He  did  so* 

He  seemed  disinclined  to  change  his  posture,  or  even  to  raise 
his  eyelids? — ^Tes. 

^d  he  looked  at  you  through  his  half -closed  lids?— He  did. 

He  told  you  he  had  been  overworked,  mentally  and  bodily,  I 
think? — He  did. 

And  that  for  some  time  he  had  suffered  from  sleeplessness?— 

Tes. 

Did  his  wife  seem  very  nervous  and  anxious  about  him? — She 
seemed  very  attentive  to  him. 

And  very  anzions  about  it  f— Yes. 

You  were  an  absolute  stranger  to  them  both?— I was. 


Dr.  Mootaoub  MuimaT,  examined  by  Mr.  WBiOH't— -I  hold  the 
degree  of  M D.  of  London,  and  I am  assistant  physician  at  Charing 
0“  2nd  January  last  I,  along  with  Dr.  Green, 
attended  at  the  post-mortem  examination  on  the  body  of  Mr. 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 


Dr.  Murray 

Bartlett  at  86  Claverton  Street.  Dr.  Leach,  Dr.  Cheyne,  and  Dr. 
Dudley  were  also  present.  We  began  about  half -past  two.  I did 
the  operative  work,  while  Dr.  Green  watched  the  operations  and 
dictated  the  notes  which  were  taken  down  by  Dr.  Leach.  We  all, 
to  some  extent,  checked  the  operations  as  they  were  described ; if 
there  was  any  doubt  we  discussed  them  as  we  went  on.  The 
general  condition  of  the  body  showed  that  it  was  exceedingly  well 
nourished.  The  heart  was  the  first  we  came  to;  it  was  normal  in 
size  and  was  healthy,  although  the  muscular  tissue  was  perhaps  a 
trifle  flabby.  The  lining  membrane  was  deeply  stained,  and  the 
blood  in  the  heart  was  fluid. 

Were  any  of  these  conditions  abnormal,  considering  the  long 
time  which  had  elapsed  since  the  death? — ^Yes,  the  fluid  condition 
of  the  blood  and  the  excessive  staining  of  the  lining  membrane 
were  not  quite  what  one  would  have  expected  from  health.  Apart 
from  the  contents  of  the  stomach  and  the  condition  of  the  stomach, 
there  was  nothing  whatever  in  the  state  of  the  organs  to  account 
for  death.  I took  out  the  stomach  and  intestines.  1 have  heard 
Dr.  Dudley^s  evidence,  and  I concur  in  his  account  of  the  way 
in  which  the  proceedings  took  place.  There  was  a small  amount, 
above  an  ounce  of  a dark  fluid  in  the  stomach,  with  a few  small 
lumps  of  solid  matter,  and  it  smelt  very  strongly  of  chloroform. 
The  intestines  smelt  slightly  of  chloroform;  the  smell  was  much 
more  disguised,  because  other  things  were  mixed  with  it.  There  was 
an  inflammatory  blush  over  the  whole  of  the  cardiac  end  of  the 
stomach  and  the  whole  of  what  is  described  as  the  most  de- 
pendent part,  in  area  about  an  inch  and  a half  in  diameter. 
The  mucous  membrane  was  rather  softer  than  the  other  parts 
and  a little  roughened  and  irregular. 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills — The  patch  was  about  an  inch  and 
a half  in  diameter  in  the  dependent  part  of  the  stomach,  the 
part  lowest  down  when  the  person  is  lying  on  his  back. 

jffacmmatzon  continued — That  condition  of  things  suggested 
the  action  of  a mild  irritant  poison. 

Where  death  results  from  causes  other  than  poison,  would 
that  be  a natural  place  to  expect  the  ulceration  or  inflammatory 
•condition  of  that  kind? — ^No;  when  ulceration  occurs  it  usually 
occurs  near  the  other  end  of  the  stomach,  and  at  the  upper  rather 
than  at  the  lower  part,  but  not  invariably  so.  That  would 
probably  be  the  part  of  the  stomach  through  which  its  fluid 
contents  would  naturally  gravitate  if  the  person  were  lying  on 
his  back.  If  a man  were  lying  on  his  face  I should  not  expect 
it  to  gravitate  to  the  same  part.  The  inflammatory  blush  must 
have  taken  place  while  life  continued. 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills — ^Do  you  confine  your  evidence  to 
the  inflammatory  blush,  or  does  it  extend  over  Ihe  thinning  of 
a portion  of  the  tissues? — should  not  be  certain  about  the  thin- 
ning of  the  portion  of  the  tissues. 

263 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 

Dr,  Marrav 

The  other,  you  think,  must  have  been  produced  while  in 
life?— Yes.^ 

Examination  continued — ^There  was  softening  of  the  tissues  at 
the  place  I have  mentioned ; at  the  most  dependent  part.  The 
mucous  membrane  was  a little  softer  than  natural;  it  could 
have  been  stripped  oE  with  the  finger  more  easily. 

Must  that  necessarily  have  been  something  that  happened 
ante-mortem,  or  subsequent  to  the  death — ^the  softening  of  the 
tissues? — I think  the  signs,  taken  altogether,  must  have  hap- 
pened before,  but  I am  not  prepared  to  say  that  any  one  of  the 
others  could  not  have  been. 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills — I do  not  quite  follow  you.  You  say 
something  about  being  taken  all  together? — ^Leaving  out  the  in- 
flammatory blush,  the  others,  the  softening  and  slight  thinning, 
I do  not  think  they  were  post-mortem,  but  I do  not  feel  quite 
sure.  I think  they  were  more  likely  ante-mortem  than  post- 
mortem. 


^ Examination  continued — Supposing  that  the  appearances 
which  I saw  were  the  result  of  swallowing  chloroform,  I am  not 
able  to  form  any  opinion  as  to  what  period  of  time  must  have 
elapsed  between  the  swallowing  and  the  death  and  to  give  time 
for  these  appearances  to  be  caused.  I could  not  give  the  limit  of 
the  smallest  time,  but  an  hour  would  certainly  be  sufiicient,  I think, 
between  the  swallowing  and  the  death,  to  produce  the  condition 
of  the  stomach.  I cannot  tell  how  much  less  would  do  it.  I 
saw  the^  stomach  as  recently  as  last  night,  when  Dr.  Stevenson 
showed  it  to  me.  I do  not  think  I have  anything  to  add  as  the 
result  of  what  I saw  last  night.  I examined  the  gullet  also  last 
night.  I have  not  mentioned  that  the  lower  part  of  the  gullet 
was  just  in  the  same  condition  as  the  adjoining  part  of  the  stomach 
— the  part  of  the  gullet  next  the  stomach ; that  had  an  inflammatory 
blush  just  in  the  same  way,  and  was  a little  roughened;  I sup- 
pose the  lower  3 inches  or  so  of  the  gullet. 

^ By  Mr.  Justice  Wills— That  was  the  portion  of  the  gullet 
which  comes  nearest  to  the  stomach,  which  opens  into  it. 

Examination  continued — ^A.t  the  post-mortem  I examined  the 
lower  jaw,  and  found  a patch  where  it  was  becoming  necrosed. 
There  was  nothing  serious  or  dangerous  about  that. 

Gross-examined  by  Mr.  Clarke— This  is  new  matter.  With 
regard  to  your  examination  of  the  gullet,  I understand  that  wa$ 
made  ^uite  recently?— I made  the  examination  of  the  two  at 
tne  ]^st-mortem,  and  I saw  them  together  again  la^  night 
You  say  yesterday  you  saw  the  gullet?— Yes. 
k A indicated  was  that  the  irritant,  whatet^er  it  was, 

had  been  taken.through  the  ^llet?— Precisely. 

ways  in  whiob  an  irritant  poison 
may  be  introduced  into  the  stomach,  but  the  condition  of  the 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 


Dr.  Murray 

gullet  shows  that  it  was  taken  down  the  throat  in  the  passing  to 
this  spot.  You  have  been  speaking  of  the  redness;  that  would 
show  that  at  the  time  the  liquid  passed  down  the  throat  the  body 
was  in  a recumbent  position.  Would  that  indicate  that,  or  might 
the  body  have  been  erect  at  the  time? — ^It  might  have  been  erect 
at  the  time  it  was  taken.  I should  say  it  would  show  that  after  it 
was  taken  for  the  greater  portion  of  the  time  that  life  lasted 
the  body  must  have  been  in  a recumbent  position. 

Are  there  not  extraordinary  varieties  with  regard  to  the  cause 
of  death  by  liquid  chloroform,  both  as  to  the  quantity  producing 
death  and  also  as  to  the  survival  after  the  dose? — 1 believe  so, 
but  1 have  no  special  knowledge  myself  upon  that  subject. 

By  the  Foreman — Suppose  that  the  person  was  insensible — 
suppose  it  would  take  some  time,  and  it  would  have  to  be  done 
very  gradually  to  administer  chloroform  down  the  throat? — ^To 
pour  it  down  the  throat. 

It  would  take  some  little  time  to  do  it;  you  could  not  do  it 
suddenly  if  the  person  was  insensible? — Difierent  methods  might 
be  employed;  there  might  be  a tube  employed. 

But  suppose  that,  with  the  tube,  the  head  might  be  held 
back  to  pour  it  down  the  throat  quietly? — I could  not  say  the 
time  it  would  take. 

But  it  would  have  to  be  done  gradually  if  the  person  was 
insensible? — ^A  portion  might  be  poured  down  gradually. 

If  poured  down  gradually,  it  would  very  likely  leave  some 
mark  on  the  tongue  or  throat ? — ^No,  not  necessarily;  it  need  not 
last  so  long  as  that. 

Then  you  do  not  think  that  it  would  leave  more  marks  in  that 
way  than  if  a person  took  it  up  and  drank  it  up  quickly? — ^No. 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills — You  speak  of  a short  time;  unfor- 
tunately, to  my  mind  that  conveys  no  notion.  How  long  do  you 
suppose  the  operation  of  pouring  down  anything  whidi  would 
be  a fatal  dose  of  chloroform  must  necessarily  take,  supposing  a 
person  to  be  asleep? — ^It  would  depend  somewhat  upon  ^e  degree 
of  insensibility.  I could  not  say  definitely  how  long  it  would  take. 

QroBB-examinoLtion  continued — ^But  would  it  be  minutes  or 
hours?— Oh,  certainly  not  more  than  minutes;  not  more  than 
two  or  three  minutes. 

Mr.  Clarke — ^Would  your  lordship  kindly  ask,  or  allow  me  to 
ask,  the  witness  whether,  so  far  as  he  knows,  or  so  far  as  his 
reading  goes,  such  a case  has  ever  happened  of  liquid  chloroform 
being  poured  down  the  throat  of  an  insensible  person? — have 
no  l^owledge  of  such  a case. 

Have  you  ever  heard  of  such  a case  ? — ^No. 

By  the  Attorney-General — ^Probably,  my  lord,  it  would  be 
proper  to  ask  upon  that,  do  you  see  any  difficulty  in  its  being 
poured  down  the  throat  of  a person  in  a state  of  insensibility?  Is 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 

Dr.  Marray 

there  any  difficulty  in  performing  that  operation  ? — If  the  insensi- 
bility was  profound,  there  would  be  no  difficulty  that  I can  see.  It 
naight  be  poured  down. 

But  I mean,  would  there  be  any  physical  difficulty  in  doing 
it  if  the  person  down  whose  throat  it  was  sought  to  pour  it  was 
in  a state  of  insensibility? — ^I  know  of  none. 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills — ^If  the  insensibility  was  very  pro- 
found, there  would  be  a difficulty  in  swallowing,  would  there  not? 
Swallowing  is  rather  a muscular  action  ? — Certainly.  They  would 
have  to  take  some  mechanical  means  to  get  it  down,  because  the 
parts  would  collapse. 

That  is  to  say,  that  there  would  have  to  be  a tube  ? — Certainly. 

But  I think  you  must  exclude  that  supposition.  Supposing 
there  was  no  tube,  what  would  you  say  then? — Then  the  greater 
part  would  remain  in  the  mouth,  and  some  trickle  down. 

Trickle  down  the  gullet,  do  you  mean,  or  do  you  mean  out- 
side?— Inside. 

Down  the  gullet? — ^Yes. 

That  is  to  say,  in  the  case  of  profound  insensibility.  Now, 
suppose  insensibility  was  not  so  profound  (I  do  not  know  whether 
I use  the  right  expression)  as  to  paralyse  the  muscular  action  of 
the  throat — ^there  is  muscular  action  necessary  in  swallowing,  is 
there  not? — ^Then  the  insensibility  would  prevent  the  swallowing. 

Might  there  be  an  insensibility  so  profound  that  the  person 
operated  upon  might  swallow  without  resistance,  and  yet  so  little 
profound  that  the  muscular  action  would  not  be  paralysed? — Yes. 

Does  that  answer  your  own  view  that  the  touch  of  the 
liquid  would  excite  the  involuntai’y  act  of  swallowing?  Does  it 
apply  to  such  a case  as  that — ^to  such  a condition  as  that? — 1 
think  so. 

Then  it  would  be  swallowing,  and  not  trickling,  in  that  case? 
—Yes. 

Cross-examination  continued — ^By  what  test  would  a medical 
man  be  able  to  ascertain  that  th^  particular  stage  had  been  reached 
where  reflex  action  of  the  muscles  continued,  but  yet  there  was 
insensibility  which  would  prevent  the  burning,  and  so  on?— Oh, 
by  the  presence  of  reflex  in  other  parts. 

How  would  he  test  it? — He  would  test  it  by  touching  the  eye, 
and  there  would  be  a closure  of  the  eyelid.  That  would  show 
that  reflexes  were  present. 

Would  you  mind  touching  your  own  eyelid — ^just  show  how  the 
^ medical  man  would  touch  fhe  eyelid? — He  would  separate  the 
eyelids,  and  just  touch  the  conjunctiva,  the  white  membrane 
of  the  eye.  Then  the  lids  would  immediately  contract,  supposing 
reflex  was  not  carried  farther. 

If,  on  touching,  the  eyelids  contracted,  he  would  then  know 
that  there  was  some  reflex  action  existing  which  might  render  the 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 


Dr.  Murray 

How  would  he  know  there  was  insensibility  to  pain? — ^By 
the  relaxation  of  the  muscles,  and  by  the  abolition  of  the  reflex — 
I mean  suflficient  abolition  to  perform  the  operation. 

You  say  the  medical  man  would  judge  that  there  was  in- 
sensibility to  pain  from  the  laxity  of  the  muscles? — ^Yes. 

Through  the  relaxation  of  the  muscles  and  also  from  the 
abolition,  I think  is  the  word  you  used? — ^Yes. 

Of  the  reflex  action? — ^Yes. 

I am  very  anxious  not  to  repeat  your  words  for  fear  of  any 
mistake. 

Mr.  Justice  Wills — That  is  quite  right,  but  it  is  a thing 
that  seems  to  introduce  a new  condition,  and  a very  important  one 
in  connection  with  that  which  is  proceeding  now. 

Cross-examination  continued — Then  the  physician  intending 
to  do  anything  to  the  patient  which  would  involve  pain,  and  with 
a view  to  which  the  insensibility  was  to  be  produced,  would  not 
do  it  until  he  found  the  reflex  action  had  stopped? — ^That  would 
depend  to  some  extent  upon  the  nature  of  the  operation.  In 
some  operations  more  profound  insensibility  has  to  be  produced 
than  in  others. 

I think  I follow  you.  Your  mind  has  now  come  to  the  pro- 
ducing of  insensibility  by  chloroform.  There  are  some  cases  in 
which  chloroform  is  used  in  which  it  is  not  desired  to  produce 
complete  ansesthesia? — ^Yes. 

There  are  some  cases  where  it  is  desired  to  use  it  to  deaden 
the  pain;  it  is  not  desired  to  obtain  a condition  which  is  one 
of  absolute  insensibility? — Certainly. 

Then,  in  those  cases  the  physician  would  judge  whether  the 
exact  moment  had  come  at  which  there  was  sufficient  diminution 
of  sensibility  to  enable  the  patient  to  bear  the  pain,  and  yet 
not  sufficient  diminution  absolutely  to  destroy  reflex  action? — ^Do 
you  mind  repeating  your  question? 

1 have  put  before  you  the  class  of  cases  in  which  it  is  not 
desired  to  produce  complete  ansestlfesia ; only  to  deaden  the  pain. 
In  those  cases  the  physician  has  to  exercise  his  judgment  as  to 
whether  the  moment  has  come  in  which  there  is  sufficient  insensi- 
bility to  produce  anaesthesia,  yet  not  the  entire  abolition  of  the 
reflex  action? — Certainly. 

But  supposing  ansethesia  is  carried  to  a point  which  prevents 
any  pain,  then  the  reflex  action  has  disappeared? — Some  reflexes 
disappear  before  others;  they  do  not  all  disappear  at  the  same 
time. 

But  supposing  the  anaesthesia  to  be  carried  to  the  extent  of 
destroying  the  sense  of  pain,  has  not  the  reflex  action  then  en- 
tirely disappeared?  If  you  have  a doubt,  I am  afraid  it  cannot 
be  a very  easy  question,  doctor? — ^Well,  it  is  a 'question  one  is 
familiar  with — ^the  loss  of  certain  reflexes.  I was  thinking 
s 257 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Dr.  Murray 

whethor  there  might  not  be  others.  You  see,  one^  judges  practi- 
cally by  this  conjunctiva  reflex.  One  knows  practically  if  that  is 
gone,  the  patient  will  not  feel  painj  and  you  judge  also  by  the 
muscular  relaxation. 

I think  I follow  you.  You  say  the  physician  judges  by  that 
test  ? — Yes ; I am  not  prepared  to  say  that  at  that  moment  there  is 
no  reflex  which  can  be  obtained. 

But  you  are  not  prepared  to  say  that  there  is? — am  not 
prepared  to  give  an  opinion. 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills — Just  tell  me  this.  In  operations 
where  chloroform  is  administered,  is  it  ever  necessary  to  give 
brandy,  or  anything  of  that  sort,  while  the  operation  is  going 
on  ? — ^Yes ; but  it  is  not  given  by  the  mouth  easily  under  that  con- 
dition. 

By  injection? — ^Yes. 

Tom  Ralph,  examined  by  Mr.  Polahd — I am  an  officer  in 
the  Metropolitan  Police  Force,  and  I am  the  coroner’s  ofiicer  in 
this  case.  Mr.  Braxton  Hicks  was  the  coroner  who  held  the  in- 
quest on  4th  January.  In  consequence  of  what  he  told  me  I 
went  to  86  Claverton  Street  about  half-past  nine  at  night.  I 
went  into  the  front  room,  and  I there  found  four  glass  vessels, 
jars,  or  bottles,  which  were  covered  over  with  brown  paper,  and 
had  string  tied  round  them,  and  were  sealed  with  the  initials 
of  Dr.  Dudley — J.  G.  D.  At  the  same  time  I took  possession 
of  thirty-six  medicine  bottles.  Some  of  them  were  in  the  front 
room;  they  were  not  corked.  1 corked  them  and  sealed  them 
up.  I placed  the  jars  and  the  medicine  bottles  in  two  separate 
hampers  and  took  them  to  the  mortuary  at  20  Millbank  Street, 
and  placed  them  in  a large  safe,  under  cover,  in  the  back  yard. 
There  was  no  lock  to  the  place,  but  I put  a piece  of  tape  across 
it  and  sealed  it  up.  On  9th  January  I went  there  and  found  the 
tape  in  the  same  condition.  I had  been  to  Claverton  Street  on 
the  9th.  Mr.  Doggett,  junior,  gave  me  a tumbler,  which  appeared 
to  contain  Condy’s  fluid.  There  was  a small  glass  bottle  in- 
verted in  the  tumbler,  which  was  open,  without  any  cork  in  it. 
As  I was  moving  it  into  the  glass  jar  that  I had  taken  with  me 
it  broke,  so  that  the  whole  of  the  broken  tumbler  and  its  con- 
tents went  into  the  glass  jar.  I fastened  it  up,  sealed  it  with 
Mr.  Doggett’s  seal,  and  took  it  to  the  mortuary,  and  put  it  with 
the  other  things.  The  little  bottle  that  was  inverted  remained  in 
the  glass  jar  along  with  the  contents  of  the  tumbler  and  the  broken 
pieces.  I fastened  up  the  mortuary  again.  On  the  11th  I took 
all  the  things  to  Dr.  Stevenson  at  Guy’s  Hospital,  and  he  gave 
me  a receipt  for  them.  After  giving  tiiese  things  to  Dr.  Steven- 
son I went  to  Claverton  Street  again,  and  met  Inspector  Marshall 
there  by  appointment.  Mr.  Wood,  the  solicitor,  was  there,  but 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 


Tom  Ralph 

not  Mrs.  Bartlett.  I examined  seven  boxes  on  the  floor  in  the 
front  room,  and  in  one  of  the  boxes  1 found  two  glass  bottles. 
One  of  these  was  like  a scent  bottle,  with  a silver  top  on  it,  and 
there  seemed  to  be  some  white  powder  in  it.  The  other  bottle 
was  similar.  I also  found  in  another  box  a small  wooden  box 
containing  white  powder.  I sealed  those  three  things  iip  and 
handed  them  to  Dr.  Stevenson  on  the  IBth.  I found  a tin  box 
in  the  front  room  containing  a man's  suit  of  light  clothing,  which 
I examined.  In  the  right-hand  trousers  pocket  I found  four  or 
flve  of  what  are  popularly  called  French  letters.  1 did  not  take 
possession  of  them.  1 left  the  clothes  with  the  things  in  the 
pocket  in  the  box.  I also  found  in  one  of  the  boxes  the  letter 
that  has  been  produced  here  addressed,  ''  Dear  Edwin,"  and 
signed  George."  I suppose  it  was  in  Mrs.  Bartlett's  box — 
they  were  all  there  together.  The  other  boxes  contained  some 
gentlemen's  clothes  and  some  ladies’  clothes.  1 saw  on  a table  in 
the  front  room  the  book  Squire's  " Companion  " in  the  same 
state  as  it  is  now  in,  Companion  to  the  British  Pharmacopoeia," 
comparing  the  strength  of  various  preparations,  and  so  on.  I 
did  not  go  with  Marshall  to  Wandsworth  Common. 

Dr.  Dudley,  recalled  and  further  examined  by  the  Attob- 
key-Genbbal — The  contents  of  the  stomach  were  put  into  an  open 
unstoppered  bottle,  which  we  could  find  no  cork  to,  and  they 
remained  in  that  bottle  for  about  half  an  hour,  when  we  got 
another  bottle  from  a chemist’s,  which  had  a glass  stopper.  We 
transferred  the  contents  from  the  unstoppered  open  bottle  into  the 
other  one.  Chloroform  is  very  volatile. 

Dr.  Thomas  Stevenson,  examined  by  the  Attobnet-Genbbal 
— am  a doctor  of  medicine  in  practice  as  a consulting  physician 
and  am  Professor  of  Medical  Jurisprudence  at  Guy’s  Hospital.  1 
am  one  of  the  analysts  usually  employed  by  the  Home  Office.  1 
have  written  on  the  subject  of  medical  jurisprudence.  I re- 
collect receiving  from  the  last  witness,  Ralph,  a number  of  bottles 
and  pads:ages.  I think  he  has  described  them  by  enumeration 
with  substantial  correctness.  There  were  eight  packages  on  11th 
J anuary,  and  on  the  16th  there  was  one  sealed  package  containing 
three  enclosures.  No.  1,  on  the  11th,  was  a paper  package  con- 
taining the  lower  jaw  of  an  adult,  with  the  tongue  and  the  soft 
parts  adjacent  to  the  tongue  and  jaw.  No.  2 was  a glass  jar 
containing  a thick  semi-fluid  mass  measuring  a quarter  of  a 
pint,  apparently  the  contents  of  the  small  bowel.  No.  3 was  a 
jar  containing  a human  stomach,  that  of  an  adult.  No.  4 was  a 
bottle  containing  mango-chutney.  No.  6 was  a i-o-unce  glass- 
stoppered^  bottle  containing  half  an  ounce  or  a 'tablespoonful  of 
thick  fluid,  apparently  the  contents  of  a stomach.  The  im- 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


portant  ones  are  No.  2,  the  contents  of  the  smaller  bowel ; No. 
3,  the  stomach ; and  No.  5,  the  bottle  containing  the  tablespoonful 
of  semi-fluid  matter.  No.  6 was  the  glass  jar,  sealed,  containing 
some  Gondy’s  fluid,  a broken  tumbler,  and  1^-ounce  medicine 
bottle;  No.  7 was  a brandy  bottle,  sealed,  containing  some  fluid. 
No.  8 was  SL  hamper,  sealed,  containing  altogether  some  thirty- 
six  bottles  of  various  kinds  used  for  medicinal  purposes.  On  the 
16th  I received  one  package  containing  a small  toilet  powder  box, 
with  toilet  powder,  and  a pepper  castor,  which  are  not  material  to 
go  into.  No  3 contained  some  santonins,  a medicine  given  for 
worms. 

I commenced  my  analysis  on  12th  January.  I began  by  open- 
ing the  stoppered  bottle  No.  B,  which  contained  a tablespoonful  of 
thick  semi-fluid  matter  from  the  stomach — could  see  it  was  most 
likely  to  be  that  before  I opened  it.  The  characteristic  smell  of 
the  contents  was  that  of  chloroform.  I described  it  as  strong, 
very  strong.  There  was  also  a slight  garlicky  odour,  of  which  I 
discovered  the  cause,  namely,  the  mango  relish.  Although  I 
opened  it  with  a view  to  beginning  my  analysis,  I did  not  in  fact 
begin  my  analysis  until  the  13th.  I smelt  it,  and  then  stopped. 
It  was  slightly  acid.  I afterwards  proceeded  to  test  its  component 
parts  by  analysis,  and  I found  the  presence  of  chloroform,  of  which 
I estimated^  the  quantity  to  be  llj  grains.  I produce  here  the 
same  quantity,  which  I have  weighed  and  placed  in  a tube.  Eleven 
and  a quarter  grains  are  equivalent  to  between  8 and  9 minims. 
Approximately  that  represented  about  5 per  cent,  of  the  entire 
quantity  that  I analysed.  Besides  the  chloroform  there  was  a 
trace,  a very  small  trace,  of  alcohol.  I tested  it  for  possible 
traces  of  any  other  poison  besides  chloroform — prussic  acid, 
morphia;  I found  no  other  trace  of  any  alkaloid.  The  fluid  did 
not  contain  any  chloral. 

Chloral,  I believe,  decomposes  in  the  stomach,  does  it  not? — 
If  the  contents  be  made  alkaline  by  the  use  of  carbonate  of  soda  it 
will  become  chloroform  in  the  stomach. 

Did  you  find  there  chloral,  or,  if  it  had  decomposed,  any  other 
substance? — ^Nothing  except  chloroform.  If  it  had  been  decom- 
posed by  the  alkali,  it  would  form  acid,  of  which  I found  none. 

Was  there  any  trace  of  chlorodyne? — ^No,  chlorodyne  being 
composed  of  chloroform  and  other  ingredients.  I satisfied  myself 
that  the  other  matter  was  chloroform.  My  analysis  extended  over 
several  days. 

No.  2,  the  contents  of  the  smaller  bowel,  was  the  next  thing 
in  order  that  I took.  It  was  a fluid  mass  in  a bottle,  about  a 
quarter  of  a pint.  ^ It  was  only  loosely  stoppered — a glass  bottle, 
^e  stopper  of  which  had  been  tied  by  means  of  brown  paper. 
Cmoroform  is  a very  volatile  substance,  and,  if  it  were  in  a vessd 
which  was,  not  hermetically  sealed,  it  would  gradually  evaporate. 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 


The  result  of  my  examination  as  to  the  contents  of  No.  2 was  that 
there  were  traces  of  chloroform,  to  the  extents  of  about  3/lOths  of 
a grain.  I also  tested  the  chutney  and  part  of  the  contents  of  the 
intestines,  and  1 found  them  to  be  free  from  any  poisonous  matter. 

Were  you  able  to  perceive  any  special  smell  from  that  or  not? 
— ^No  special  smell  of  ^loroform.  The  stomach  had  already  been 
cut  open.  It  was  in  a good  state  of  preservation.  It  was 
inflamed.  The  cardiac  or  first  end  of  the  stomach  next  the  gullet, 
the  centre  of  that  patch  of  inflammation,  showed  over  an  area  of 
about  an  inch  and  a half  in  diameter — ^that  would  be  about  the 
size  of  a crown  or  half-crown  piece — a more  intense  efiect  of  in- 
flammation; that  is  to  say,  the  epitheliae  or  lining  membrane  was 
detached  and  softened,  giving  a certain  amount  of  roughness  to 
the  inner  surface  of  the  stomach  towards  the  cardiac  end*.  1 will 
describe  it  more  particularly  presently.  That  appearance  of  in- 
flammation extended  to  the  gullet;  round  this  patch  of  which  1 
have  spoken  the  redness  of  inflammation  extended  to  a patch  almost 
as  large  as  my  two  hands,  and  extended  into  the  gullet.  That 
spot  indicated  where  the  greatest  amount  of  inflammation  was  to 
be  seen;  it  extended  3 inches  up  the  gullet.  1 would  describe 
that  inflammation  as  acute  and  recent,  referring  to  the  time  at 
which  it  had  commenced.  1 should  say  that  it  had  commenced 
and  run  its  course  within  a few  hours  of  death.  I should  like  to 
say,  with  regard  to  the  patch  in  the  stomach,  that  it  has  been  fairly 
and  accurately  described.  It  was  about  the  part  to  which  liquid 
would  flow  when  a person  was  lying  on  his  back.  It  was  the  usual 
spot  at  which  we  find  it  after  swallowing  irritant  poison. 

Was  or  was  not  that  a state  of  things  which  might  have  been 
occasioned  by  swallowing  chloroform? — It  might  have  been  produced 
by  swallowing  chloroform.  I found  no  other  cause  for  it.  So 
far  as  1 could  ascertain,  the  presence  of  chloroform  was  an  ade- 
quate cause,  and  there  was  no  other  cause  ascertained  or  ascertain- 
able. I tested  the  contents  of  the  stomach  for  traces  of  every 
poison  that  could  suggest  itself  to  me,  and  I found  none.  I 
found  a trace  of  copper  in  the  gums,  in  No.  1.  It  is  usual  to 
find  traces  of  copper  in  a healthy  subject.  From  one-half  of  the 
gum  and  the  whole  of  the  soft  pa^ts,  approximately,  the  amount  of 
copper  and  lead  altogether  was  not  more  than  l/80th  of  a grain. 
I do  not  think  that  is  a matter  at  all  of  any  consequence  worth 
dwelling  upon.  The  presence  of  lead  and  copper  is  to  be  accounted 
for  by  a vast  number  of  vegetables,  bread,  the  use  of  copper 
utensils,  &c.  Lead  is  less  commonly  found ; it  comes  from  leadened 
pipes  containing  drinking  water  and  things  of  that  kind.  The 
traces  were  quite  minute,  and  they  would  not  account  for  the  death 
of  a person.  No.  6 was  a glass  jar,  which  had  ‘Some  decomposed 
Condy’s  fluid,  but  1 found  nothing  in  that.  In  the  tumbler  in 
No.  7 I found  a little  sulphate  of  magnesia  or  Epsom  salts.  The 

261 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Dr.  Slerenioii 

hamper  contained  thirty-six  bottles.  There  were  poisons,  but 
medicinal  doses  only,  not  poisonous  doses. 

Tou  have  already  said  that  chloroform  is  very  volatile.  Is 
it  cumulative? — No.  An  ordinary  dose  of  chloroform  taken  will 
disappear  from  the  system  very  quickly.  The  efiect  I arrived  at 
from  the  analysis  was  the  presence  of  chloroform  in  the  contents 
of  the  stomach.  I made  no  analysis  of  the  blood  of  the  deceased 
man,  nor  did  1 analyse  the  stomach  itself  for  chloroform.  From 
my  analysis  I would  judge  that  the  man  must  have  swallowed  a 
large  dose  of  chloroform,  enough  to  produce  a very  serious  inflam- 
mation of  the  stomach,  and  such  a quantity  would,  1 believe,  be 
sufficient  to  cause  death.  1 did  not  find  anything  to  suggest  any 
other  cause  than  chloroform.  When  chloroform  is  swallowed — I 
have  experimented  on  animals — ^at  first  it  sometimes  produces  a 
state  of  intoxication,  but  not  always.  It  then  produces  insensi- 
bility, stertorous  breathing,  or  hard  snoring,  with  muscular  relaxa- 
tion, paralysis,  and  death.  It  suspends  the  operation  of  the  heart 
— ^paralyses  the  heart.  It  passes  into  the  blood,  and,  of  course, 
from  thence  into  every  region  of  the  system,  and  it  produces  a 
liquid  condition  of  the  blood  after  death,  which  remains  fluid  for 
a long  time.  If  the  contents  of  the  stomach  were  put  into  an  open 
jar,  and  remained  some  time  before  being  put  into  a stoppered 
bottle,  some  of  the  chloroform  would  evaporate  and  some  would 
remain,  some  might  settle  down  at  the  bottom  and  be  unobserved. 
I tested  that  on  these  very  contents  of  the  stomach;  1 found  they 
lost  their  smell  in  the  course  of  an  hour  very  gradually  by  exposure. 
1 know  that  in  this  case  the  deceased  died  on  1st  January,  and  the 
post-mortem  was  at  two  o^clock  in  the  afternoon  of  the  2nd.  My 
analysis  began  on  the  13th.  I would  not  expect  there  to  be  an 
evaporation  of  chloroform  from  the  bottle  in  the  interval,  but  there 
was  a disappearance  of  the  chloroform  from  the  stomach  while  the 
body  was  lying  before  the  post-mortem,  by  a process  which  we  call 
difiusion.  * 

According  to  your  experience,  have  you  any  reason  to  suppose 
there  would  be  indications  of  chloroform  having  been  taken  in  the 
brain? — ^When  swallowed  I do  not  think  there  would  be— there 
might  or  might  not.  I have  frequently  examined  tedies  where 
there  has  been  no  obvious  smell  of  dxloroform  in  the  brain  and  no 
unusual  appearances  in  the  heart— in  fact,  nothing  to  indicate 
that  death  had  occurred  from  inhalation  of  chloroform.  I would 
not  necessarily  expect  to  find  it  in  the  brain.  My  observation  is 
that  oftener  than  not  you  find  nothing  in  the  brain  to  indicate  the 
cause  of  death— I mean  short  of  analysis  of  the  brain.  I have 
analysed*  ^d  have  found  traces  in  cases  of  inhalation. 

Does  it  pass  more  rapidly  into  the  blood  by  inhalation  than 
by  swallowing? — It  would  be  difficult  to  axiswer  that  question. 

232 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 


Inhalation  is  the  most  rapid  means  of  introducing  gaseous  poisons 
into  the  blood,  but  it  would  get  there  by  either  means. 

If  swallowed,  I understand  you  to  say  that  you  would  not 
expect  to  find  it  in  the  brain  should  expect  to  find  it  by 
analysis,  but  no  obvious  odour ; there  might  or  might  not  be. 

If  a person  accidentally  takes  a dose  of  chloroform  su£S.cient 
to  cause  death,  the  person  being  at  the  time  in  the  possession  of 
sensibility  and  faculties,  should  you,  or  should  you  not,  expect 
that  person  to  make  any  sign?  Might  he,  or  might  he  not,  be 
conscious  that  he  had  done  something  that  he  was  sufiering  from? — 
Yes,  he  would  at  once  perceive  the  peculiar  character  of  the  liquid 
he  had  swallowed  It  would  produce  pain  and  a hot,  fiery  taste. 

1 mean,  could  he  take  an  excessive  dose,  a fatal  dose,  of  chloro- 
form and  suppose  he  was  taking  some  innocent  thing? — ^No,  I do 
not  think  he  could.  It  has  not  the  taste  of  any  article  of  food  or 
drink.  I have  swallowed  it  myself,  I have  had  it  in  my  mouth 
several  times,  and  1 have  found  that  it  is  very  hot  and  very  sweet 
and  burning. 

Now,  there  is  another  matter,  please.  Is  it  or  is  it  not, 
according  to  your  experience,  possible  to  put  a liquid  down  the 
throat  of  a person  who  is  insensible,  in  the  sense  of  being  un- 
conscious, but  still  having  the  sense  of  feeling? — ^Yes,  you  can  put 
liquids  down  the  throat  of  a person  who  is  fairly  moderately  under 
the  influence  of  inhaled  chloroform. 

Assuming  that  the  liquid  is  in  some  such  bottle  as  I showed 
you,  would  there  be  any  diflBloulty  in  putting  it  down  the  throat  of 
a person  in  the  condition  of  insensibility? — ^Not  any  great  diffi- 
culty. 1 have  myself  put  liquid  down  the  throat  of  a person 
while  I have  been  chloroforming  him  by  passing  it  with  a teaspoon 
to  the  back  of  the  throat. 

Would  there  be  any  difficulty  ? — ^No,  not  if  the  man  were  lying 
on  his  back  with  his  mouth  open.  It  could  easily  be  poured  down 
his  throat.  « 

Assuming  it  could  be  put  to  the  back  of  the  mouth,  would  its 
presence  not  occasion  the  act  of  swallowing  ? — ^Yes,  up  to  a certain 
point  of  sensibility. 

What  is  the  point  of  insensibility  to  which  the  sense  of  swal- 
lowing would  not  respond  to  the  presence  of  liquid  in  the  gullet?*— 
At  the  point  from  what  we  understand  by  reflexes  had  disappeared 
there  would  not  be  swallowing.  That  simply  means  that  such  a 
stimulant  as  chloroform  at  the  back  part  would  not  excite  muscular 
action,  because  the  nervous  centres,  which  are  concerned  in  swal- 
lowing, would  be  paralysed  beyond  a certain  point.  In  other 
words,  the  swallowing  might  be  eSected  up  to  that  point,  which 
I have  described,  of  paralysis.  When  I trie<^  the  eflect  of  the 
introduction  of  chloroform  into  the  mouth  I found  a hot,  burning, 
sweet  sensation,  which  passed  away  after  1 ejected  it.  It  left  a 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Dfn  Stavenioii 

little  tLumbixess  on  the  tongue,  but  not  to  prevent  me  going  about 
my  usual  avocations.  It  also  left  a blotch — a little  redness — ^which 
passed  ofi  quickly.  Since  the  hearing  before  the  magistrate  I have 
made  some  experiments  as  to  the  efiect  of  chloroform  upon  animals. 

Mr.  Claake — We  ought  to  have  had  a note  of  these  experiments 
upon  the  animals  if  they  are  to  be  given  in  evidence. 

Mr.  Justice  Wills — ^Yes;  I think,  if  they  have  not  been  sup- 
plied, they  should  hardly  be  gone  into. 

Examination  contimied — 1 repeated  an  experiment  which  I 
made  before.  The  animal  I selected  was  a rabbit.  There  were 
two  experiments. 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills — Confine  yourself  to  the  one  upon 
which  you  have  spoken  before? — ^That  was  the  one.  I must  just 
reflect  what  1 did  say  before  the  magistrate.  What  the  point  was 
— it  was  in  cross-examination^ — it  was  a question  as  to  whether 
chloroform  passed  into  the  blood  from  the  stomach  j and  I took  a 
rabbit,  and  by  means  of  a tube  I introduced  a quarter  of  a fluid 
ounce  or  two  large  spoonfuls  of  chloroform  into  the  stomach.  I 
observed  the  symptoms.  And  then,  at  the  end  of  three  hours — ^the 
animal  had  been  upwards  of  two  hours  in  a dying  state — it  was 
nearly  dead,  but  the  blood  was  still  circulating.  I then  cut 
the  throat  of  the  rabbit,  and  collected  the  blood  which  flowed. 
I analysed  the  blood  to  see  whether  it  contained  chloroform,  and 
I found  that  it  did. 

Any  appreciable  quantities  or  only  a trace? — Traces.  You 
never  got  more  than  traces  in  the  blood,  but  it  was  quite  obvious. 
I also  extracted  the  stomach  of  the  animal,  and  observed  the  effects 
of  the  chloroform  upon  the  stomach.  The  effects  upon  the  stomach 
were  acute  inflammation,  and  the  mucous  membrane  was  softened 
and  partly  removed,  so  as  to  give  it  a roughened  appearance — 
blood  diffused  into  the  coats  of  the  stomach.  There  was  chloro- 
form obviously  present  in  the  stomach  also. 

Examination  contin/iMd — ^When  you  were  mentioning  the  effects 
of  the  taking  of  chloroform — tEe  first  sensation  of  intoxication — 
was  that  the  result  of  your  own  experiment  and  observation? — 
This  animal  rolled  about  as  if  intoxicated.  I have  seen  persons 
under  the  influence  of  chloroform  inhaled,  and  I have  seen  one 
under  the  influence  of  chloroform  swallowed.  It  produced  vomit- 
ing and  pain,  and  the  patient  was  very  much  alarmed-  It  is 
many  years  ago,  and  I do  not  remember  that  it  produced  absolute 
insensibility.  It  was  not  a fatal  dose.  Vomiting  is  a very  fre- 
quent accompaniment  of  chloroform  swallowed,  but  not  always. 
I have  seen  a great  number  of  persons  under  the  influence  of 
^loroform  by  inhalation.  It  is  possible  to  produce  a state  of 
insensibility  by  inhalation  during  sleep.  I have  not  done  that 
myself,  but  I know  many  instances  in  which  it  has  been  done,  and 
I have  no  doubt  whatever  that  it  can  be  done  if  the  person  is 
264 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 


Dr.  Sterenaoii 

soundly  asleep.  Most  of  the  appearances  of  the  stomach  to  which 
I have  spoken,  and  which  I attribute  to  the  presence  and  action  of 
chloroform,  must  have  been  produced  before  death.  The  action  is 
a vital  action.  They  might  be  produced  in  an  hour  before  death, 
or  it  might  be  longer.  I showed  the  bottle  containing  the  con- 
tents of  the  stomach  and  a small  quantity  that  remained  to  Dr. 
Tidy.  I showed  the  stomach  to  Dr.  Murray.  Assuming  that,  in 
the  attempt  to  put  chloroform  down  the  throat  of  a person  in  a 
state  of  insensibility  or  partial  torpor,  any  of  it  fell  on  the 
chin  or  breast  or  throat,  I would  not  usually  expect  any  indications 
of  it ; there  might  be,  but  it  would  be  unusual  for  the  momentary 
contact  to  produce  any  lasting  efieot.  There  might  be  a tem- 
porary redness,  which  would  pass  away,  as  the  case  which  I was 
illustrating  by  myself. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  Clsbke — I believe  you  have  for  many 
years  given  your  attention  to  subjects  of  this  class? — I have. 

And  you  have  had  a long  experience  of  the  administration 
of  chloroform  at  Guy’s  Hospital? — have. 

And  you  have  not  only  had  personal  experience,  but  you 
have  given  study  to  the  results  of  the  experience  of  other  doc- 
tors ? — ^Yes. 

And  you  have  edited  **  The  Principles  and  Practice  of  Medical 
Jurisprudence,  by  Dr.  Alfred  Swaine  Taylor,”  who  is  well  known 
as  one  of  the  greatest  authorities  in  that  branch  of  medical  science  1 
— ^Tes. 

You  edited  and  reproduced  and  corrected  the  book  he  had 
written,  and  called  it  the  leading  work  upon  the  subject? — be- 
lieve so;  you  are  quoting  from  the  book. 

So  far  as  your  skill  and  experience  have  enabled  you,  have 
you  taken  care  that  it  is  complete  in  the  subject  upon  which  it 
deals? — ^Yes;  it  is  fairly  complete,  I think. 

The  last  edition  under  your  editorship  having  appeared  as 
lately  as  1883? — ^Yes. 

Now,  chloroform  has  been  used  in  this  country  as  an  anses- 
thetio  for  almost  forty  years,  I believe? — ^Possibly. 

It  was  early  in  1847  that  Dr.  Morton  used  it? — ^Yes,  ’47. 

And,  from  the  very  first,  I think,  the  characteristics  of  chloro- 
form have  been  the  subject  of  great  interest  to  the  medical  pro- 
fession?— They  have. 

And  by  many  writers,  yourself  among  them,  the  result  of  the 
administration  of  chloroform,  whether  by  inhalation  or  in  liquid, 
and  whether  accidentally  taken  or  intentionally,  have  been  care- 
fully studied  and  carefully  recorded,  have  they  not? — ^Yes,  as  to 
inhalation.  I do  not  think  attention  has  been  drawn  to  it  much 
till  last  July  as  to  swallowing  it. 

Chloroform  is  a most  important  agent  of  medical  science,  is 
it  not  Yes. 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


And  there  is  a great  deal  of  literature  as  to  chloroform  and 
its  application? — ^Tes;  chiefly  by  inhalation. 

(Jan  you  refer  me  to  any  recorded  case,  anywhere,  of  murder 
by  the  administration  of  liquid  chloroform? — ^No. 

So  far  as  you  can  judge,  there  has  never  been  such  a case? — 
I know  of  none. 

Now,  of  course,  you  are  familiar  with  the  fact  that  there 
have  been  many  murders  by  poisons  well  known  to  medical  science 
— ^prussic  acid  and  strychnine,  and  poisons  of  that  class? — ^Yes. 

Has  the  use  of  chloroform  been  somewhat  given  up  of  late 
years,  ether  being  substituted  for  it  ? — ^Yes. 

1 think  there  are  several  reasons  for  that.  1 will  suggest 
one  or  two,  and  will  ask  you  as  a medical  authority;  chloroform 
is  an  anaesthetic  of  uncertain  effect? — 1 should  not  say  very  un- 
certain. 

I did  not  say  — ^It  will  produce  insensibility,  but 

the  time  and  amount  vary  a good  deal — ^the  time  of  insensibility 
and  the  amount. 

The  time,  the  amount  required,  and  the  symptoms  involved  ? — 
Well,  the  permanent  symptoms  are  the  same. 

When  you  say  uncertain  with  regard  to  amount  and  time, 
of  course,  they  have  some  relation  to  each  others — ^Yes. 

But  in  the  case  of  chloroform,  do  you  sometimes  find  that  a 
very  small  dose  inhaled  proves  suddenly  fatal? — ^Yes. 

While  a very  large  dose  taken  into  the  stomach  does  not 
produce  death? — ^Yes. 

In  the  last  edition  of  your  book  you  have  given  a number 
of  instances,  and  you  have  given  them  substantially  on  the 
authority  of  Dr.  Taylor? — ^You  are  referring  to  the  book  there? 

Yes? — I think  it  was  taken  almost  entirely  from  previous 
editions. 

Textually? — ^Yes;  I do  not  think  I added  any  fresh  oases. 

Though  ;t  was  published  in  1883,  is  it  the  fact  that  no  case 
is  quoted  since  1870? — understand  not.  I think  there  has  only 
been  one  fatal  case  of  swallowing  chloroform  in  this  country  within 
the  last  twenty  years — mean  recorded.  I know  of  another  case 
which  occurred. 

W^  that  at  Lewes,  or  was  it  the  Chichester  case? — No.  It 
was  a case  which  happened  to  some  one  in  this  Court — mean  a 
fatal  case  which  happened  in  the  practice  of  a gentleman  in  this 
Court. 

That,  of  course,  was  a case  of  accident? — ^A  case  of  accident; 
yes. 

Have  there  not  been  deaths  in  this  country  from  the  swallow- 
ing of  chloroform  by  accident,  besides  that  within  the  last  twenty 
years? — One  I know  of,  and  the  one  I have  spoken  of,  but  I 
cannot  call  to  mind  now  any  others.  There  is  a paper  on  that 
table  containing  a record  of  known  fatal  cases. 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 


Dr*  Stevfloion 

Probably  it  is  a proof-sheet  of  your  new  edition? — ^No;  my 
new  edition  is  on  the  table  j but  there  is  a copy  of  a journal  of 
repute,  giving  them  in  chronological  order  up  to  last  July.  The 
table,  you  will  find,  is  in  chronological  order. 

Mr,  Justice  Wills — Give  me  the  name  of  the  paper,  Mr. 
Clarke. 

Mr.  Clarke — ^It  is  the  Medical  Record  of  11th  July.  It  is  an 
American  paper — 11th  July,  1885. 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills — That  contains  a table,  you  say,  of  all 
the  known  cases  of  death  by  swallowing  chloroform? — ^All  the 
known  cases  up  to  1885.  I have  added  a list  of  some  half-dozen 
more  since,  my  lord. 

CrosB-emmmation  continued — Have  you  at  all — am  much 
obliged  for  this — ^have  you  at  all,  yourself,  arranged  those  in  any 
class?  Can  you  tell  me,  out  of  ihe  fifty-six,  for  instance,  how 
many  died? — I can  give  you  the  cases  of  death. 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills — ^Those  are  poisonings,  but  not  neces- 
sarily fatal  ? — ^No,  not  necessarily  fatal.  I can  give  you  the  num- 
ber of  fatal  cases  1 know  of.  I have  added  a few  to  the  list,  but 
I can  give  you  the  number  in  the  list.  I think  you  will  see,  at 
the  end,  it  says  how  many  were  fatal. 

Cross-examination  continued — ^No,  it  does  not  say? — I think, 
out  of  that  list,  you  will  find  something  like  seventeen. 

Out  of  fifty-six? — ^Yes;  about  30  per  cent,  of  all  the  cases 
known  to  me  were  fatal — 31  per  cent.,  twenty  oases  out  of  sixty- 
five. 

And  this  purports  to  be,  and  so  far  as  you  know  is,  a dili- 
gent collection  of  the  cases  occurring  in  different  countries  re- 
ported in  books? — Tes;  I have  verified  some  of  them,  and  found 
them  very  fairly  accurate — ^very  fairly  stated. 

Without  wishing  to  occupy  too  much  time,  and  having  this 
in  my  hand  for  the  first  time,  I will  go  through  the  oases  iii  which 
death  has  occurred,  and  take  the  number  of  hours  after  the  ad- 
ministration in  which  death  ocourfed.  Case  3 : “ Two  mouthfuls; 
death  in  thirty-six  hours.’’  Case  4 : "‘A  male  child,  aged  four, 
took  from  1 to  2 drachms — died  in  three  hours.”  Case  7 : “ Six 
ounces;  died  in  forty-eight  hours.”  Case  10 : “An  ounce  and  a 
half;  twenty  hours.”  &se  13:  “A  wineglassful” — ^that  would 
be  about  2 ounces? — ^About  2^  ounces,  probably. 

“ Died  on  eighth  day  ” ? — Yes. 

Case  15 : and  the  reference  to  that  is — ^A  man  of  twenty-eight 
“ had  attempted  to  disembowel  himself;  had  shot  himself  in  each 
side  of  the  chest,”  and  so  on.  It  is  no  use  referring  to  that? — ^No. 

Case  16:  “ An  ounce  and  a half;  twenty-three  hours  and  a 
half  ”? — think  that  is  twenty-six.  You  see  a reference. 

You  have  corrected  it  to  twenty-six? — Yes;'  I have  a note  of 
it  as  twenty-aix. 

Case  23:  “One  ounce;  twelve  hours — Yes. 


267 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Dr.  Stevwiaon 

There  is  a note  to  that.  This  was  a case  of  supposed  chloro- 
form  poisoning];  the  amount  taken  was  approximated.  The 
coroner’s  jury  were  unable  to  come  to  a decision  as  to  the  immediate 
cause  of  deai±.”  Case  24 : Five  to  9 drachms;  death  on  eighth 
day  — Tes. 

Case  26  : **  Two  ounces.”  I will  read  that.  Seen  in  one 
hour;  a few  minutes  before  his  death.  In  three  minutes  (esti- 
mated time)  he  could  with  difficulty  be  aroused  from  the  stupor 
into  which  he  was  sinking ; could  not  speak,  but  indicated  that  he 
had  severe  pain  in  the  stomach.  In  five  minutes  he  was  entirely 
unconscious,  lying  still,  breathing  stertoroui^y.  Medical  assist- 
ance arrived  too  late  to  be  of  service.  Post-mortem  examination 
showed  congestion  of  lungs,  oesophagus,  and  stomach.  Mucous 
membrane  could  be  pulled  o£E  with  the  finger  nail.”  Case  27 : 

Two  ounces;  nineteen  hours  ”} — Tes. 

Case  28  : Ninety  grammes  ” — ^what  would  be  90  grammes? — 
I think  you  will  find  in  my  note — ^I  say  what  it  is  about. 

Rather  over  2 fluid  ounces? — Tes. 

Twenty-nine  hours  and  a half  ”1 — Tes. 

Case  29  : “ One  ounce;  sixty  hours.”  Case  43  : “ An  ounce 
and  a half  ” — ^that  is  about  twenty-six  or  twenty-eight  hours? — 1 
have  made  a mistake  about  the  other.  In  case  16  death  took  place 
twenty-three  and  a half  hours  after  the  first  dose  was  taken.  In 
this  last  case  twenty-six  hours  and  a quarter  elapsed  before  death. 

This  is  twenty-six  and  a quarter? — ^Tes;  I was  confounding 
the  two. 

Case  48:  “ Fifty  to  60  grammes;  thirty-one  hours  ”? — ^Tes. 

By  Mr.  Justiob  Wills — That  is  a little  over  an  ounce  and  a 
quarter? — I have  got  it  about  an  ounce  and  three-quarters;  60  to 
60  grammes  would  be  a little  under  2 ounces — about  a fluid  ounce 
and  a quarter  of  chloroform. 

Cross-exa?mnation  continued — Case  48 : ” Seen  in  about  four 
hours;  deep  intoxication;  artificial  respiration.”  I think  that 
pretty  well  indicates  that  there  is  very  great  uncertainty  as  to  what 
the  action  would  be  ? — ^When  swallowed. 

Mr.  Justice  Wills — May  I just  interpose  a question? 

Mr.  Clarke — I hope  so,  my  lord. 

Mr.  Justice  Wills — It  is  whether  these  are  cases  when  it  was 
discovered,  and  means  of  restoration  attempted. 

Mr.  Clarke — In  some  oases  it  does  appear  so. 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills — ^Because  that  would  make  a great 
difference  in  the  length  of  life,  would  it  not? — ^Tes;  many  of  these 
cases  were  treated  unsuccessfully. 

Was  the  eSect  of  the  treatment,  although  unsuccessful,  to  pro- 
long life? — ^Tes,  it  would  be  likely.  Some  of  the  cases  lived  a 
long  time,  and  died  from  acute  inflammation  of  the  stomach,  and 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 


Dr.  Stevenson 

not  by  the  direct  effect  of  chloroform — ^by  producing  paralysis  of 
the  heart. 

Mr.  Clarke — Your  lordship  will  not  find  any  rule,  for  this 
reason.  One  case  (7)  is  an  adult  male  who  took  6 ounces  in  the 
Royal  Infirmary  in  Edinburgh.  One  may  assume  that  he  was 
seen  immediately.  He  recovered  from  the  immediate  effects,  but 
died  in  forty-eight  hours  from  acute  gastritis.  I do  not  think 
you  can  get  any  rule  from  it.  Then  case  10,  seen  in  twenty 
minutes,  and  the  woman  died  in  twenty  hours. 

Mr.  Justice  Wills — That  is  a very  remarkable  case.  I mean 
remarkable  as  it  differs  from  any  others.  And  26,  what  was  that? 

Mr.  Clarke — “ Seen  in  one  hour;  a few  minutes  before  his 
death.  In  three  minutes  (estimated  time)  he  could  with  difficulty 
be  aroused  from  the  stupor  into  which  he  was  sinking;  could  not 
speak,  but  indicated  that  he  had  severe  pain  in  the  stomach.’’  1 
should  assume  in  three  minutes  after  taking  the  dose. 

Mr.  Justice  Wills — ^I  should  think  so.  If  the  people  around 
him  found  out  about  it,  they  could  not  perhaps  treat  him  at  once. 

Mr.  Clarke — ^Tes;  medical  assistance  arrived  too  late  to  be  of 
service. 

CroBB-txammatioTb  contvnAjHeA — ^Now,  you  have  only  had  ex- 
perience in  one  case  of  chloroform  swallowing? — Only  one. 

How  many  years  ago  was  that? — ^A  good  many. 

Do  you  mind  giving  a figure?  We  won’t  accuse  you  of  being 
too  old? — ^No;  I suppose  it  must  have  been  probably  twenty-five 
years  ago. 

Now,  you  say  the  post-mortem  symptoms  in  inhalation  and 
swallowing  would  be  of  the  same  character,  in  your  judgment? — 
In  inhalation  there  would  not  be  the  appearance  in  the  stomach. 

I ought  to  have  excepted  that,  because,  of  course,  swallowing 
brings  a local  irritant  to  act  on  the  stomach? — ^Yes,  and  you  don’t 
always  observe  the  known  great  fluidity  of  the  blood,  too,  after 
inhalation.  ^ 

And  the  condition  of  the  stomach? — ^The  condition  of  the 
stomach,  and  one  thing  follows  the  fluidity  of  the  blood — ^that  is, 
the  post-mortem  staining  of  the  lining  membrane  of  the  heart. 

Now,  with  r^ard  to  the  condition  of  the  internal  coats  of  the 
stomach,  that  would  depend  a good  deal  on  what  the  state  of  the 
man’s  health  was  a shoi^  time  previous  to  death? — I do  not  think 
the  condition  I saw  would  be  dependent  on  the  condition  previous 
to  death.  I mean  the  post-mortem  or  pathological  appearance. 

The  post-mortem  appearances  following  on  the  taking  of  liquid 
chloroform  by  a man  who  had  been  recently  suffering  from  acute  or 
sub-acute  gastritis  would  be  a little  stronger,  more  obvious  than  in 
a man  with  a perfectly  healthy  stomach? — ^I  do.  not  think  they 
would  if  he  had  recovered  from  his  sub-acute  gastritis,  as  it  is 
termed. 


Adelaide  Bartlett 


Dr.  St«v«iiraci 

Supposing  there  were  any  return  of  that,  surely  it  would  b€ 
afiected  by  the  rapidity  of  the  actual  irritant  % — If  there  were  actual 
gastritis  at  the  time  he  took  it,  it  would. 

Leaving  out  the  condition  of  the  stomach  and  blood,  may  1 
take  it  that,  in  your  judgment,  the  effect  produced  by  the  swallowed 
irritant  and  observable  in  post-mortem  examination  would  be  the 
same  as  that  produced  by  ii^alation? — ^Not  always.  The  appear- 
ances after  inhalation  are  very  variable. 

The  post-mortem  appearances  are  not  very  definite? — ^No; 
there  is  often  nothing,  unless  you  know  the  history  of  the  case,  to 
lead  you  to  suppose  that  death  occurred  from  chloroform. 

But  there  are  some  appearances,  are  there  not,  where  death 
has  followed  from  inhalation  of  chloroform? — Some  have  been 
frequently  observed;  yes. 

That  is  to  say,  so  frequently  observed  that  they  are  indicated 
and  would  be  looked  for? — ^Tes.  One  would  look,  of  course,  for 
any  ^indications  whatever. 

And  you  would  look  with  still  greater  care  for  those  that  had 
frequently  been  observed? — ^Tes. 

If  you  had  no  indications  at  all,  of  course,  you  are  helpless, 
but,  in  trying  to  find  indications,  you  look  for  those  that 
other  people  have  frequently  observed? — ^Yes. 

Now,  in  the  case  of  the  administration  of  chloroform  by  in- 
halation, death  takes  place  very  suddenly  sometimes,  does  it  not? 
— ^Yes. 

Not,  if  one  may  say  so,  from  the  chloroform  having  been 
inhaled  and  taken  into  the  system,  but  from  some  action  on  the 
heart  which  is  not  quite — I will  not  say  not  quite  understood,  but 
not — determined? — ^Yes.  A patient  would  die  in  a few  minutes 
after  a few  whiffs  occasionally. 

But  where  chloroform  has  been  inhaled  by  the  patient  just  a 
short  time, before  death,  you  would  expect,  would  you  not,  to  find 
a distinct  odour  in  the  ventricle^  of  the  brain? — ^Not  always;  it  has 
been  observed. 

Is  it  not  one  of  the  most  prominent  symptoms  recognised  ?~ 
Not  according  to  my  own  observations.  I am  speaking  from  my 
own  observation. 

I do  not  want  to  challenge  your  book  by  any  other;  but  you 
know  “ Guy  and  Ferrier  ”? — ^Yes. 

Is  that  a book  of  substantial  authority? — ^Yes. 

So  that,  where  it  did  not  actually  conflict  with  your  own 
observation,  you  would  attach  importance  to  a statement  there?—— 

I certainly  should  attach  importance  to  any  statement  made  in  such 
a book. 

^ank  you,  that  is  very  fair;  I am  at  page  660  of  Guy  and 
Ferrier, '’  6th  edition.  “ In  many  cases  the  appearances  are  those 
of  asphyxia.  The  odour  of  chloroform  is  perceptible  on  opening 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 


the  body.  It  is  especially  observable  in  the  cerebral  ventricles. 
The  heart  is  frequently  collapsed  and  flabby.  In  cases  of  sudden 
death  the  heart  may  be  found  in  a state  of  fatty  degeneration. 
Sometimes  bubbles  of  gas  are  observed  in  the  blood.  Their  eiact 
nature  is  not  determined.  The  post-mortem  appearances  are, 
therefore,  neither  very  definite  nor  characteristic  ”1 — ^Tes;  that  is 
speaking  of  asphyxia,  or  suffocation  from  the  inhalation  of  chloro- 
form. I have  not  the  book  before  me,  but  as  you  were  reading  it 
to  me 

I am  reading  the  whole  of  the  passage.  In  many  cases  the 
appearances  are  those  of  asphyxia.  The  odour  of  chloroform  is 
perceptible  on  opening  the  body.  It  is  especially  observable  in  the 
cerebral  ventricles  **  1 — ^Yes ; I suppose  it  is  a matter  of  grammatical 
construction,  but  I presume  it  means  in  cases  of  asph3rsia  from 
chloroform. 

I do  not  take  it  to  mean  that,  because  it  says,  In  many  cases 
the  appearances  are  those  of  asphyxia  ’’  ? — Yes,  it  ought  to  be  read 
all  together ; but  what  I mean  is,  asphyxia  generally  arises  from 
giving  too  much  chloroform — a large  quantity  given — and  there 
you  would  expect  to  find  the  smell  more  prominent  in  such  a case 
than  when  the  patient  died  from  small  quantities. 

I quite  agree  it  may  be  a question  of  quantity,  but  what  I am 
putting  to  you  is,  if  you  are  looking  for,  and  you  can  find,  any 
post-mortem  indications  of  chloroform  having  been  inhaled,  the 
odour  in  the  cerebral  ventricles  would  be  one  of  the  principal  ones? 
— Oh,  certainly  I should  look  for  it. 

You  would  agree  to  my  proposition,  it  would  be  one  you  would 
certainly  look  for? — ^Yes. 

Now,  there  ie  another  case  which  rests,  perhaps,  on  the  better 
authority— we  won’t  discuss  that,  it  rests  on  another  authority— 
that  is  the  question  of  the  engorgement  of  the  right  side  of  the 
heart.  Is  that  a post-mortem  appearance  which  you  would  expect 
to  find  after  the  patient  had  died  after  inhaling  chloroform  ?— If 
the  death  had  occurred  from  asphyxia. 

You  would  expect  to  find  it  in  smaller  degree  if  the  death  had 
occurred,  as  you  just  told  me  it  sometimes  does,  during  the  ad- 
ministration of  chloroform,  but  owing  to  some  sudden  failure  of 
the  heart? — ^No;  if  the  heart  was  paralysed  on  the  right  side,  it 
would  not  necessarily  be  engorged. 

But  if  the  inhalation  be  carried  to  the  point  of  asphyxia,  it 
leaves  that  result  in  the  heart.  Supposing  that  during  the  inhala- 
tion of  chloroform  the  patient  had  died  from  the  failure  of  the 
heart,  you  would  expect  to  find  some  trace  in  the  engorgement  of 
the  heart? — ^If  the  patient  was  in  a state  of  asphyxia,  and  died 
from  engorgement  of  the  heart— 

Yea?— Yes;  you  would  find,  probably,  the  right  side  of  the 
heart  engorged. 


271 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 

Dr.  Stevenson 

Suppose  the  patient  was  brought  to  the  verge  of  asphyxia — 
a state  of  insensibility  by  the  administration  of  chloroform — and 
then  death  suddenly  should  take  place,  or  almost  suddenly,  from 
whatever  cause,  you  would  expect  to  find  that  engorgement  of  the 
right  side  of  the  heart? — ^Yes;  in  all  asphyxiated  conditions  you 
would  expect  to  find  it. 

You  have  yourself  made  a study  of  the  engorgement  of  the 
right  side  of  the  heart? — ^No;  I do  not  know  that  I have  made  any 
special  study. 

Bid  you  not  yourself  examine  thirty-four  cases  ? — Oh,  I dare 

say. 

And  you  found  in  twenty-seven  cases  engorgement  of  the 
lungs  or  of  the  right  side  of  the  heart  ?^ — Probably  you  have  got 
something  I have  written. 

Yes;  I have.  You  know  Taylor’s  book  on  poisons?  It  is  a 
very  well-known  book? — ^Yes;  I had  nothing  to  do  with  writing 
that. 

No,  but  a book  you  are  familiar  with — oh,  you  are  referred 
to  with  regard  to  the  two  hundred  administrations  at  Guy’®.  It 
is  Dr.  Snow  who  is  mentioned  with  regard- to  the  thirty-four  cases? 
— Dr.  Snow  is  a great  authority  on  chloroform. 

Is  there  also  intense  inflammation  of  the  air  passages  where 
there  has  been  inhalation  of  chloroform? — There  may  be  occasion- 
ally, but  I have  not  myself  observed  that  condition.  I think  in- 
tense inflammation  of  the  air  passages  is  certainly  not  the  ordinary 
result  after  death  from  inhalation. 

Is  this  the  fact — again  I am  quoting  from  Guy  and  Ferrier,” 
6th  edition,  page  644 : The  poisons,  alcohol,  ether,  and  chloro- 
form, have  the  common  property  of  inducing  a state  of  narcotism 
often  preceded  by  delirious  excitement,  and  followed  by  indisposi- 
tion, of  which  nausea  and  vomiting  are  generally  the  leading 
symptoms.  In  large  doses,  and  in  the  concentrated  form,  they 
may  destroy  life  suddenly  by  shook;  but  they  generally  prove 
fatal  by  coma,  or  by  paralysfs  of  the  heart.  They  act  as  irri- 
tants to  the  parts  with  which  they  come  in  contact,  producing  in- 
tense inflammation  in  the  lining  membrane  of  the  stomach  when 
swallowed,  and  in  that  of  the  air  passages  when  inhaled.  But 
they  do  not  affect  the  whole  tract  of  the  intestinal  canal,  as  poisons 
of  the  irritant  class  do.  All  the  poisons  of  this  group  are  more  . 
or  less  volatile,  and  their  vapours,  when  inhaled,  act  more  power- 
fully than  like  quantities  of  the  liquids  themselves  when  swal- 
lowed ” ?^ — -I  do  not  agree  to  that. 

not  agree?— No,  if  that  were  the  case,  the  patient 
w'ould  generally  have  acute  bronchitis  after  it^^ 

I will  read  you  the  whole  passage  : The  poisons,  alcohol, 
ethers  and  ^ 0^^  the  common  property  of  inducing  a : 

state  narcotism,  often  preceded  by  delirious  excitement,  and  lol- 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 


Dr.  Storenion 

lowed  by  indisposition^  of  which  nausea  and  vomiting  are  gener- 
ally the  leading  symptoms.  In  large  doses,  and  in  the  concen- 
trated form,  they  may  destroy  life  suddenly  by  shock;  but  they 
generally  prove  fatal  hy  coma,  or  by  paralysis  of  the  heart.  They 
act  as  irritants  to  parts  with  which  -^ey  come  in  contact,  producing 
intense  inflammation  in  the  lining  membrane  of  the  stomach  when 
swallowed,  and  in  that  of  the  air  passages  when  inhaled.”  Do 
you  agree  with  that  ? — ^1  do  not,  as  regards  the  chloroform. 

You  did  admit  to  me,  just  now,  that  ” Guy  and  Ferrier  ” 
was  a book  of  substantial  authority? — ^Yes,  I admit  the  authority; 
I do  not  admit  the  statement. 

You  have  come  to  a different  judgment? — ^Yes. 

Now,  is  there  another  result  to  be  found  after  the  inhalation 
of  chloroform?  Does  it  affect  the  urine? — ^Yes. 

An  indication  would  be  found  there? — It  acts  on  what  is  termed 
copper  solution — it  reduces  copper.  A copper  solution  is  the  test 
we  apply. 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills — ^You  apply  a test? — ^By  boiling  it 
with  a certain  solution  of  copper,  and  it  turns  it  red. 

And  did  you  have  any  of  the  urine  sent  to  you  for  analysis? 
— No. 

Cross-emmination  continued — ^Now,  you  have  spoken  of  the 
possibility  of  administering  chloroform  to  persona  while  in  sleep? 
— ^Yes, 

Did  you  speak  of  adults? — ^Yes. 

As  a matter  of  your  own  practice? — ^No;  I said  I had  not  done 
it  myself. 

I am  much  obliged.  Well,  when  you  say  you  know  of  cases  in 
which  it  was  done,  are  you  speaking  of  recorded  cases? — ^Yes. 

Of  adults? — Yes. 

In  the  case  of  adults,  is  it  the  fact  that  the  attempt  to  ad- 
minister chloroform  by  inhalation,  during  sleep,  wakes  the  man? — 
Not  almost  invariably. 

Not  almost  invariably? — ^If  I might  refer  to  figures  and  the 
largest  number  of  experiments  made  by  one  individuS — Dolbeau — 
he  found  that  the  proportion  that  woke  up  either  when  heavily 
deeping  or  lightly  deeping  was  three  to  one,  three  awoke  to  one 
that  was  chloroformed.  1 think  Quimby  experimented  on  four, 
and  he  succeeded  in  chloroforming  them  all. 

Quimby  and  Elliott  ”? — “ Quimby  and  Elliott.” 

**  Quimby  ” was  the  American  we  have  just  read? — Yes. 

I have  not  got  Dolbeau’s  book,  but  1 have  a reference  to  Dol- 
beau, the  authority  on  that  matter? — ^And  Hussey.  He  was  coroner 
for  Oxford,  1 think.  He  did  it  thirty-six  years  ago. 

1 am  adding  for  recorded  matters,  of  course,  that  one  can 
look  at.  Do  you  know  Wynter  Blyth’s  book  on  poiesons? — Yes. 

I dare  say  1 may  look  at  that  reference  to  Dolbeau? — ^The  book 
is  there* 


T 


173 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Dr.  StavoiMii 

By  Mr.  Justioh  Wills — ^What  book  is  thatl — ^The  Annales 
d'Hygi&ne,”  a book  of  great  authority,  and  it  appears  that  Dol- 
beau^s  experiments  were  published  in  1874. 

Mr.  Claiuce — am  rather  reluctant  to  translate  it  lest  1 
should  appear  to  give  it  too  favourably  to  myself.  May  I translate 
it,  and  ask  you  to  check  me?  ‘‘  Scientifically  it  is  difficult,  but 
often  possible,  to  render  persons  who  are  in  natural  sleep  insensible 
fay  chloroform.  Certain  precautions,  the  employment  of  a pure 
spirit  and  great  skill,  are  among  the  conditions  which  may  favour 
the  attempt  to  ansesthetise.  It  is  probable  that  certain  subjects  are 
absolutely  refractory — that  is  to  say,  it  will  be  impossible  to 
anaesthetise  them  in  epite  of  all  the  precautions  that  may  be  taken. 
Other  persons,  on  the  contrary,  little  children  by  preference,  will 
easily  submit  to  anaesthesia  wi^out  being  aroused  from  their 
slumbers  by  the  irritation  that  the  anaesthetic  agent  produces  in 
the  air  passages.” 

(fo  Witness) — With  regard  to  Wynter  Blyth,  just  let  me  take 
this.  I find  a passage  on  page  136  : ” Dolbeau  has  made  some 
interesting  experiments  in  order  to  ascertain  whether  under  any 
circumstances  a sleeping  person  might  be  anaesthetised.  The  main 
result  appears  to  answer  the  question  in  the  affirmative,  at  least 
with  certain  persons;  but  even  with  these,  it  can  only  be  done  by 
using  the  greatest  skill  and  care,  first  allowing  the  sleeper  to 
breathe  very  dilute  chloroform-vapour,  and  then  gradually  ex- 
hibiting stronger  doses,  and  taking  the  cloth  or  inhaler  away 
on  the  slightest  symptom  of  approaching  wakefulness.  In  76  per 
cent,  of  the  cases,  however,  the  individuals  awoke  almost  immedi- 
ately on  being  exposed  to  the  vapour.  This  cautious  and  scientific 
narcosis,  then,  is  not  likely  to  be  used  by  the  criminal  classes,  or 
if  used,  to  be  successful.”  Will  you  kindly  tell  me  that  other 
name?  What  was  it? — Quimby,  Boston  Medical  lownal. 

That  is  an  American  book,  is  it  not? — ^Yes. 

I think  “ Wharton  and  Still6  ” is  an  American  work  with  j 
which  you  are  acquainted? — Hes. 

Do  you  remember  in  that  the  resxilts  of  experiments  are  stated 
with  regard  to  endeavouring  to  give  chloroform  to  sleeping  persons? 
— do  not  remember  the  statement  in  that  book.  Probably  there 
would  be  one.  Is  it  a recent  edition? 

I will  tell  you.  1884? — ^Probably  it  would  be  a reference  to 
Quimby.  I have  not  so  recent  an  edition. 

Then  I shall  be  glad  to  give  you  the  reference.  The  following 
testimony  is  given  at  page  393  of  vol.  ii.  of  Wharton  and  StilW's 
**  Medical  Jurisprudence,”  and  “ is  taken  from  the  records  of 
a recent  trial  (New  Bloomfield,  Perry  County,  Pa.,  18th  January, 
1871)  for  an  attempt  at  robbery  by  the  uee  of  chloroform : — ^F.  P. 
Maury,  M.D.,  recalled:  Chloroform  ijeiy  very  often  produces 
resistance.  It  sometimes  produces  irritation,  and  sometimes  a 
274 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Dr.  StaTMuon 

depressing  feeling.  It  produces  vomiting.  If  the  stomach  is 
full,  nausea  and  vomiting  almost  always  follow.  Sometimes  it 
does  not.  I experimented  with  chloroform  on  six  sleeping  persons. 
Out  of  that  number  all  resisted  more  or  less.  Two  mm  woke  up 
inmediately,  and  one  remarked  ‘ you  are  trying  to  give  me  some- 
thing.'^ Unquestionably  it  requires  more  chloroform  to  produce 
death  in  a recumbent  position  than  in  an  upright  posture.  One 
man  cannot  administer  chloroform  to  another"? — I know  those 
experiments — Quimby  and  others  have  experimented  to  try  and 
settle  the  question,  and  Dolbeau's  experiments  were  taken  up 
for  the  same  reason,  I know. 

Dolbeau's,  then,  are  the  most  recent? — ^No^  Quimby 's  are 
more  recent.  He  is  referring  to  a trial — 1880. 

Stillfi  is  quoting  in  1884? — ^Yea. 

Quimby's  is  an  American  book? — ^It  is  a paper  by  Quimby, 
who  is,  I believe,  a person  of  repute,  in  the  Boston  Medical 
Journal^*  17th  June,  1880. 

You  have  got  the  French  Dolbeau,"  and  now  you  mention 
"Quimby  and  Elliott"? — ^And  I have  another  American 
authority. 

But,  so  far  as  English  authorities  are  concerned,  can  you  find 
me  any  suggestion  in  any  book  that  it  is  possible  to  administer 
chloroform  to  sleeping  men  without  waking  them? — ^Yes. 

Where? — Hussey,  the  Medical  Times  and  Gazette,  1880,  ii.  261. 

The  Medical  Times  amd  Gazette,  excuse  me  saying  it,  is  not  a 
book  in  the  sense  I am  using.  I am  speaking  of  treatises? — ^Hussey 
is  a perfectly  reliable  person. 

I have  no  doubt,  but  you  know  one  can  deal  with  medical 
treatises,  but  it  is  not  so  easy  to  find  things  in  the  Medical  Times 
and  Gazette, 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills — ^Have  you  got  it  there? — ^No. 

Gross-exammcdion  continmd — This,  you  tell  me,  is  the  only 
book — ^an  English  authority — ^in  which  there  is  a mention  of  this 
matter  o£  administering  chloroform  ^during  sleep — ^a  book  of  very 
coiuaiderable  authority — " Woodman  and  Tidy  " ? — think  it  is 
mentioned  there. 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills — I have  not  appreciated  what  you  say 
about  Hussey? — ^Hussey  said  it  was  done  in  his  presence  at  Oxford 
Infirmary  as  far  back  as  1860. 

The  chloroform  was  administered  to  a sleeping  person? — Yes. 

Cross-examination  continvied — do  not  want  to  trouble  you. 
Have  you  got  a record  of  that  case  with  you  ? — ^No. 


*The  Boston  Medkal  Journal,  17th  June,  1880,  p.  592,  contams  an 
editorial  note  only  on  Quimb/s  experiments.  Quimby’s  original  paper  will 
be  found  in  the  Transactions  of  the  American  Medical  Association,  1880, 
p.  519.— Ed. 


276 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


0r«  Stavwnaan 

Was  it  to  an  adult  or  a child? — think  it  was  to  a young  man 
of  sixteen  or  seventeen. 

You  have  given  your  references? — I have — 1880,  ii.  261.  My 
assistant  will  get  it  for  me  this  afternoon. 

I suggest  to  you  the  only  really  known  matter  with  regard  to 
this  in  English  treatises  is  with  respect  to  children.  I am  about 
to  read  an  extract  from  Woodman  and  Tidy/'  It  is  the  edition 
of  1877,  but  I think  the  world  wants  a new  edition.  That  is  the 
last — ^p.  625.  ‘‘  A question  of  some  importance  to  the  zuedical 

jurist  naturally  occurs  here,  namely,  whether  chlarofomi  ccm  be 
odmimAstered  jor  improper  pwrpoeee.  We  know,  however,  tliat 
comparatively  the  insensibility  from  chloroform-vapour  is  only 
slowly  induced.  It  would  be  di£Gloult,  therefore,  to  administer 
chloroform  to  persons  forcibly  and  against  their  will,  whilst,  of 
course,  the  stories  of  immediate  ansesthesia  produced  by  it  are  but 
idle  fables.  Still,  it  might  be  administered  to  persons  asleep  with- 
out much  difficulty  {Lancet,  6th  October,  1872,  p.  614,  and  12th 
October,  1872,  p.  549),  and  this  seems  the  only  possible  condition 
under  which  it  could  be  conveniently  used  for  improper  purposes, 
unless  considerable  force  was  employed  to  prevent  the  person 
struggling,  which,  under  ordinary  circumstances,  would  he  an 
almost  insurmountable  difficulty  to  its  use."  I have  referred  Dr. 
Stevenson  to  the  two  references  to  the  Lancet  given  in  " Woodman 
and  Tidy,"  and  I find  they  referred  entirely  to  the  administration 
of  chloroform  to  children.  Do  you  know  Dr.  Whitmarsh,  of 
Hounslow?^!  think  I do. 

You  remember  the  name? — Yes. 

It  is  not  a question  of  authority.  I was  only  earmai*king 
the  question.  There  is  a note  here  that  it  will  be  interesting  to 
know  whether  this  mode  of  giving  chloroform  has  been  noticed  by 
the  profession.  I do-  not  know  if  you  know  Mr.  Dobson,  of  Clifton, 
Bristol.  Eeference  is  made  in  Woodman  and  Tidy's  book  to  his 
letter.  (The  learned  counsel  read  a letter  from  the  Lcmcet,  1872, 
ii.  649,  by  Mr.  Dobson.)^  ‘^In  reply  to  the  letter  of  Dr.  Whit- 
marsh ^ which  appeared  in  your  last  impression  respecting  the 
administration  of  chloroform  to  diildren  during  deep,  I beg  to  say 
I have  b^  in  the  habit  of  so  administeriim  chloroform  when  the 
oppo^nity  occurred.  During  the  time  I was  house-surgeon  to 
the  Bristol  General  Hospital,  where  I had  frequently  to  gire  ohloro- 
foma  to  children  to  straighten  their  legs  in  hip-joint  disease  and 
t^  like,  I used  to  consider  mysdf  fortunate  if  I could  catch  the 
child  asleep  and  so  give  it  chloroform  without  disturbing  it;  the 
adTant^  of  such  a proceeding  being  that  the  child  ffl)eedi&  became 
under  the  influmce  of  the  ansesthetio  without  that  alarm  sad  crying 
Md  irregular  inmirations  which  are  so  common  in  the  adminis- 
tration of  oblosoform  to  children.  The  only  precaution  which  I 
ever  found  necessary  to  prevent  them  from  awaking  with  the  first 
276 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 


Dr.  St«v«iiion 

inspiration  of  the  chloroform,  was  that  the  inhaler  should  be  first 
held  at  a moderate  distance  from  the  child’s  face,  and  gradually 
approached  nearer  until  the  requisite  degree  of  anaesthesia  was 
produced,  which  would  be  judged  of  by  the  usual  signs.”  Apart 
from  that  reference  in  “ Woodman  and  Tidy,”  you  are  not  pre- 
pared to  refer  me  to  any  English  treatises  which  discuss  the  proba- 
bility of  administering  chloroform  during  sleep  ? — It  is  mentioned 
in  ” Taylor.”  He  refers  to  Dolbeau — in  the  book  on  poisons,  I 
think  it  is. 

He  refers  to  Dolbeau  1 — Tes;  there  is  a paragraph  on  it — a 
sentence,  at  all  events. 

Oh,  that  is  Dolbeau  ? — You  will  find  it  in  the  reference  to  the 
” Annales  d’Hygiene.” 

Quite  right;  he  did  not  give  the  reference  to  Dolbeau? — ^No. 

But  he  gives  reference  to  the  book,  and  he  only  gives  this 
passage,  3rd  edition,  p.  648 : ” These  facts  show  that  there  is  no 
truth  in  the  statement  sometimes  made  in  cases  of  allied  robbery 
or  rape,  that  the  person  assaulted  was  rendered  suddenly  insensible 
and  unable  to  ofier  resistance.  Chloroform-vapour  does  not  pro- 
duce immediate  insensibility  unless  it  also  produces  complete 
asphyxia  and  death.  There  is,  however,  one  case  in  which  it 
might  be  used  to  aid  the  perpetration  of  crime.  If  the  person  is 
already  asleep,  the  application  of  the  vapour  might  intensify  this 
and  render  him  or  her  powerless,  but  the  conditions  for  thus  using 
chloroform  criminally  can  rarely  present  themselves.”  He  does 
not  give  the  name  of  Dolbeau,  but  that  is  the  reference? — ^Yes. 

Now,  1 just  want  to  come  to  another  question.  Do  you  say 
the  symptoms  produced  by  the  swallowing  of  chloroform  entirely 
correspond  with  those  that  follow  on  inhalation? — ^Pretty  well,  I 
think.  You  get  symptoms  of  unconsciousness  and  paralysis 
intensified. 

I speak  of  symptoms  that  follow  on  swallowing  chloroform? — 
There  is  then  inflammation  of  Hib  stomach,  Imt  the  general 
symptoms  are  not  very  greatly  different. 

But  the  very  first  case  in  Taylor's  **  Medical  Jurisprudence,” 
3rd  edition — ^you  have  edited  that.  1 am  afraid  to  ask  you  if 
you  bdlieve  in  all  the  cases.  Some  of  them  are  of  very  great 
authority? — I have  certainly  modified  some  of  that  chapter  from 
what  has  since  come  to  my  knowledge. 

The  first  case,  vol.  i.,  p.  404,  is:  ” This  liquid  when  taken  in 
a large  dose  appears  to  affect  the  system  like  alcohol;  but  as  a 
Ugmd  it  cannot  be  regarded  as  an  active  poison.  A man  swallowed 
four  oftmcBB  of  chloroform.  He  was  able  to  walk  for  a consider- 
able distance  after  taking  this  dose,  but  he  subsequently  fell  into 
a state  of  coma  ” ? — Yes;  the  symptoms  when  taken  into  Ike  stomach 
-—the  absorption  is  less  rapid  than  when  taken  into  the  lungs.  1 

277 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Dr.  Starmon 

dxould  take  it  symptoms  would  take  longer  to  develop  themselves, 
but  when  they  do  so  they  are  very  profound. 

I should  expect  you  to  answer  me  in  the  affirmative  directly. 
The  results  of  swallowing  a dose  of  chloroform  vary  immensely  in 
diSerent  oases? — ^Tes. 

So  far  as  the  inhalation  of  chloroform  is  concerned,  the 
symptoms  are  fairly  regular,  are  they  not? — ^Yes;  the  stage  of 
excitement 

I will  read  it  to  you  from  “ Taylor.’*  Now  the  passage  in 
which  he  describes  it — and  I just  ask  you  if  you  agree — is  at  page 
649  of  “ Taylor  on  Poisons,”  3rd  edition : “ There  are  considered 
to  be  four  stages  in  the  administration  of  the  vapour.  In  the  first, 
the  patient  becomes  excited;  in  the  second,  he  talks  incoherently, 
and  sensibility  is  diminished ; in  the  third,  he  is  unconscious,  but 
the  muscles  are  rigid;  in  the  fourth,  the  muscles  are  completely 
relaxed,  and  the  patient  is  perfectly  insensible.  Danger  oom- 
mences  with  the  third  stage.”  Do  you  agree  with  that  generally? 
— Yea. 

Now,  during  the  first  stage,  when  the  patient  is  excited,  the 
passage  of  a quantity  of  chloroform  over  the  lips  and  tongue  and 
down  the  throat  would  cause  severe  pain,  would  it  not? — Tes. 

And  in  that  first  stage,  the  stage  of  excitement,  that  pain  would 
be  resented,  and  would  arouse  the  patient  to  resistance? — ^Yee. 
Are  you  speaking  now  of  its  administration  to  a person  awake? 
In  any  case 

Forgive  me;  you  are  right  in  this  sense:  I have  taken  you  to 
the  stage  of  the  administration  of  chloroform  to  a person  sleeping, 
and  he  would  have  awakened? — ^Yes.  I do  not  agree  that  that 
state  of  excitement  would  be  necessary  if  a person  were  asleep.  I 
wish  not  to  commit  myself  to  too  general  a proposition. 

We  have  got  from  Dolbeau,  as  far  as  his  experience  went,  that 
three  out  of  four  persons  awoke? — This  experience  is— 

I have  got  an  American  authority,  where  he  attempted  it  with 
six  persons,  and  they  all  awoke?— Yes, 

Then  I have  taken  the  case  given  by  Mr.  Tidy,  of  the  children 
being  dealt  with  while  th^  were  asleep  in  the  hospital,  and  I have 
r^d  you  the  letter  in  which  Mr.  Dobson  practically  agrees  with 

Dolbeau.  He  saya  he  avoided  excitement  by  giving  it  during 
sleep?— y^.  ^ e 5 6 

He  did  it  with  great  care,  beginning  with  the  chloroform  far 
on  and  bringing  it  closer.  Now,  apart  from  the  question  of 
sleeping  or  wAing,  supposing  the  first  stage  here  of  excitement  to 
occur,  the  pain  of  administering  the  poison  would  be  felt,  and 
would  be  resisted.  That  would  be  the  first  thing  to  wake  anybody 
up?~TeB,  it  might  wake  a person  up,  and  it  might  not. 

Probably  from  the  first  stage,  if  you  only  got  a person  into  the 
first  stage,  that  of  excitement,  the  pain,  vhetaier  about  the  tender 
278 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 


Dr,  Simmon 

places  there  in  his  mouth  or  lips,  would  wake  him  if  you  put  the 
liquid  into  the  mouth? — ^Tes,  in  that  stage;  I misunderstood  you. 

Then,  in  the  second,  he  talks  incoherently,  and  sensibility  is 
diminished,  so  that  sensibility  is  gradually  passing  away? — Tes, 
he  is  intoxicated. 

But  still  capable  of  feeling  pain  ? — To  a less  extent. 

In  the  third  he  is  unconscious,  but  the  muscles  are  rigid. 
Now,  in  the  administration  of  chloroform  by  inhalation,  when 
you  come  to  that  third  stage,  does  not  the  jaw  become  rigid? — ^Very 
often.  There  is  a great  deal  of  rigidity  in  the  limbs  generally. 

So  that  at  that  ^age  it  would  require  force  to  open  the  mouth  ? 
— Probably,  yes. 

And  when  that  rigidity  passes  away,  the  muscles  become  com- 
pletely relaxed,  and  the  patient  is  perfectly  insensible? — Tes, 
ready  for  operation. 

And  in  &at  stage  there  is  no  capacity  for  swallowing  at  all, 
is  there? — Tes. 

How?  Is  not  the  reflex  state  abolished? — ^No;  the  patient  is 
on  the  operating  table,  and  would  continue  to  swallow. 

When  completely  ansesthetised  ? — Tes. 

That  is  a question  of  degree? — That  is  altogether  a question 
of  degree  when  the  patient  would  cease  to  swallow. 

Then  I understand  you,  in  your  judgment 

By  Mr.  Justiob  Wills — ^May  I interpose  one  question?  When 
you  speak  of  their  swallowing  in  that  sense,  do  you  mean  by  the 
muscles  acting,  or  having  stuff  simply  poured  down  their  throat, 
as  Mr.  Murray  said? — ^Any  liquid  put  at  the  back  of  the  throat; 
the  patient  continues  to  swallow  his  own  saliva  for  some  time. 

That  is  by  muscular  action? — ^Tes. 

Not  like  pouring  it  down  a leaden  pipe? — ^No.  Blood  flows 
into  the  back  of  the  throat;  it  is  swallowed  unless  he  is  under 
chloroform  very  profoundly,  when  he  ceases  to  swallow,  and  then 
he  becomes  suffocated.  There  is  g.  stage  of  inhalation  where  the 
patient  ceases  to  swallow. 

Oross^examiffULtion  cmtimued — ^But  in  this  case,  where  the 
operation  is  performed  and  the  blood  gets  to  the  back  of  the 
throat,  is  not  one  of  the  dangers  that  blood  will  get  into  the  air 
passages? — Tes;  he  may  get  into  such  a state  by  inhalation  that 
he  cannot  swallow. 

Now,  let  me  put  it  again.  Do  you  say  there  is  a particular 
point  in  the  process  of  chloroforming  at  which  a medical  man — at 
which  the  patient  would  be  able  to  swallow,  although  he  was 
sufficiently  under  the  influence  of  chloroform  not  to  suffer  from 
the  pain? — ^I  do. 

Will  you  tell  me  how  you  would  yourself  ascertain  that  time 
had  arrived  ? — ^Well,  I should  not  like  to  pouf^  liquid  down  the 
throat  if  the  reflex  of  the  eye  had  been  abolished,  as  Dr.  Murray 

279 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


DnSimnsgn 

terns  it.  I would  not  like  to  commit  myself  to  say  where  would 
be  point  at  which  the  reflex  would  even  be  abolished. 

I take  it  from  you  that  is  taken  as  the  test  ? — It  is  the  practical 

test. 

Let  me  ask  you  this,  is  not  that  the  test  that  the  doctor  does 
apply  in  order  to  ascertain  if  the  sensation  of  pain  has  gone? — 
Yes. 

Is  that  the  assumption,  at  all  events,  of  a doctor  dealing 
with  chloroform;  until  that  reflex  action  is  gone,  pain  is  felt? — 
He  assumes  that. 

Now,  suppose  you  had  to  deal  with  a sleeping  man,  and  it 
was  your  object  to  get  down  his  throat  without  his  knowing  it 
a liquid  the  administration  of  which  to  the  lips  or  throat  would 
cause  great  pain,  do  you  not  agree  it  would  be  a very  difficult  or 
delicate  operation? — ^I  think  it  would  be  an  operation  which  would 
often  fail,  and  might  often  succeed. 

Would  you  not  look  on  it  as  a delicate  operation? — I should 
look  on  it  as  a delicate  operation,  because  I should  be  afraid  of 
pouring  it  down  the  windpipe. 

That  is  one  of  the  dangers  you  contemplate? — ^Yes. 

If  it  got  into  the  windpipe,  there  would  be  spasmodic  action 
of  the  muscles,  would  there  not? — ^A.t  the  stage  when  you  had 
come  to  the  conclusion  that  you  could  do  it,  when  there  is  in- 
sensibility, or  partial  insensibility,  the  rejection  of  the  liquid  by 
the  windpipe  would  be  probably  less  active  than  when  the  patient 
was  awake. 

If  the  patient  got  into  such  a state  of  insensibility  as  not  to 
reject  it,  it  would  go  down  his  windpipe  and  burn  that? — 
Probably  some  of  it  might  go  down  the  windpipe. 

It  muld  probably  do  so? — ^Probably. 

If  it  did  so,  it  would  leave  its  traces? — ^I  should  expect  to  find 
traces  after  death,  unless  the  patient  lives  for  some  hours. 

Of  course,  a great  many  poqjj-mortem  appearances  are  changed 
if  the  patient  lives  for  some  hours? — ^Yes, 

Not  only  by  the  chloroform  disappearing,  so  to  speak,  but  also 
other  changes  incidental  to  a post-mortem  condition  ?— Yes. 

if  tke  post-mortem  examination  bad  been  performed,  as 
Mrs.  Bartlett  wished  it  to  be,  on  the  very  day  on  which  death 
^k  place,  there  would  have  been  still  better  opportunity  of 
determining  the  cause  of  death?— Yes. 


The  Court  adjourned. 


Fifth  Dasr— Friday,  16th  April,  1886. 

Dr.  Stevenson,  recalled,  and  re-examined  by  the  Attornbt- 
Gbnbbal — ^You  were  asked  about  chloroform  being  very  volatile? 
— ^Yes,  it  is. 

Assuming  it  to  have  been  taken  into  the  mouth  and  so  to  have 
gone  down  into  the  stomach,  would  you  expect,  after  the  lapse  of 
four  or  five  hours,  that  there  would  necessarily  be  any  smell  of 
chloroform  in  the  mouth? — No. 

Or  three  or  four  hours?— No. 

Or  two  or  three?  I want  to  get  some  approximate  idea? — ^If 
the  mouth  were  open,  I should  expect  the  smell  might  disappear 
even  within  half  an  hour. 

Can  you  tell  me  this — ^whether  the  effect  of  a dose  of  chloro- 
form^ swrflowed  and  taken  into  the  stomach  would  be  greater  or 
less  in  its  effects  upon  the  person  taking  it  if  that  person  was 
insensible  or  partially  insensible  by  inhalation  first? — should 
expect  that  the  effect  would  be  greater. 

In  the  direction  of  causing  paralysis  of  the  action  of  the 
heart,  for  instance? — ^Yes. 

You  spoke,  I think,  of  the  delicacy  that  would  be  used  in 
getting  chloroform  into  the  stomach  if  the  person  were  lying  back 
and  insensible  or  partially  insensible? — ^Yes. 

You  used  that  word,  I think? — think  I used  the  word  or 
something  very  like  it. 

Do  you  mean,  from  a medical  point  of  view,  it  would  require 
to^  be  delicately  done  in  order  to  prevent  its  getting  into  the 
windpipe  instead  of  the  throat? — ^What  I mean  precisely  is  this, 
that  a person  unskilled  in  the  anatomy  of  the  part — ^in  such  a case 
there  would  be  a chance  whether  it  got  in  the  right  way,  down  the 

Sullet,  or  the  wrong  way,  down  the  windpipe.  Some  might  go 
own  the  windpipe  if  not,  in  that  sense,  delicately  done;  there 
would  be  that  danger. 

My  learned  friend  read  a passage  from  one  work  in  which 
he  spoke  of  asphyxia  as  a consequence  of  the  administration  of 
chloroform. 

Mr.  Glabeb — ^No;  the  passage  I read  was  this:  that  the  post- 
mortem appearances  were  similar  to  the  cases  of  asphyxia. 

By  Ihe  Attobnbt-Gbneeal — ^Is  that  your  experience? — The 
post-mortem  appearances  are  sometimes  those  of  asphyxia,  because 
asphyxia  is  sometimes  the  cause  of  death  from  chloroform. 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills — do  not  know  whether  I am  correct  in 
summarising  iMs.  The  notion  I have  from  the  cross-examination 
of  yesterday  is,  that  chloroform  would  produce  \death  in  one  of 
two  ways — in  the  one-,  by  producing  asphyxia,  Which  I suppose 

' 281 


Adelaide  Bartlett 


Dr.  StsvaiMoii 

would  paralyse  the  muscles  of  respiration ; and  in  the  other  cases, 
by  paralysing  the  muscles  of  the  heart;  and  the  two  post-mortem 
symptoms  are  not  quite  the  same  in  the  two  cases? — No. 

If  that  requires  correction,  pray  give  it? — Practically,  it  is 
so;  but  one  thing  with  asphyxia,  it  is  not  quite  necessary  that 
there  should  be  paralysis  of  the  muscles  of  respiration — it  really 
means  suffocation. 

It  may  arise  from  that? — Tes,  or  from  paralysis  of  the  heart. 

Be-examination  continued — So  it  comes  to  this,  if  the  par- 
ticular form  which  the  mischief  takes  is  suffocation,  you  would 
expect  to  see  on  the  post-mortem  the  signs  of  suffocation? — ^Yes. 

If  the  mischief  results  from  paralysis  of  the  heart,  you  do  not 
expect  to  see  signs  of  suffocation? — Tes. 

It  sometimei  happens,  does  it  not,  that,  when  persons  are 
voluntarily  drinking  a liquid,  some  of  it  may  get  down  the  wind- 
pipe or  approach  the  windpipe? — ^Yes,  occasionally;  that  is  a rare 
incident. 

With  reference  to  the  passage  which  my  learned  friend  Mr. 
Clarke  was  reading  yesterday  from  this  book  at  page  183,  what 
paper  do  you  call  that? — It  is  a paper  by  M.  Dolbeau. 

I will  just  read  one  passage  more  to  you;  it  follows  the  pas- 
sage which  Mr.  Clarke  read.  You  know  the  passage  probably; 
you  will  recognise  it  as  I endeavour  to  translate  it : “ With  regard 
to  crime,  it  is  certain  that  chloroform  administered  to  persons 
asleep  could  facilitate  the  perpetration  of  certain  crimes  and 
misdemeanours.  It  is,  however,  probable  that  conditions  favour- 
able to  anaesthesia  will  rarely  be  found  combined  at  the  time  of 
the  attempted  criminal  acts.”  Do  you  agree  with  that? — ^I  agree 
that  it  is  possible,  and  that,  in  a certain  numW  of  cases,  the 
production  of  sleep  would  be  comparatively  easily  effected. 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills— The  production  of  sleep,  you  say?— 
The  production  of  insensibility  during  sleep,  I should  say. 

continuedr~^i^  learned  friend  Mr.  Clarke  also 
asked  you  whether  there  may*  not  be  found  some  traces  in  the 
urine  of  a person  who  has  died  from  an  overdose  of  chloroform, 
and  I understood  you  to  say  yes.  Would  it  be  visible  to  the  eye, 
or  would  It  only  be  detectable  upon  analysis?— Oh,  not  visible  to 
the  eye.  It  is  a little  undetermined  whether  it  is  due  to  the  un- 
doubted presence  of  chloroform  or  the  chloroform  producing  some 
other  substance  in  the  urine.  At  all  events,  the  urine  would  act 
in  a particular  way  at  a particular  period. 

^ You  had  no  portion  of  the  urine  furnished  to  you  for  analysis  ? 

appearance  of  the  urine  would  not  suggest  any 
^ange^'ae  appearance  would  not  suggest  it,  I have  the  book, 
the  Med%em  TwnpSf  here  now,  my  lord. 

By  the  Fob^hmae'-— We  wish  to  ask  you  one  or  two  questions. 

282 


Evidence  for  Prosecution 


Dr,  Stoventon 

We  desire  to^  be  perfectly  clear  upon  this  point.  I think  you 
stated  that,  in  the  third  stage  of  chloroformism,  the  jaws  are 
rigid,  or  partially  sol — ^In  one  stage.  The  stages  are  purely 
arbitrary,  but  in  one  stage  there  is  rigidity. 

Then  we  take  it  that  an  unskilled  person  with  a little  time 
to  administer  a suflScient  quantity  of  chloroform  down  the  throat 
— suflBcient  to  cause  death — ^must  do  it  very  gradually  for  fear  of 
choking.  It  must  take  some  little  time;  they  could  not  do  it 
suddenly  1 — do  not  think  in  some  cases  it  would  be  very  difficult 
to  do  it  quicldy.  It  is  simply  the  very  act  of  swallowing. 

Then  the  chances  are,  I think,  perhaps,  that  some  portion  of 
the  chloroform  might  remain  in  the  mouth  for  some  little  timel — I 
should  expect  it  would  be  a very  short  time. 

But  it  must  remain  there  some  little  time  1 — Some  of  it  might. 

If  the  person  were  unable  to  swallow,  it  would  be  likely  to  remain 
at  the  back  of  the  throat. 

Then  it  will  show  some  sign  of  its  having  been  there,  in  the 
gums  or  throat,  in  the  same  way  as  if  it  lay  in  the  intestines? — > 
Yes,  if  the  patient  were  unable  to  swallow.  If  he  were  in  a con- 
dition to  swallow  it,  the  swallowing  would  be  effected  almost 
momentarily,  just  as  long  as  it  would  take  to  drink  a little  water. 

You  would  expect  more  signs,  supposing  a person  could  not 
swallow,  than  if  he  was  drinking  medicine  quickly  off.  In  the 
latter  case  you  would  not  expect  to  see  any  signs  at  all,  would 
you  i — If  a person  could  not  swallow,  it  would  remain  at  the  upper 
part  of  the  windpipe ; and  upon  the  post-mortem  I should  expect  to  ' 
find  the  effects  of  contact  there — ^irritation  or  inflammation. 

If  taken  suddenly,  you  would  not  expect  to  find  either  f — ^I 
should  not  expect  to  find  it. 

By  Mr.  Justxob  Wills — I just  want  to  adc  a question  as  to 
the  term  rigidity.  It  is  a little  too  vague  to  convey  any  definite 
notion  to  my  mind.  It  may  mean  that  the  jaws  were  closed  like 
an  iron  vice,  or  it  may  mean  something  very  much  less.  Will 
you  kindly  explain  that? — ^In  giving  chloroform  by  inhalation  at 
a certain  period,  and  before  the  patient  is  altogether  uncon- 
scious, there  is  often  considerable  general  muscular  rigidity.  The 
arms  would  be  rigid  and  the  patient  would  grind  his  teeth  or 
clench  the  jaw. 

Would  that  be  the  same  if  administered  during  sleep? — ^I 
have  never  seen  it  given  during  sleep.  I should  not  think  so  from 
the  record  of  those  cases — sleep  passing  into  the  period  of  ohloro- 
formism. 

How  long  does  the  period  of  rigidity  last? — ^Oh,  it  may  be 
a few  seconds  or  a minute. 

Not  very  long? — ^No;  if  the  patient  is  insensible,  the  rigidity 
speedily  passes  off.  \ 

Mr.  Claekh — My  lord,  the  letter  to  which  1 1 have  referred 

283 


Adelaide  Bartlett, 


Dr.SmniMa 

does  itself  refer  to  a quotation  in  the  previous  week’s  number  of 
the  Medical  Times,  1 am  endeavouring  to  find  it,  but  I will  not 
delay.  I dare  say  Dr,  Stevenson  will  be  good  enough  to  try  and 
find  it  for  me. 

Mr.  Justice  Wills — Mr.  Hussey’s  letter,  do  you  meani 

Mr.  Clakeb — ^Yes,  my  lord.  He  referred  to  the  Medical 
Times.  In  that  case  it  was  administered  to  a boy.  It  is  the  28th 
of  August,  1880,  which  is  the  second  volume  of  the  work,  at  page 
251.  1 have  just  found  it,  and  I will  read  the  letter ; — **  Ad- 
ministration of  Chloroform  during  Sleep. — ^About  thirty  years  ago 
the  late  Mr.  Hester,  of  this  city,  asked  me  to  assist  him  in  the 
operation  of  removing  a small  pendulous  tumour  from  the  inner 
side  of  the  thigh  in  a boy.  When  we  entered  the  bedroom  the  boy 
was  in  bed  asleep.  We  administered  the  chloroform  at  once  with- 
out awaking  him;  and,  when  he  was  well  under  the  influence  of 
it,  we  prepared  a table,”  and  so  on;  but  the  point  there  is  that 
that  was  the  case  of  a boy. 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills — will  just  ask  one  more  question. 
We  ^e  told  that  there  was  unusual  and  considerable  diflSculty  in 
putting  the  patient  under  the  influence  of  nitrous  oxide.  Is 
Aere  any  connection  necessarily  or  probably  between  difficulty 
in  being  put  into  insensibility  by  nitrous  oxide  and  being  put 
into  insensibility  by  chloroform!— It  is  quite  a guess.  I should 
think  the  difficulty  in  the  one  case  would  create  a difficulty  in 
the  other  ; but  that  is  a pure  matter  of  inference. 

A thing  you  cannot  say  much  about! — ^A  thing  I cannot  say 
much  about.  I will  only  say  generally,  if  a person  is  insensible 
to  one  anaesthetic,  he  would  be  less  sensible  to  another. 

Dr.  Chahlbs  Mbtmott  Tidt,  examined  by  Mr.  Poland— I am  a 
Bachelor  of  Medicine  and  Master  of  Surgery.  I am  Professor  of 
Chemistry  and  Forensic  Medicine  at  the  London  Hospital,  and  I 
am  one  of  the  official  analysts  to  the  Home  Office.  I am  one 
of  the  authors  of  the  book  ” Forensic  Medicine  and  Toxicology,” 
by  Woodman  and  Tidy.  I have  had  considerable  experience  in 
matters  of  that  description.  I have  of  my  own  knowledge  known 
of  a death  from  taking  liquid  chloroform,  in  the  year  1863, 
Dr.  Lankester  was  coroner  at  that  time,  and  he  referred  the  case 
to  me.  So  far  as  we  know,  the  fatal  dose  at  that  time  was  an 
ounce  and  a half ; but  I am  bound  to  say  the  details  I have  of  that 
case  are  not  very  clear,  for  the  case  was  one  of  suicide,  and  the 
^t  of  chloroform  having  been  taken  was  beyond  all  question. 
Wineglasses  are  of  different  sizes,  but  I take  it  a wineglass 
w^d  hold  2 to  2^-  fluid  ounces.  In  the  case  of  a death  from 
taking  liquid  chloroform,  I should  expect  to  find  some  of  the 
actual  dhlorofonrf  in  the  stomach.  In  the  case  in  1863  there  was 
actual  chloroforip  in  the  stomach,  but  the  exact  quantity  wae 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Dr.  Cbarlei  M.  Tidy 

not  determined,  as  there  was  no  necessity  to  do  so.  One  other 
case  of  chloroform  came  before  me,  curiously  enough  in  1863, 
which  I saw  also  with  Dr.  Woodman,  but  that  was  a case  of 
recovery.* 

In  my  judgment  chloroform  taken  in  a liquid  form  entering 
the  stomach  would  show  signs  when  it  came  in  contact  with  the 
stomach.  In  the  1863  case,  which  is  the  only  case  I know  of  my 
own  knowledge,  there  was  considerable  inflammatory  condition 
of  the  stomach.  I presume  that  would  be  the  part  of  the  stomach 
that  the  chloroform  would  come  in  contact  with;  but  I have  no 
note  in  this  case  as  to  where  the  inflammation  was.  I should 
judge  that  the  chloroform  would  aflect  the  oesophagus,  or  gullet, 
if  it  were  sufficiently  long  in  contact  with  it,  but,  if  the  contact 
of  chloroform  with  a tissue  is  of  very  short  duration,  I am  of 
opinion  that  no  abnormal  appearance  might  be  apparent.  I have 
myself  tried  that  in  my  own  case  for  experiment.  I put  a tea- 
spoonful  of  pure  chloroform  in  my  mouth,  and  I held  it  in  my 
mouth  for  something  like  flve  or  six  seconds;  I then  spat  it  out 
and  simply  washed  my  mouth  out  with  a little  water.  There  was 
a slight  redness  produced,  but  it  certainly  did  not  last  longer 
than  a few  minutes  at  the  most,  although  a certain  numbness 
continued  for  something  like  nearly  an  hour.  I am  clear,  there- 
fore, that  the  effect  of  chloroform  on  animal  tissues  will  be 
greatly  dependent  on  the  duration  of  the  contact.  When  liquid 
chloroform  is  taken  into  the  stomach  it  then  passes  into  the  blood ; 
the  diffusibility,  as  it  is  called,  of  chlhroform  is  very  great.  If 
taken  in  sufficient  quantity  to  cause  death,  I would  expect  to  And 
traces  of  chloroform  in  the  intestines;  that  would  not  be  by 
its  diffusibility  through  the  membranes,  however,  but  fly  its 
actual  passage  from  the  stomach  into  the  intestines,  and  I should 
expect  to  find  traces  there  if  a sufficient  period  had  elapsed  between 
the  taking  of  the  chloroform  and  the  death.  Upon  the  death  so 
caused  I would  expect  to  find  at  the  post-mortem  examination  what 
is  described  as  fluidity  of  the  blood;  one  of  the  peculiar  effects  of 
chloroform  is  its  action  on  the  blood  including  various  changes 
of  the  blood. 

On  Saturday,  20th  March,  Dr.  Stevenson  showed  me  some 
cf  the  contents  of  the  stomach — bottle  No.  5.  I smelt  it,  and  I 
think  that  Dr.  Stevenson’s  description,  that  the  smell  was  over- 
poweringly  strong  of  chloroform,  is  a very  right  one,  and  it  is 
exactly  as  I should  describe  it  myself  on  ^at  date,  20th  March. 
Suppose  chloroform  was  inhaled,  and  then  chloroform  was  taken 
in  a liquid  state,  I should  think  that  the  chloroform  taken  in  the 
liquid  state  would  have  a greater  effect  than  if  taken  by  a person 
who  had  not  previously  inhaled  it.  That  is  rather  a matter  of 
opinion,  however. 

^VideMedico^  Timu  and  GazetU^  1863,  rol.  iL,  p.  r378. — En. 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Dr.  Charles  M.  Tidy 

By  Mr.  Justice!  Wills — I think  I might  almost  call  it  a specu- 
lation'; I do  not  think  I could  put  it  much  higher  than  that. 

^xwnwnation  contimied — Supposing  death  be  caused  by  a fatal 
dose  of  liquid  chloroform  in  a body  seen  some  two  or  throe  hours 
after  death,  I think  it  is  quite  consistent  with  facts  that  there 
should  be  no  smell  of  chloroform  in  the  mouth  at  all.  Chloroform 
is  very  volatile,  indeed,  and  if  the  mouth  were  opened  after 
death  that  would  be  quite  sufficient  to  account  for  the  smell  going 
ofi.  As  regards  the  effect  of  chloroform  on  the  skin,  supposing 
chloroform  spilt  on  the  face,  and  not  covered  up,  I should  not 
expect  to  find  any  marks  left.  As  a matter  of  fact,  I dropped 
some  chloroform  on  my  own  hand  last  night,  and  there  was  no 
sign  left  at  all;  there  was  a slight  redness  produced  for  a short 
time,  but  it  was  very  transient.  There  was  certainly  no  sign  of 
the  spot  where  I dropped  it  half  an  hour  afterwards,  and  I think  I 
should  be  more  correct  if  I said  quarter  of  an  hour  afterwards. 
At  the  present  moment  I cannot  determine  at  all  where  the  spot 
was.  If  one  was  to  drop  chloroform  on  the  skin,  and  then  place  a 
pad  over  it,  so  as  to  cover  it,  then  undoubtedly  it  would  produce 
a burn.  In  giving  chloroform  which  is  inhaled  I have  noticed 
a rigidity  of  the  jaw,  and  I have  also  noticed  some  cases  where 
there  has  been  no  rigidity  of  the  jaw.  The  rigidity  does  not 
necessarily  follow  in  all  cases,  although  it  usually  occurs;  and, 
further,  the  rigidity  of  the  jaw  lasts  a very  variable  period.  In 
my  judgment  partial  insensibility  could  be  produced  by  inhala- 
tion of  chloroform  during  sleep. 

If  a person  were  rendered  partially  insensible  by  the  adminis- 
tration of  chloroform,  in  your  judgment,  could  the  liquid  be 
administered  ?— I think  so,  certainly,  at  certain  stages.  I should 
like  to  say,  with  regard  to  my  experiment  on  the  action  of  ad- 
ministering chloroform  during  sleep,  that  I think  it  is  fair  to 
state  exactly  what  I have  done  in  the  case.  Of  course,  it  is 
always  difficult  to  do  it,  for  you  must  get  the  consent  of  the 
person,  and  it  is  not  an  experiment  you  can  often  make.  In 
the  case  of  a boy  between  fifteen  and  sixteen  years  of  age,  who 
had  a dislocation  of  his  arm,  it  was  necessary  to  give  him 
chloroform  in  order  to  reduce  it.  He  went  to  sleep,  and  we  ad- 
ministered chloroform  while  he  was  asleep  with  great  ease.  I 
have  tried  it  in  two  other  cases  since,  but  I failed  in  both  cases. 
In  the  one  case  the  person  was  fairly  well  asleep,  but  in  tibie  other 
case  the  man  was  just  dozing. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  Clabkb — ^With  regard  to  the  three 
cases  you  have  given  us,  you  succeeded  in  the  case  of  the  boy 
and  failed  in  the  others,  I understand? — Yes;  in  one  the  person 
was  not  in  a good  sleep,  and  I failed. 

Those  are  the  only  experiments  you  have  had  the  opportunity 
of  making,  and  -^re  those  both  adults? — ^They  were  adults. 

In  the  case  (ff  the  boy,  I notice  that  you  said  **  we  ad- 


Evidence  for  Prosecution, 

Dr.  ChurU.  m.  Tidy 

ministered  chloroform.  Was  there  a KHrp*H.n  ihen*  with  yout—The 
surgeon  was  there  who  was  going  to  rcduw  it . 

Have  you  had  long  experience mean  ot  chloroform? 

Tes? — ^Tesj  very  long  indeed.  ....  , . 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills — Th<?n  u«iintntstt'rod  the  chloro- 

form Tes;  I administered  the  chloroiornh 

CToss-BasOtTnincLtioTi  to  the  1863  case^ 

that  was  a suicide,  I believe  1 — 

And  so,  I believe,  being  a case  of  atnotue,  it  was  not  neces- 
sary to  make  detailed  notes  1~No;  the  j '***?’  wuiitod  the  analysis 
to  be  made  to  detect  the  chloroform,  anti  I tlitl  not  go  very  fully 
into  it. 

The  great  majority  of  cases  reportetl  arc  cases  of  suicide,  are 
they  notl — Certainly;  by  a very  long  way. 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills— Two  by  swallowing  chloroform,  I 
understand? — ^Tes,  entirely. 

Cross-examination  The  inajtirity  «»f  cases  of  in- 

halation are  accidental,  are  they  nofe?^ — \os:  I undorstand  that. 

So  that,  apart  from  positive  evitlciu'u  t*f  fav’ts,  the  enormous 
probability  of  evidence  would  be  in  favtoir  t»f  sutcido?-*^!  should 
say  so. 

You  say  that,  with  regard  to  rigitlity,  it  lasts  for  a very 
short  time?— Very;  it  may  only  last  a few  sts’imds,  and  it  may  last 
longer. 

It  may  last  much  more — four  or  five  ruinittos  t— -I  should  not 
like  to  say  no. 

I am  quite  content,  Dr.  Tidy;  I will  take  your  answer.  The 
symptoms  from  the  inhalation  of  chlorofiirm  nro  very  variable,  are 
they  not? — ^Very  variable  indeed. 

A person  might  be  chloroformetl— I will  uw*  that  word — in  two 
minutes,  or  it  may  take  a considerable  time i— Yes ; ivhilo  the  quan- 
tity required  to  produce  the  efiects  varies  also.  It  is  not  a question 
of  time  only,  but  of  quantity. 

In  administering  chloroform,  you  are  guiileri  by  the  appear- 
ance of  the  patient  with  regard  to  the  quantity  you  are  to  ad- 
minister, I suppose? — ^Manifestly  so;  it  is  the  real  tlilBculiy,  in 
administering  chloroform,  that  yon  eannot  lay  down  any  law 
which  applies  to  everybody. 

Exactly;  and  therefore  in  all  the  stages  you  nmst  exercise  a 
careful  judgment? — Tes. 

And  that  is  the  reason  that  there  arn  adniinistrators  of 
chloroform  who  devote  themselves  to  the  |irnct}iHV/ — Exactly. 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills— It  goes  further,  dfws  it  not?  Some- 
times persons  whom  you  would  not  expect  iliu  auddenly  under 
chloroform,  do  they  not?— Tes;  and  in  K»*ine  raws  even  when  a 
careful  examination  has  been  made,  and  no  sigiiH  of  heart  dis- 
ease distsovered. 


287 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Dr.  Chiirlea  M.  Tidy 

And  is  the  converse  sometimeB  the  case,  that  when  you  think 
it  'primdL  facie  very  d&ngerous,  the  patient  will  take  any  quantity  1 
— ^That  is  so. 

So  that  it  is  singularly  uncertain  ? — ^Yes,  and  that  is  no  doubt 
why  ether  has  been  so  largely  substituted  lately,  because  all 
authorities  have  found  it  more  certain  in  its  action,  although  it 
has  its  disadvantages. 

Do  you  know  whether  the  case  which  you  read  to  Mr.  Clarke 
— ^the  one  case  which  was  unhappily  fatal,  was  that  a case  of 
suicide]  I dare  say  you  know  the  case? — know  the  case  per- 
fectly well. 

Perhaps  it  does  not  say? 

Mr.  Clarke — ^It  does  not  say,  my  lord.  It  is  this — he  was 
aged  twenty-six,  and  he  took  2 ounces. 

Mr.  Justice  Wills — ^Dr.  Tidy  says  he  rather  thinks  it  was 
suicide. 

The  Witness — rather  think  so. 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills — Just  let  me  ask  you  one  question. 
Would  it  be  correct  to  say  that  there  is  a similar  uncertainty  about 
the  action  of  swallowing  chloroform;  or  would  it  be  more  correct 
to  say  that  not  much  is  known  about  it? — There  is  considerable 
uncertainty  in  its  action ; it  depends  largely  upon  whether  the 
man  vomits  or  not — ^whether  the  person  vomits  or  not.  I am 
only  judging  now  from  the  cases  I have  read. 

We  toow  the  limits  of  your  experience,  but  I suppose  you  have 
read  everything  there  is? — think  1 have  read  everything  there 
is,  as  far  as  1 can  find  it. 

I suppose  one  may  say — one  must  have  to  correctly  summarise 
it — a good  deal  less  is  known  about  swallowing  chloroform  than 
about  chloroform  inhaled  ? — Oh,  very  much  less. 

By  a Juror — suppose  it  would  be  likely,  if  you  were  to 
drop  chloroform  on  the  delicate  parts  of  the  mouth,  to  show 
marks  there,  though  you  would  not  see  them  on  the  skin  of  the 
hand  ? — Certainly. 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills — ^There  is  one  other  question  I want  to 
ai^  of  you — or  Dr.  Stevenson,  perhaps  of  both.  Dr.  Leach  says 
that»  experimenting  upon  himself,  he  produced  a mark  of  whiteness 
on  the  tongue  when  he  took  chloroform  in  his  mouth.  Do  you  know 
anything  about  that? — ^No;  it  is  contrary  to  my  own  experiments, 
and  my  own  experience.  There  was  no  sign  of  whiteness;  it  was  a 
thing  I looked  for  very  carefully,  but  it  was  a delicate  blush  of 
redness. 

Then  you  only  know  from  that  one  experiment?— That  is  all. 

It  is  not  anything  that  is  recorded,  is  it  ? — ^No,  I think  not. 

Re-examined  by  the  Attornet-Gbnbral — ^How  long  do  you 
think  the  chloroform  was  in  your  mouth? — ^Five  or  six  seconds. 

But  nothing  has  been  recorded  about  that  in  pathological 
books? — No;  I know  nothing  about  whiteness  being  produced. 


Mr.  H.  B.  Poland. 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Mrs  Mary  Ann  Furlong 

Mrs.  MjlRY  Ann  Furlong,  examined  by  Mr.  Maloney — am  a 
married  woman,  residing  at  77  Phillip  Bridge  Road,  Merton.  I 
acted  as  servant  to  Mrs.  Bartlett  at  Merton  Cottage  from  6th 
January  to  1st  September,  1886.  I was  living  then  with  my  hus- 
band near  their  house,  and  I went  home  every  afternoon.  I 
usually  went  to  the  Bartletts'  house  about  eight  o’clock  in  the 
morning.  I made  the  beds,  sometimes  alone  and  sometimes  with 
Mrs.  Bartlett.  Mr,  and  Mrs.  Bartlett  did  not  occupy  separate 
beds  in  that  house.  I was  never  with  them  anywhere  else.  Mr. 
Bartlett  had  a cold  bath  every  morning  in  his  bedroom.  He  went 
to  business  every  day.  Mr.  Dyson  came  to  the  house  sometimes  at 
the  latter  part,  and  I have  left  them  alone  together. 

By  Mr.  Justiob  Wills — My  usual  time  of  leaving  was  eleven 
o’clock  in  the  day,  but  if  Mrs.  Bartlett  had  company  I would 
stay  and  cook  the  dinner. 

Examination  contimied — I used  to  see  Mr.  Bartlett  coming 
home  in  the  evening;  he  passed  my  house  as  he  came  home. 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills — ^Mr.  and  Mrs.  Matthews  stayed  with 
the  Bartletts  for  a week.  They  and  Mr.  Dyson  were  the  only 
visitors  that  they  had.  So  far  as  I saw,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Bartlett 
lived  on  very  affectionate  terms  with  one  another,  and,  as  far  as 
I could  judge,  they  lived  as  husband  and  wife. 

Henry  Marshall,  examined  by  Mr.  Poland — am  inspector 
of  the  Metropolitan  Police,  and  I have  had  charge  of  this  case.  I 
was  present  at  the  inquest  on  4th  and  11th  February.  On  those 
occasions  both  Mr.  Dyson  and  Mrs.  Bartlett  were  present.  On  the 
11th  Mr.  Dyson  was  examined  as  a witness.  Mrs.  Bartlett  was 
represented  by  a ^rrister,  Mr.  Beal,  and  by  a solicitor,  Mr. 
Wood.  On  the  4tfi  the  coroner  said  to  Mr.  Wood,  or  he  said 
publicly,  he  should  like  to  know  whether  Mrs.  Bartlett  intended  to 
give  evidence.  There  was  some  reply,  but  1 do  not  know  what 
it  was.  She  did  not  give  evidence. 

Did  her  counsel  say  anything  in  her  presence  in  reference  to 
awaiting  the  result  of  the  analysis,  or  did  anything  of  that  kind 
pass) — am  not  quite  clear  about  that.  I remember  more  par- 
ticularly about  the  11th.  After  Mr.  Dyson  had  given  evidence 
Mr.  Braxton  Hicks,  the  deputy  coroner,  said  he  should  like  to  know 
whether  it  was  the  intention  of  Mrs.  Bartlett  to  give  evidence  or 
not,  but  she  was  not  tendered  as  a witness.  Upon  that,  from  what 
was  said  in  the  inquest  room,  I took  her  into  custody  in  the  board 
room  as  soon  as  it  was  cleared.  1 was  in  plain  clothes,  and  I 
said  to  her,  “ I am  Inspector  Marshall.  After  what  has  passed 
here  to-day  I must  take  you  into  custody  for  the  wilful  murder  of 
your  husband  by  administering  to  him  about  midnight  on  tihie  Slat 
of  December  last  a poisonous  dose  of  chloroform.  This  is  a serious 
charge,  and  whatever  you  say  I must  caution  you  that  I shall 
reduce  it  to  writing,  and  it  will  be  given  in  evidence  at  your  trial.  ’ ’ 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Henry  Mnrdiall 

Mrs.  Bartlett  said,  **  I have  nothing  to  say.’*  Her  solicitor,  Mr. 
Wood,  was  present  and  heard  all  that  passed.  She  was  charged 
in  the  ordinary  way  and  taken  before  the  magistrate. 

Previous  to  that  date,  11th  February,  I searched  the  whole 
of  the  railway  line  from  Peckham  Rye  to  Victoria  to  see  if  I 
could  find  any  bottle.  1 found  some  bottles,  but  not  the  one  I 
expected.  I was  at  Claverton  Street  on  11th  January  when  the 
house  was  searched.  I saw  “ Squire’s  Companion  ” among  the 
books,  and  handed  it  to  the  coroner’s  officer.  I also  found  the 
letters  referred  to  by  the  witness  Ralph.  On  24th  February  T 
also  searched  a number  of  boxes  at  Claverton  Street.  No  medicine 
chest  was  found;  I never  could  find  it  either  at  Claverton  Street 
or  at  Mrs.  Matthews’,  where  Mrs.  Bartlett  had  been  staying.  I 
searched  Mrs.  Bartlett’s  luggage  at  the  office  of  her  solicitor,  and 
I took  possession  of  a certain  number  of  things — the  deceased’s 
nightgown  and  other  things — ^which  were  handed  to  Dr.  Steven- 
son. These  I got  from  Mrs.  Bartlett’s  box.  The  nightgown  was 
cut  down  the  centre.  I showed  it,  the  pillow,  and  the  other  things 
to  Dr.  Stevenson.  There  were  stains  on  the  nightgown  just  above 
the  neck.  These  were  seen  by  Dr.  Stevenson.  On  16th  February 
I went  to  Wandsworth  Common  with  Mr.  Dyson,  and  I searched 
the  Common  for  bottles  at  the  place  indicated  by  him.  I found 
the  coloured  bottle  with  Poison,  not  to  be  taken  ” on  itv  I 
should  say  that  I have  searched  the  Common  twice  since,  but  I 
have  not  been  able  to  find  the  other  bottles.  On  18th  February 
I received  a warrant  from  the  coroner,  upon  which  I took  Mr. 
Dyson  into  custody,  and  took  him  before  the  magistrate.  The 
warrant  was  for  both  prisoners,  and  it  charged  them  with  murder. 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills — There  was  a large  box  of  books  which 
were  not  taken  possession  of.  They  were  mostly  English  books;  I 
do  not  remember  seeing  any  foreign  book.  The  “ Pharmacopoeia  ” 
is  the  only  one  that  struck  me. 

Dr.  Stevekson,  recalled  and  further  examined  by  the  Attob- 
nbt-Gbotral — ^Last  night  there  were  delivered  to  me  and  Dr. 
Tidy  jointly  a nightdress  and  a pillow  case.  There  were  spots  and 
stains  on  the  nightdress.  But  1 could  not  detect  any  substance 
beyond  a little  sugary  substance.  The  stains  might  have  been  due 
to^  any  ordinary  article  of  liquid  food,  such  as  beef  tea,  or  it 
might  be  the  result  of  perspiration.  It  was  not  caused  by  tea, 
as  the  tannic  character  of  tea  or  brandy  was  absent.  It  might 
have  been  sweet,  I think.  There  was  no  sign  on  the  pillow  case. 

Mrs.  Caboliot  Doggbtt,  recalled  and  further  examined  by  the 
ATTOBNET-GsiraBAL — ^Mr.  and  Mrs.  Bartlett  came  to  lodge  with 
me  in  October.  The  illness  began  in  December,  and  Dr.  Leach 
was  called  in  on  the  lOth.  The  first  weA  that  Ihe  Bartletts  were 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Mrs  Caroline  Dogselt 

living  with  me  they  had  only  one  bedroom  and  one  bed,  which 
they  used  together.  Afterwards  a smaller  bed  was  put  into  the 
bedroom,  which  they  continued  to  occupy  up  to  the  time  of  the 
illness.  The  small  bed  was  then  moved  into  the  drawing-room. 
I sometimes  went  to  help  the  servant  to  make  the  large  bed,  and 
I found  the  small  one  remade,  but  whether  Mrs.  Bartlett  had  made 
it  or  not  I cannot  say.  1 think  the  servant,  Alice  Fulcher,  can 
speak  to  that.  There  were  folding  doors  communicating  between 
the  drawing-room  and  the  bedroom,  and  it  was  not  necessary  to 
go  on  to  the  landing  to  get  from  the  bedroom  to  the  front  room. 
There  was  some  furniture  put  near  the  folding  doors  when  the 
sofa  was  put  there  in  December.  But  it  was  possible  to  pass 
through  the  door.  I did  not  see  anything  unusual  in  the  relation- 
ship between  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Bartlett.  I think  they  were  on  affec- 
tionate terms  as  husband  and  wife. 

Futher  cross-examined  by  Mr.  Clakee — ^Whose  was  that  small 
bedstead  ? — ^Mrs.  Bartlett  ordered  me  to  get  another  bed  to  put  in 
the  room. 

Do  you  mean  that  you  bought  it  for  the  purpose  1 — ^Yes. 

Then  it  was  yours? — Tes. 

At  the  time  of  their  coming,  or  very  soon  after  was  it,  she 
said  that  to  you? — ^When  they  came  they  asked  for  two  beds  in 
the  bedroom. 

What?  The  first  time  they  took  the  room? — ^Yes. 

You  had  not  in  the  house  a bed  small  enough  to  put  in,  I 
believe? — ^No,  and  it  was  nearly  a week  before  I could  get  out  to 
run  to  the  stores,  and  it  was  some  days  before  they  sent  it. 

But  when  they  first  took  the  rooms,  I understand,  it  was  stipu- 
lated that  they  should  have  two  beds? — ^Two  beds. 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills — ^Were  you  ever  present  in  the  room 
when  Mr.  Dyson  was  there  with  them? — ^With  Mrs.  Bartlett,  not 
with  Mr.  Bartlett. 

Did  you  ever  hear  what  he  called  her  or  what  she  called  him? 
—No. 


Alice  Fuloheb,  recalled  and  further  examined  by  the 
Attornbt-GtBNbral — was  servant  to  Mrs.  Doggett.  I remember 
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Bartlett  coming  to  her  house  in  October,  and  1 
remember  Mr.  Bartlett's  illness  in  December.  They  occupied  the 
same  bed  the  first  week  they  came,  and  then  a small  bed  was  put 
into  the  bedroom.  They  then  always  occupied  separate  beds.  The 
small  bed  was  moved  into  the  front  room  when  the  illness  came  on. 
After  that  Mrs.  Bartlett  used  to  have  the  sofa  made  up  in  front 
of  the  fire,  and  she  slept  there.  , 

By  Mr.  Justice  Wills — waited  upon  the  Bartletts  when 
Mr.  Dyson  was  dining  there.  I have  heard  Mrs.  Bartlett  address 
him  as  Mr.  Dyson  and  also  as  George  while  Mr.  Bartlett  was 

291 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Alice  Fulcher 

present.  I do  not  remember  Mr.  Dyson  calling  her  anything. 
When  Mr.  Dyson  came  to  the  house  I have  seen  books  about,  but  I 
cannot  say  whether  they  were  open.  I did  not  know  anything  at 
the  time  about  lessons  being  given.  I do  not  know  whether  Mr. 
Dyson  brought  books  with  him. 

Edmond  Blake,  examined  by  Mr.  Poland — am  an  inspector 
of  the  Metropolitan  Police.  I understand  making  plans  and 
models,  and  I have  often  made  them  for  Courts  of  justice.  The 
plans  which  have  been  produced  here  are  correct  apd  to  scale. 
Mr.  Poland — That  is  the  case,  my  lord. 

Mr.  Clarke — I do  not  call  any  evidence. 


Speech  for  the  Defence, 

Mr.  Edward  Clarke — May  it  please  you,  my  lord,  gentlemen 
of  the  jury — ^In  this  case  you  have  now  heard,  in  its  fullest  detail, 
the  evidence  which  the  Crown  has  to  lay  before  you  in  support 
of  this  charge,  and,  having  heard  that  evidence,  and  believing 
that  I have  been  able,  to  some  extent,  to  trace  the  e^ect  of  it  upon 
your  minds,  1 now,  in  Adelaide  Bartlett’s  name,  claim  from  you 
a verdict  of  not  guilty.  It  might  be  thought  that  one  was  speaking 
too  confidently  in  using  that  sentence.  Some  of  my  friends  might 
think  that  I had  had  sufficient  experience  of  the  sad  uncertainties  of 
the  administration  of  the  criminal  law  to  induce  me  to  pause 
before  I used  an  expression  which  only  the  strongest  confidence 
would  justify.  But,  gentlemen,  I think  I shall  justify  that  claim 
in  the  most  absolute  and  complete  form.  I believe  that  when  1 
have  taken  you,  as  it  will  be  my  duty  to  take  you,  through  the 
record  of  the  evidence  of  suspicion  which  has  pointed  to  her  guilt, 
and  through  that  evidence  more  recently  given,  and  which  has,  I 
think  I shall  show  you,  gone  nearly  to  demonstrating  her  innocence, 
I think  you  will  recognise  that  my  claim  is  not  too  confident,  and 
that  it  is  a claim  which  you  will  admit  and  indorse. 

I fear  I shall  have  to  detain  you  some  time  in  discussing  this 
case,  for  one  reason,  which  only  applies  to  cases  where  the  Attorney 
or  Solicitor-General  appears  for  the  prosecution.  There  is  a 
strange  anomaly  in  the  procedure  in  such  cases.  In  the  ordinary 
cases,  which  are  subjects  of  accusation  and  defence  in  these  Courts, 
where  the  prosecution  has  produced  all  its  evidence,  and  where, 
as  is  the  case  in  nine  cases  out  of  ten,  the  prisoner  not  being 
allowed  to  give  evidence,  no  evidence  is  offered,  or  could  be  offered, 
on  the  part  of  the  defence — in  all  those  cases,  at  the  end  of  the 
evidence  for  the  prosecution,  the  counsel  who  asks  the  jury,  in  the 
name  of  the  Crown,  to  accept  the  charge  that  has  been  made,  has 
fhen  and  there,  at  the  close  of  the  evidence,  to  point  out  to  the 
292 


L«tter  from  Adelaide  Bartlett  to  Sir  Edward  Clarke. 


Mr  Clarlie 


Speech  for  the  Defence. 

jury  the  facts  upon  which  he  relies,  to  indicate  upon  what  ground 
of  suspicion  or  of  evidence  it  is  that  he  feels  entitled  to  ask  them 
for  a verdict  of  guilty ; and  when  he  has  so  pointed  out  the  grounds 
upon  which,  in  his  judgment  and  contention,  that  verdict  could 
be  justified,  it  is  then  the  right  of  the  counsel  for  the  prisoner  to 
make  answer  to  the  suggestions  so  put.  But,  strangely  enough, 
in  those  cases  in  which  the  privilege  and  right  is  most  important  to 
the  prisoner,  the  practice  of  our  procedure  takes  it  away;  and 
although  I call  no  witnesses,  though  I have  to  content  myself  with 
comments  upon  the  evidence  put  before  you,  when  I have  finished, 
the  leader  of  the  English  bar  will  have  to  answer  me,  will  have  an 
opportunity — do  not  say  that  he  will  use  it — of  pointing  to 
topics  of  suspicion  or  of  proof,  which  I may  not  have  appreciated, 
upon  which,  if  he  were  to  make  his  statement  now  as  counsel  for 
the  prosecution,  if  this  were  some  trivial  case,  such  as  those  cases 
whic^  are  often  tried  in  the  other  Courts,  if  he  had  to  make  that 
statement  now,  I should  hear  the  comments,  and  might  be  able 
to  answer  them,  but  they  will  come  to  you  when  my  lips  are  closed. 

It  is  an  anomalous  privilege,  and  1 do  not  hesitate  to  say,  as  I 
have  said  in  this  Court  before,  that  1 hope  an  Attorney-General  may 
be  found  some  day,  unless  the  law  is  altered,  as  it  should  be,  to 
abandon  the  exercise  of  a right  which  does  not  seem  to  me  to  be 
defensible.  It  has  always  been  felt  by  the  Attorney-General  that 
the  exercise  of  that  right  has  to  be  under  strict  conditions;  and 
nearly  one  hundred  years  ago  a great  Attorney-General,  after- 
wards an  illustrous  judge,  speaking  as  Sir  John  Scott,  said  that 
the  principles  upon  which  the  Attorney-General  spoke  in  a case 
of  this  kind  were  principles  which  forbade  the  exhibition  of 
zeal  on  his  part.  I know  that  my  learned  friend  will  endeavour 
to  be  as  fair  in  his  reply  as  he  was  in  his  opening;  but  I know 
it  well,  by  my  own  experience  of  the  conduct  of  cases  where  one 
meets  in  forensic  combat — ^I  know  that  there  is  an  instinct  of  anta- 
gonism aroused  which  the  strongest  determination  to  be  absolutely 
impartial  and  fair  could  not  by  any  of  us  be  trusted  to  clear 
him  from  prejudice  or  from  passion.  And  my  learned  friend, 
coming  from  a country  distinguished  far  more  for  its  advocates 
than  for  its  judges,  may  import  that  combative  instinct  into  the 
conduct  of  this  case. 

Gentlemen,  that  consideration  obliges  me  to  deal  with  all  the 
topics  that  are  before  you,  because,  if  I were  to  leave  any  out,  it 
might  suggest  itself  to  your  minds,  or  it  might  be  suggested,  that 
I have  avoided  a difficulty;  and  unless  I met,  as  far  as  I could,  all 
the  suggestions  which  appear  to  me  to  arise  upon  the  facts  whidbt 
have  been  put  before  you,  I should  run  the  most  grievous  risk — 
risk  not  for  myself,  for  it  is  a matter  of  no  moment  to  me  what 
comment  might  be  made  on  my  speech  or  my  advocacy,  but  risk  to 
one  whose  interests  are  present  to  me  at  this  moment  in  a very 

293 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Mr  Clarke 

far  higher  degree  than  any  consideration  that  could  attach  to 
myself. 

Whatever  the  history  of  our  medical  jurisprudence  may  be, 
this  case  will  long  be  remembered.  There  have  been  incidents  in 
it,  there  have  been  topics  dwelt  upon,  which  will  not  easily  be 
forgotten  by  any  of  those  who  interest  themselves  in  the  administra- 
tion of  the  criminal  law,  or  in  subjects  of  medical  science  and 
of  medical  jurisprudence.  We  have  had  certainly  strange  inci- 
dents. 1 do  not  speak  now  of  those  remarkable  relations  which 
appear  to  have  existed  between  Mr.  Bartlett  and  his  wife — rela- 
tions which  would  be  almost  inconceivable  if  they  had  not  been, 
as  here  they  are,  proved  to  be  true.  Nor  do  1 speak  at  this 
moment  of  that  other  most  remarkable  incident  in  this  case, 
which  gave  to  the  proceedings  of  the  second  day  an  intensely 
dramatic  interest,  when  the  man  who  had  passed,  with  the  consent 
and  sanction  of  the  Crown,  from  his  place  in  the  dock,  who  had 
been,  by  their  consent  and  upon  their  invitation,  declared  by 
your  verdict  to  be  free  from  any  imputation  of  crime  in  this 
matter,  stood  in  that  witness-box  and  heard  the  question  which  was 
put  by  my  learned  friend,  Mr.  Poland,  with  a rhetorical  point 
which  1 do  not  think  was  present  to  his  mind  when  he  asked  the 
question.  You  gave  your  evidence  before  the  coroner  and  then 
^e  was  arrested  ; and,  having  passed  from  the  dock  to  the 
witness-box,  it  is  in  great  measure  upon  the  evidence  that  he  has 
given  that  you  are  asked  to  rely  in  support  of  the  charge  against 
Mrs.  Bartlett. 

But,  gentlemen,  there  is  another  consideration  which  I think 
has  been  presented  to  your  minds.  It  is  a marvellous  thing  that 
you  are  asked  by  the  prosecution  to  accept — ^you  are  a^d — and 
when  I use  that  phrase  I do  not  mean  that  you  will  be  urged,  but 
what  I do  mean  is,  that  this  is  what  you  must  accept 
if  you  accept  the  idea  of  guilt  or  the  contention  of  guilt — ^you 
are  asked  to  believe  that  a woman  who,  for  years,  had  lived  in 
friendship  and  afieotion  with  her  husband;  who,  during  the  whole 
time  of  his  illness,  had  striven  to  tend  him,  to  nurse  him,  and  to 
help  him;  who  had  tended  him  by  day,  who  had  sacrificed  her 
own  rest  to  watch  over  him  at  night,  had  spent  night  after  night 
without  going  to  her  restful  bed,  simply  giving  to  herself  sleep  at 
the  bottom  of  his  couch  that  she  might  he  ready  by  him  to  comdort 
him  by  her  presence;  who  had  called  doctors,  who  had  taken  all 
the  pains  that  the  most  tender  and  afiectionate  nurse  possibly 
could,  that  by  no  possibility  any  chance  should  be  lost  of  the 
doctors  ascertaining  what  his  trouble  was,  and  having  the  quickest 
means  to  cure  it — that  woman  w£o  had  watched  over  him,  had 
tried  to  cheer  him,  had  talked  of  going  away,  had  talked  lightly 
when  they  were  together  before  the  doctor  in  order  to  give  spirits 
to  that  husband — you  are  asked  to  imagine  that  that  woman  on 
284 


Speech  for  the  Defence. 

Mr  Clarke 

New  Year’s  Eve  was  suddenly  transformed  into  a murderess,  com- 
mitting crime,  not  only  without  excuse,  but  absolutely  without  any 
object — ^you  are  asked  to  believe  that  by  a sort  of  inspiration 
she  succeeds  in  committing  that  orime  by  the  execution  of  a delicate 
and  difficult  operation,  an  operation  which  would  have  been  deli- 
cate and  difficult  to  the  highest  trained  doctor  that  this  country 
has  in  it. 

There  is  another  aspect  in  which  this  case  will  be  of  abiding 
interest,  and  the  observation  which  I have  just  made  leads  me  to  it. 
This  is  the  first  case  that  the  world  has  ever  heard  of  in  which 
it  has  been  suggested  that  a person  has  been  murdered  by  the 
administration  of  liquid  chloroform.  Just  let  me  ask  you  to  con- 
sider what  a tremendous  effect  that  proposition  and  that  fact  ought 
to  have  upon  your  judgment.  Forty  years  ago  it  was  discovered 
that  by  the  administration  of  chloroform  a state  of  insensibility 
might  be  produced  during  which  the  most  terrible  operations  could 
be  performed  on  the  human  frame  without  pain  being  suffered  from 
the  operation ; and  it  was  recognised,  by  all  the  members  of  that 
great  profession  which  devotes  itself  to  i^e  study  and  to  the  treat- 
ment of  human  suffering,  that  here  ,a  great  boon,  a great  bless- 
ing, had  been  found  for  man,  and  that  many  lives  might  be  saved 
which  would  have  passed  away  under  the  intense  agony  of  the 
surgeon’s  knive,  or  even  at  the  very  thought  of  what  that  agony 
might  be;  and  for  the  last  forty  years  this  chloroform,  its  qualities 
and  efiects,  the  mode  of  administration,  the  symptoms  of  ffie 
patient,  the  results  either  for  life  or  death,  have  been  a constant 
subject  of  inquiry  by  the  medical  profession. 

You  have  had  the  good  fortune  to  see  in  the  witness-box  two  of 
the  greatest  living  authorities  upon  these  subjects.  Than  Dr. 
Stevenson  and  Dr.  Tidy  no  witnesses  could  be  brought  here  of 
greater  authority  as  to  the  history  and  as  to  the  character  of  this 
matter;  and  1 know  those  two  gentlemen  well  enough  to  know 
that  when  they  go  into  the  witness-box  they,  at  all  events,  are 
absolutely  clear  from  feeling,  bias,  or  prejudice  with  respect  to  the 
case  in  which  they  are  concerned,  and  tiiat  they,  speaking  from 
the  witness-box,  speak  with  a due  and  strong  sense  of  responsibility 
for  the  evidence  they  are  giving.  Gentlemen,  you  have  had  the 
best  information  which  you  could  possibly  get  on  this  subject,  and 
what  does  it  come  to? — that  never,  during  those  forty  years,  has 
there  been  a case  of  murder  by  chloroform.  There  have  been  cases 
of  death  by  chloroform — ^there  have  been  cases  of  death  from  the 
swallowing  of  liquid  chloroform.  In  the  great  majority  of  those 
cases  dea^  may  have  been  death  by  suicide;  in  all  the  others, 
they  have  been  death  by  the  accidental  taking  or  administration 
of  that  drug.  There  is  no  case  recorded  in  the  books,  but  during 
those  forty  years  there  have  been  criminals  in  this  country  and  in 
other  countries  who  would  have  used  that  poison  if  it  had  been 

295 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Mr  Clarke 

possible  or  likely  to  succeed.  There  have  been  men  who  have  com- 
mitted murders,  who  have  been  supplied  with  all  the  medical 
knowledge  and  experience  that  would  be  required  for  the  purpose 
of  the  successful  administration  of  this  poison.  There  is  no  case 
of  the  kind,  and  you  are  called  upon  now — it  is  suggested  to  you 
that  you  should  say  that  Adelaide  Bartlett  has  committed  an  ofEence 
absolutely  unknown  in  the  history  of  medical  jurisprudence,  and 
the  possibility  of  which  has  never  been  suggested  in  any  book  on 
this  subject  so  far  as  we  know — never. 

Now,  gentlemen,  let  us  just  consider  for  a moment  what  this 
means.  These  forty  years  having  passed,  I think  you  under- 
stand now  how  it  is,  for  it  has  been  your  lot  to  listen  yesterday 
and  to-day  to  an  exposition  of  all  that  is  known  on  this  subject 
from  Dr.  Stevenson  and  Dr.  Tidy — think  you  understand  the 
reasons  why  chloroform  never  has  been  used,  and  probably  never 
will  be  used,  for  the  purpose  of  murder,  because  the  administration 
of  liquid  chloroform  is  singularly  variable  in  its  effects.  In- 
stances are  given  where  large  doses  of  liquid  chloroform  have  been 
taken,  and  the  patient  has  lived  afterwards.  We  hear  of  cases 
of  persons  swallowing  2 ounces,  4 ounces — think  1 saw  a case 
in  that  list  of  6 ounces — of  liquid  chloroform,  and  yet  of  life  being 
retained.  There  seems  no  rule  at  all : one  case  will  give  you  the 
instance  of  a man  who  swallows  liquid  chloroform  and  walks  for 
a considerable  distance  after  he  has  done  so;  another,  a case  which 
has  attracted  special  notice  in  the  list  Dr.  Stevenson  supplied  us 
with,  a case  where  a man,  twenty-six  years  of  age,  takes  a very 
much  smaller  dose  of  chloroform,  and  in  three  minutes  he  was 
in  a heavy  sleep ; so  that,  as  to  ii»  fatal  effects,  there  are  all  sorts 
of  variety.  And  there  is  also  the  same  variety  as  to  the  symptoms. 
It  may  produce  immediate  or  almost  immediate  coma ; it  may  pro- 
duce convulsions ; it  may  produce  with  an  ordinary  dose  vomiting ; 
it  may,  so  far  as  I oan  see,  produce  no  immediate  effects  at  all; 
in  fact,  the  summing-up  of  the  whole  matter,  the  whole  testimony 
of  medical  science  with  regard  to  chloroform,  is  that  its  administra- 
tion requires  to  be  watched  with  so  great  care  in  order  to  adjust 
it  to  the  characteristics  of  the  patient — that  its  effects,  whether 
inhaled  or  swallowed,  are  so  various  in  character — ^that  it  is  not 
altogether  a trustworthy  agent  for  producing  ansssthesia.  It 
has  already  been  succeeded  by  another,  the  administration  of 
which  is  believed  to  be  free  from  some  of  the  difficulties  and  dangers 
'which  attend  the  administration  of  chloroform,  and  medical  science 
can  only  say  that  its  effects  are  so  uncertain  that  its  administration 
cannot  be  undertaken  without  great  care  and  study. 

But  now,  gentlemen,  let  me  go  a step  further.  If  you  were' 
dealing  with  a case  of  ^e  fatal  inhalation  of  chloroform,  there 
would  not  be  the  same  difficulty.  Science  tells  us  that  the  stories 
of  immediate  insensibility  produced  by  chloroform  are  mere  fables, 


speech  for  the  Defence. 

Mr  Clarke 

because,  if  chloroform  be  administered  in  an  overdose  so  strong, 
with  so  slight  an  admixture  of  air  that  it  at  once  produces  insensi- 
bility, that  insensibility  means  immediate  death.  It  is  not  here  a 
question  of  death  by  the  inhalation  of  chloroform;  1 shall  have 
occasion  presently  to  point  out  to  you  that  if  a person  were  trying 
to  commit  a murder  by  chloroform,  and  administered  any  chloro- 
form to  the  victim  so  as  to  produce  even  partial  ansesthesia,  that 
they  would  almost  certainly,  either  with  medical  knowledge  or 
without  medical  knowledge,  go  on  with  the  administration  of  the 
inhaled  chloroform  and  produce  fatal  effects;  and  it  is  impossible 
to  suppose  that  a person,  with  medical  knowledge  or  without  medi- 
cal knowledge,  either  knowing  all  these  difficult  details  or  not, 
would  interrupt  the  process  of  anaesthesia,  which,  if  continued, 
must  result  in  death,  in  order  to  attempt  another  and  a difficult 
process,  the  immediate  result  of  which  might  be  to  destroy  the 
anaesthetic  influence  which  had  already  been  produced,  and  to  re- 
vive the  patient  to  the  capacity  of  sensation  or  resistance.  But 
it  is  not  here  death  from  inhalation  of  chloroform;  what  is  alleged 
or  suggested  here  is,  death  by  chloroform  poured  down  the  throat ; 
and  I think  you  will  quite  understand  that,  although,  of  course, 
there  can  be  no  admission  in  cases  of  this  kind,  looking  at  the  evi- 
dence and  looking  at  the  great  authority  of  Dr.  Stevenson  and  Dr. 
Tidy,  it  seems  to  me  perfectly  clear — if  I am  entitled  to  say  so — ^that 
there  was  in  the  stomach  of  Mr.  Bartlett  a sufficient  quantity  of 
chloroform  to  indicate  that  he  had  taken  what  might  have  been  a 
fatal  dose.  There  are  all  sorts  of  limitations  to  that.  No  one  can 
define  what  a fatal  dose  is.  A fatal  dose  has  sometimes  been  very 
small,  and  a large  quantity  has  sometimes  not  produced  death;  but, 
seeing  how  small  a quantity  has  sometimes  on  some  occasions  pro- 
duced that  fatal  effect,  it  is  impossible,  1 think,  to  suggest  that  the 
quantity  which  Dr.  Stevenson  found  in  the  stomach  did  not  indi- 
cate that  death  might  have  been  caused  by  chloroform  administered 
by  the  mouth.  There  are  questions  with  regard  to  the  condition 
of  the  mouth,  and  of  the  upper  part  of  the  throat,  and  of  the  throat, 
and  of  the  air  passages  upon  which,  of  course,  I shall  have  a word  to 
say  at  another  time;  but,  for  the  moment,  it  seems  to  me  that 
Dr.  Stevenson's  evidence  is  conclusive  that  there  was  sufficient 
chloroform  in  the  stomach  to  indicate  that  a dose  which  might  have 
been  fatal  had  been  taken,  and  there  are  no  appearances  which 
point  to  death  from  any  other  cause. 

When  we  have  taken  that  step,  just  observe  how  very  serious 
is  the  next  step  which  has  to  be  taken  by  the  prosecution.  My 
learned  friend  the  Attorney-General  recognised  it,  and  himself  ex- 
pressed the  difficulty,  at  the  close  of  his  opening  in  this  case, 
because  he  said  chloroform  could  not  be  administered  by  inhalation 
to  a resisting  person  if  you  wished  to  cause  death;  and  he  said 
murder  could  not  be  done  by  chloroform  being  poured  down  the 

297 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Mr  Clarke 

throat  of  any  person  unless  he  had  previously  been  reduced  to  a con- 
dition, substantially,  of  insensibility,  unless  there  had  been  a pre- 
vious inhalation  of  chloroform,  he  being  unwilling,  and  1 do  not 
think  my  learned  friend  is  going  to  suggest  acquiescence  on  the  part 
of  Mr.  Bartlett. 

The  Attornht-Gbnbral — Certainly  not, 

Mr,  Clabeb — ^Because  he  said  it  could  not  be  poured  down,  he 
being  unwilling,  so  that  the  person  must  have  been  reduced  to  a 
state  by  inhalation  where  swallowing  was  possible,  and  where  also 
the  power  of  resistance  had  disappeared.  Now  let  us  see  what 
step  this  is  you  are  asked  to  take.  You  cannot  come,  according  to 
this  suggestion  or  theory,  to  the  conclusion  that  Mrs.  Bartlett  com- 
mitted this  crime  unless  you  come  to  the  conclusion  that  she  first, 
by  the  administration  of  chloroform  by  inhalation,  produced  in- 
sensibility, and  that  she  then  poured  down  the  insensible  and 
unresisting  throat  the  substance  that  caused  the  death.  Well,  but 
the  moment  that  that  suggestion  is  made,  we  have  before  us  almost 
an  impossibility.  I have  put  myself  in  a position  in  this  case  to  be 
able,  without  hesitation  and  fear,  to  challenge  Dr.  Stevenson  and 
Dr.  Tidy  with  respect  to  any  matter  contained  in  the  recognised 
books  of  authority  in  England,  and  I have  put  the  question  to 
them  as  to  an  anaesthesia  produced  during  sleep.  The  suggestion  is 
(and  you  must  accept  every  step  of  it  if  you  are  to  say  that  this 
accusation  is  proved)  that,  Mr.  Bartlett  being  asleep,  chloroform 
is  administered  to  him  by  inhalation,  which  reduces  him  to  a state 
of  sufficient  insensibility  to  prevent  his  resisting  the  administration 
of  liquid  chloroform,  and  that,  being  in  that  state,  it  is  done. 
Why,  gentlemen,  that  process  is  surrounded  by  difficulties,  and 
by  difficulties  of  a most  serious  kind.  Look  at  the  very  first  step, 
the  administration  of  chloroform  by  inhalation  to  a sleeping  per- 
son. 1 asked  Dr.  Stevenson : Is  there  any  record  in  the  English 
books  upon  this  matter?  There  is  not,  except  by  reference.  One 
of  those  references  is  in  Taylor's  book  on  poisons,  and  it  is  the 
reference  to  a French  authority — which  book  lies  before  me — and 
the  sentence  in  which  this  French  authority  disposes  of  this  ques- 
tion of  the  administration  of  chloroform  by  inhalation  to  a sleeping 
person  points  out  the  substantial  impossibility  of  such  adrainistra- 
tion — ^it  points  out,  at  all  events,  this:  that  such  administration 
would  involve  the  great  overwhelming  probability  that  the  person 
would  awake  and  resist.  This  Frendbi  authority  speaks  of  experi- 
ments, and  you  will  observe  that  the  record  of  all  these  experi- 
ments is  a record  of  experiments  made  by  skilled  chloroformiirts, 
familiar  with  the  operation  of  chloroform  and  the  administration 
of  anaesthetics  according  to  their  best  experience  and  under  the 
most  favourable  conditions,  and  administering  it,  one  cannot  doubt, 
only  to  persons  whom  they  had  noticed  as  being  patients  upon  whom 
it  would  be  liely  to  produce  a satisfactory  effect,  because  it  will 


speech  for  the  Defence. 

MrClttrln 

be  perfectly  clear  to  you  that  no  physician  would  venture  to  try 
and  administer  chloroform  to  a sleeping  person  unless  he  believed 
that  that  person  was  of  a character  and  idiosyncrasy  to  he  satis- 
factorily operated  upohj  otherwise  there  would  be,  what  you  have 
been  told  in  one  of  these  cases,  the  sudden  awakening  to  resist- 
ance, and  the  objection,  You  are  trying  to  give  me  something,” 
and  so  undoubtedly  eluding  the  operation.  Now,  those  cases  are 
attempts  by  skilled  persons,  under  the  best  conditions,  and  most 
carefully  done;  and,  of  the  cases  which  this  French  authority  has 
been  able  to  record,  in  75  per  cent,  the  persons  awakened  when 
the  attempt  was  made,  and  the  summing-up  of  the  French  authority 
on  this  matter  is  that  it  is  possible  to  administer  scientifically 
— let  me  read  the  passage  again : ” It  is  difi&cult,  but  often  pos- 
sible, to  render  persons  who  are  in  natural  sleep  insensible  by 
chloroform  with  certain  precautions : the  employment  of  a pure 
spirit” — ^then  come  the  words  which  I translated  yesterday — 

G-rand  habitude,”  “ great  skill  ” — but  am  not  sure  they  are  not 
better  translated  ” long,  or  great,  practice — are  among  the  con- 
ditions which  may  favour  the  attempt  to  chloroform  in  that  way.” 
Then  he  goes  on  to  say : It  is  possible  that  certain  subjects 
are  absolutely  refractory — that  is  to  say,  it  will  be  impossible  to 
ansesthetise  them  in  spite  of  all  the  precautions  that  may  be  taken. 
Other  persons,  on  the  contrary,  and  little  children  by  preference, 
will  submit  to  anaesthetics  without  being  aroused  from  their  slumber 
by  the  irritation  that  the  anaesthetic  agent  produces  in  the'  air 
passages.” 

Substantially  that  is  the  summing-up  of  that  authority.  Now, 
I asked  Dr.  Stevenson : Can  you  give  me  any  other  authority ) 
There  is  no  English  one,  and  I confess  I have  not  followed  the 
American  authorities  on  the  subject  with  which  we  are  now  dealing. 
But  there  is  no  American  authority  in  the  shape  of  a treatise. 

Wharton  and  Still4,”  the  book  I produced  yesterday,  is  a book 
referred  to  in  one  of  our  English  treatises,  and  that  gives  the  ex- 
periences of  a doctor  who,  giving  evidence  at  a trial,  spoke  of 
the  attempts  that  he  made.  He  had  made  the  attempt  on  several 
persons — on  six  persons  i experiments  with  chloroform  on  six  sleep- 
ing persons,  and  out  of  that  number  all  resisted  more  or  less.  Two 
were  awakened  up  immediately,  and  one  remarked,  ” You  are 
trying  to  give  me  something.” 

So  far  with  regard  to  the  authorities  upon  that  subject.  Dr. 
Stevenson  referred  me  to  one  other  authority,  and  I followed  it; 
and  this  morning  he  has  brought  the  book,  I find  now  'that  this 
exactly  bears  out  the  letter  from  Mr.  Dobson,  and  exactly  bears 
out  the  opinion  given  in  the  French  book— that  is  to  say,  it  indi- 
cates there  is  difiElcully  in  the  administration,  and  it  speaks  of  the 
administration  of  chloroform  in  this  way  having  been  represented 
to  be  very  rare,  and  it  describes  the  operation  of  removing  a tumour 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Mr  Clarke 

from  the  side  of  the  knee  and  the  thigh,  and  here  again  you 
have  young  persons.  I think  there  is  one  more  reference,  and  ^at 
is  in  Dr.  Tidy^s  own  book.  It  is  a reference  to  the  Zcw^ce^,  and  by 
the  kindness  of  the  editor  of  the  Lancet  a set  of  Lancets  for  1872 
was  put  at  my  disposal  yesterday.  I turn  to  that  to  see  what  it 
gives,  and  I find  it  refers  entirely  to  the  administration  of  chloro- 
form during  sleep  to  children,  and  I find  this  (which  is  of  great 
importance  with  respect  to  this  matter),  that  the  doctor  who  had  so 
administered  it  to  children  goes  on  to  say,  The  only  precaution 
I ever  found  necessary  to  prevent  them  from  awaking  with  the 
first  inspiration  of  the  chloroform  was  that  the  inhaler  should  first 
be  held  at  a moderate  distance  from  the  child’s  face,  and  gradually 
approached  nearer  until  the  requisite  degree  of  anaesthesia  was 
produced,  which  would  be  judged  of  by  the  usual  signs.” 

There  is  only  one  more  observation  to  be  made  on  this,  and 
it  exhausts  the  whole  subject.  This  morning  we  have  had  Dr. 
Tidy  himself  here,  and  we  have  had  from  him  the  record  given 
with  that  absolute  impartiality  with  which  science  speaks  when  it 
goes,  in  the  presence  of  its  distinguished  representatives,  into  the 
witness-box  to  inform  and  advise  the  judge  and  jury.  He  says 
he  had  made  three  experiments  (and  you  cannot  doubt  that  those 
experiments  were  most  carefully  made — ^he  is  himself  a most  ex- 
perienced chloroformist,  and  would  know  all  the  conditions  under 
which  these  experiments  might  be  properly  and  favourably  made), 
the  cases  in  which  he  tried  it  wi^  children  succeeding,  but  the 
cases  in  which  he  tried  it  with  adults  failed,  and  the  persons  awoke. 

Now,  gentlemen,  what  do  you  say  as  to  the  first  step — ^the  step 
of  administering  chloroform  by  inhalation  to  the  sleeping  person 
so  as  to  produce  insensibility,  which  would  enable  the  subsequent 
administration  of  chloroform  by  the  throat?  Does  not  all  the  in- 
formation that  the  best  medical  authorities  can  give  us  on  the  sub- 
ject show  to  you  it  is  in  the  highest  degree  improbable  that  an 
unskilled  person  would  ever  be  able  to  transform  sleep  in  anaes- 
thesia by  the  influence  of  chloroform  without  waking  the  person 
who  was  subject  to  that  process? 

Just  let  me  take  one  other  step  with  regard  to  this.  If  death 
had  followed  on  inhalation,  there  would  probably  be  some  appear- 
ances discoverable  in  the  post-mortem  examination.  Those  ap- 
pearances would  have  become  less  deflnite  as  the  time  passed  by 
after  the  administration  of  chloroform  and  death  from  it,  and  it 
was  not  Mrs.  Bartlett’s  fault  that  her  husband’s  body  was  not  ex- 
amined within  a very  few  hours  of  his  death.  SEe  was  urging  it 
— anxious  for  it — saying  no  expense  should  be  spared  in  order 
for  it  to  be  done;  and  it  was  only  by  an  accident — ^the  doctor 
being  that  afternoon  engaged — that  her  wish  was  thwarted,  and 
that  the  post-mortem  was  postponed  until  the  next  day.  But  if  it 
is  not  presumptuous  in  me  to  say  so,  the  indications  of  chloro- 
300 


Speech  for  the  Defence. 

Mr  Clarke 

form  poisoning  by  inhalation,  in  a post-mortem  examination,  are 
not  very  precise,  and  have  a tendency  to  disappear  during  the 
time  that  elapses  after  death.  But  still,  if  there  had  been  inhala- 
tion, one  would  expect  to  find  some  indications  if  there  had  been 
death  very  shortly  after,  and  although  that  inhalation  had  not 
gone  far  enough  to  produce  paralysis  which  might  cause  the  death- 
paralysis  of  the  heart  and  paralysis  of  the  respiratory  organs — 
still,  one  would  expect  to  find,  though  in  a smaller  degree,  indica- 
tions that  inhalation  had  taken  place.  And  here,  although  one 
would  not  expect  to  find  indications  in  so  marked  a degree  as  if 
death  had  happened  from  inhalation  alone,  still,  as,  according  to 
the  theory  of  the  prosecution,  the  inhalation  of  chloroform  must 
have  taken  place  shortly  before  death  to  such  an  extent  as  to 
produce  a very  considerable  amount  of  anaesthesia  and  insensi- 
bility, one  would  expect  to  find  some  indications.  I do  not  desire 
to  lay  too  much  stress  upon  this  argument,  but  it  is  an  undoubted 
fact  that  none  of  the  indications  of  inhalation  of  chloroform  was 
ever  found  in  this  body.  We  have  got  from  Dr.  Stevenson,  and 
have  got  also  from  Dr.  Leach,  who  told  you,  and  who  told  my 
learned  friend,  that  he  had  (and  it  is  quite  natural)  lately  directed 
his  attention  to  the  study  of  this  matter  and  the  works  on  it.  We 
have  got  from  them  a statement  of  what  the  results — ^the  ordinary 
signs — of  chloroform  inhalation  are.  Dr.  Stevenson  agrees  with 
Guy  and  Ferrier  that  the  odour  will  be  observable  in  the  cerebral 
ventricles.  He  demurred  to  one  statement  in  “ Guy  and  Ferrier,'' 
but  he  said  Guy  and  Ferrier  were  high  authorities  on  the  subject, 
and  I put  to  him  that  quotation.  He  agrees  with  Snow  that  in- 
halation may  be  detected  after  death  in  the  urine.  He  agrees  that 
in  many  cases,  again,  as  recorded  by  Snow  and  quoted  by  Taylor, 
engorgement  of  the  right  side  of  the  heart  is  to  be  discovered. 

Let  us  take  these  three  as  the  signs.  There  is  one  other  which 
I will  refer  to  in  a moment  that  Dr.  Stevenson  did  not  accept. 
What  were  the  post-mortem  conditions  in  this  case  ? The  brain  was 
carefully  examined.  Nothing  whatever  was  detected  in  it;  no 
odour  of  chloroform  whatever  was  detected  by  the  skilled  patho- 
logist who,  with  adequate  assistance,  was  making  that  post- 
mortem examination.  Dr.  Green  has  not  been  able  to  come  and 
give  his  evidence  as  to  that  at  this  trial,  but  we  know  he  is  a 
person  of  great  pathological  skill,  and  I have  a right  to  assume 
that  he  would  be  familiar  with  the  symptoms  of  the  mischief  which 
it  was  his  business  to  detect.  Now,  gentlemen,  the  heart  is  de- 
scribed : nothing  abnormal ; the  brain  was  carefully  examined : 
nothing  abnormal.  The  one  other  part  in  which  signs  of  inhala- 
tion of  chloroform  can  be  found — ^the  urine — ^was  never  examined 
by  anybody.  So  that,  so  far  as  the  post-mortem  examination  goes, 

I am  entitled  to  say  this— I do  not  wish  to  push  it  too  far,  because 
there  may  be  an  explanation,  and  the  observation  is  not  a very 

301 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 

Mr  Clarke 

strong  one — ^but  of  all  the  indications  of  the  inhalation  of  chloro- 
form before  death  which  are  in  the  books  of  the  authorities,  and 
which  are  recognised  by  the  witnesses  before  you,  not  one  was  found 
on  the  post-mortem  examination  of  Mr.  Bartlett’s  body.  There 
was  one  other  that  I mention  separately,  because  it  was  not  ac- 
cepted by  Dr.  Stevenson,  although  I put  it  to  him  from  “ Guy  and 
Ferrier,”  and  that  was  intense  inflammation  of  the  air  passages. 
But  I read  the  passage  from  Guy  and  Ferrier  ” with  respect 
to  the  results  of  poisoning  by  that  class  of  poisons  to  which  chloro- 
form belongs,  the  poisons  alcohol,  ether,  and  chloroform;  and  I 
read  the  passage  to  him : They  act  as  irritants  to  the  parts 
'with  which  they  come  in  contact,  producing  intense  inflammation 
in  the  lining  membrane  of  the  stomach  when  swallowed,  and  in  that 
of  the  air  passages  when  inhaled.”  Though  he  did  not  entirely 
agree,  as  far  as  his  experience  goes,  with  that  passage,  he  admits 
the  book  is  one  of  considerable  authority,  and  I am  entitled  to  say 
that  in  the  air  passages  of  that  body  no  trace  of  inhalation  of 
chloroform  was  found. 

I am  ^ing,  gentlemen,  by  steps.  I have  shown  to  you  the 
enormous  Mo  you  not  think  I may  add  the  word  adopted  by  Dr. 
Stevenson  insuperable — have  siiown  to  you  the  enormous,  may 
I not  say  the  almost  insuperable  difi&culty  of  administering  chloro- 
form to  a sleeping  person  without  waking  him,  and  I have  shown 
you  by  medical  science  that,  whether  carried  to  the  point  of  fatal 
insensibility  or  preceding  death  from  another  cause,  ^ it  might 
leave — put  it  no  higher — indications  which  would  be  discoverable 
on  post-mortem  examination;  and,  if  those  indications  were  dis- 
coverable at  all,  they  would  be  now  catalogued  to  you,  and  not 
one  of  them  is  discovered  in  the  body  of  Mr.  Barnett  on  post- 
mortem examination. 

Now,  let  us  suppose  this  almost  miracle  has  been  worked, 
and  that  an  unskilled  person,  alone,  without  any  assistance,  has 
succeeded  in  administering  chloroform  to  a sleeping  man — a man, 
observe,  who  would  be  called  a refractory  subject,  a man  upon 
whom  these  anaesthetics  did  not  easily  produce  effect,  who  had  been 
with  dif&Gulty  affected  by  nitrous  oxide  gas  a short  time  before. 
Supposing  all  these  enormous  difficulties  overcome,  and  this  thing 
to  have  been  effected,  and  the  man  to  have  passed  under  the  in- 
fluence of  chloroform;  well,  there  are  many  dangers,  many  things 
that  might  have  promptly  happened.  The  first  stage  of  chloroform 
is  described  as  intoxication,  a sort  of  intoxication,  and  there  is  no 
doubt  that  very  often  in  that  early  stage  there  would  be  noise, 
and  violence,  and  movement,  which  one  person  could  not  restrain, 
at  the  yeiy  time  that  she  was  administering  the  chloroform  her- 
self. But  there  is  another  danger : the  administering  of  chloro- 
form produces  generally,  at  some  stage  or  other — sometimes  a 
very  early  stage,  and  sometimes  a late  one — produces  vomiting, 

m 


speech  for  the  Defence. 

Mr  Clarke 

and  it  is  not  at  all  unimportant  to  notice  that  in  this  case  there 
is  no  evidence  of  vomiting  of  any  sort  or  kind. 

But  suppose  these  dangers  passed  by — and  you  will  observe 
that  I am  now  discussing  what  is  the  scientific  possibility,  what  one 
can  imagine  to  be  done  by  trained  chloroformists,  and  the  experi- 
enced skill  of  a man  like  Dr.  Stevenson  or  Dr.  Tidy — suppose  all 
these  difficulties  are  surpassed  and  this  wonderful  result  to  have 
been  effected,  and  the  man  to  have  passed  quietly  into  a sort  of 
anaesthesia,  then  what  is  probable  with  regard  to  the  case  ? I put 
to  Dr.  Stevenson  the  stages  through  which  a person  ordinarily 
passes.  I quite  agree  that  those  stages  are  not  to  be  found  in 
every  case.  There  may,  for  instance,  in  some  cases  be  no  excite- 
ment, no  delirious  outcry,  just  as  in  some  cases  there  may  be  no 
vomiting;  the  conditions  are  not  constant,  the  symptoms  are  not 
always  the  same;  but  one  is  bound  to  take  the  ordinary  history 
of  a case  of  a person  under  the  influence  of  chloroform.  And 
what  does  Dr.  Stevenson  tell  us  with  regard  to  that?  There  are 
four  stages.  The  first  stage  is  a stage  of  excitement;  the  second 
stage  is  one  where  that  excitement  is  calming  down  towards  in- 
^nsibility — am  very  reluctant  to  use  words  of  my  own  in  which, 
in  matters  of  this  enormous  importance,  the  alteration  of  a single 
phrase  might  be  of  consequence,  so  I read  the  passage  which  I put 
to  Dr.  Stevenson,  and  which  he  adopted : There  are  considered 
to  be  four  stages  in  the  administration  of  vapour.  In  the  first, 
the  patient  becomes  excited ; in  the  second,  he  talks  incoherently, 
and  sensibility  is  diminished;  in  the  third,  he  m unconscious,  but 
the  muscles  are  rigid;  in  the  fourth,  the  muscles  are  completely 
relaxed,  and  the  patient  is  perfectly  insensible.  Danger  com- 
mences with  the  third  stage.'’  That  closes  that  passage.  Tester- 
day  afternoon  we  heard  from  Dr.  Stevenson  what  the  condition 
of  things  would  be  in  each  of  those  stages  with  respect  to  the  possi- 
bility of  administering  a liquid  poison  of  this  kind.  In  the  first 
stage,  assuming  it  to  have  existed — assuming  that  the  sleep  did  not 
pass  to  a sort  of  state  of  coma  at  once,  in  which  case  the  person 
administering  the  chloroform  would  have  very  little  indication 
to  guide  him  or  her  of  the  state  in  which  the  patient  was — but 
assume  the  stages  to  be  followed : in  the  first  stage  there  would  be 
this  excitement,  but  there  would  be  sensation;  and  a sensation  of 
the  entrance  into  the  mouth  and  air  passages,  and  over  the  tender 
surface  of  the  mouth  and  throat,  of  this  irritant  poison  would 
arouse  the  patient  to  resistance,  as  in  the  case  of  which  the  doctor 
in  America  spoke.  Then,  in  the  second  stage,  there  would  still  be 
sensibility,  and  there  would  be  the  resistance  to  anything  passing 
down  the  throat.  Well,  but  then  there  would  be  the  third  stage. 
The  third  stage  involves  a rigidity  of  the  muscles,  and  the  jaw 
itself  becomes  rigid,  and  during  that  period  of  rigidity  it  would 
need  force  to  open  the  mouth  down  which  the  person  is  intending  to 

303 


Adelaide  Bardett. 


Mr  Clarke 

pour  the  poison.  1 agree  again,  and  again  1 admit  it  may  be 
presumptuous  of  me  to  use  the  word,  but  I agree  that  the  duration 
of  this  rigidity  differs  enormously  in  different  cases : on  the  one 
hand,  the  transition  from  the  state  of  insensibility  to  complete 
anaesthesia  may  take  place  within  the  compass  of  two  minutes, 
while,  on  the  other,  the  experienced  doctor  administers  more  chloro- 
form if  he  thinks  it  necessary,  and  as  far  as  he  thinks  it  necessary, 
and  he  cannot  produce  that  state  of  anaesthesia  in  less  than  eight 
minutes.  Just  as  the  period  of  the  whole  four  stages  varies,  so 
the  period  of  rigidity  would  vary,  and  you  might  have  a case  in 
which  the  rigidity  would  last  for  a very  few  seconds,  and  you 
may  haye  a case — ^that  is  Dr.  Tidy's  experience — in  which  for  four 
minutes  the  jaw  might  be  rigid,  and  during  that  time  it  is  im- 
possible there  can  be,  without  violence  and  force  which  no  single 
person  could  use,  the  administration  of  chloroform.  But  when 
that  rigidity  has  passed  away,  you  come  to  the  next  stage.  But 
then,  according  to  this  distribution  of  the  stages  of  the  effects  of 
chloroform,  the  next  stage  is  one  in  which  the  muscles  are  com- 
pletely relaxed,  and  the  patient  is  perfectly  insensible.  But  when 
the  muscles  are  relaxed,  and  the  patient  is  insensible,  you  cannot 
get  any  liquid  down  the  throat  at  all  because  of  the  act  of  swal- 
lowing. It  is  proved  in  evidence  before  you.  Dr.  Murray  talks 
of  the  administration  of  this  liquid  by  a tube,  and  in  answer  to 
the  question,  not  from  me  only,  but  from  the  learned  judge,  the 
witnesses  have  described  how  the  act  of  swallowing  is  a voluntary 
process,  and  in  ordinary  conditions  it  requires  the  voluntary 
function  of  different  muscles  in  order  that  the  substance  that 
passes  to  the  mouth  shall  pass  to  the  gullet  and  down  to  the 
stomach,  and  shall  pass  over  the  opening  of  the  air  passages 
through  which  we  speak  without  any  portion  of  it  getting  into 
the  air  passages  and  causing  violent  irritation  and  rejection  of  it. 
There  is  a reflex  action  of  the  muscles  which  lasts  for  some  time 
after  the  voluntary  action  has  ceased,  and  there  is  a time  when 
the  reflex  action  will  be  excited  by  the  contact  of  substances  with 
the  muscles  of  the  throat,  and  the  act  of  swallowing  will  be  per- 
formed; but  if  the  act  of  swallowing  is  not  completely  performed, 
if  the  action  is  not  regular,  full,  and  complete  in  its  effect,  the 
great  probability  will  be  that  some  of  the  substance  will  get  into 
the  air  passages,  it  would  cause  choking  on  its  reception  into  the 
air  passages,  and,  if  it  did  so  in  a case  where  death  afterwards 
occurred,  undoubtedly  there  would  be  found,  which  was  not  found 
in  thie  case — ^there  would  be  found  evidence  in  the  condition  of 
the  air  passages  of  the  transit  of  this  irritant  poison. 

But  now,  gentlemen,  what  does  this  evidence  come  to^  Dr. 
Stevenson  says  in  this  delicate  and  varying  operation  of  ad- 
ministering ^loroform  by  inhalation  there  is  a time,  or  there 
may  be  a time,  the  duration  of  which  no  one  can  measure,  the 
304 


Speech  for  the  Defence. 

Mr  Clarks 

existence  and  the  conditions  of  which  it  is  scarcely  possible  for 
the  most  careful  doctor  to  predict,  and  there  may  be  an  instant  of 
time  or  a few  instants  during  which  the  patient  would  be  so  far 
insensible  as  not  to  detect  or  resent  the  administration  of  the 
poison — so  far  insensible  as  not  to  do  that,  and  yet  with  sufficient 
remains  of  sensibility  about  him  for  the  muscles  to  exert  their 
reflex  action,  and  the  act  of  swallowing  to  take  place.  Supposing 
that  possible,  supposing  that  time  whose  duration  no  man  can 
measure,  the  indication  of  whose  presence  no  one  but  the  most  ex- 
perienced man  can  detect,  suppose  that  time  to  exist,  you  are 
asked  to  believe  that  that  woman  that  night,  alone  with  her  hus- 
band, performed  on  him  this  marvellous  operation.  I put  to  Dr. 
Stevenson  yesterday,  towards  the  end  of  my  cross-examination,  a 
question  in  which  I ventured  to  sum  up  and  repeat  to  him  the 
whole  result  of  the  cross-examination  which  1 had  directed  to  this 
point.  Consider  who  it  was  with  whom  we  are  dealing.  I was 
dealing  with  that  scientific  authority  whose  name  is  quoted  by 
Taylor  in  his  book  as  having  made  two  hundred  administrations 
of  chloroform  at  Guy’s  Hospital,  one  who  knows,  if  any  man 
living  does  know,  exactly  the  conditions  under  which  chloroform 
may  be  administered,  the  precautions  which  are  to  accompany 
that  administration,  and  the  indications  that  will  be  given  of 
the  condition  of  the  patient,  and  I ventured  to  put  to  him  this 
question : “ With  all  your  knowledge,  experience,  and  skill,  if 
you  had  before  you  the  problem — ^the  object  of  administering 
chloroform  in  this  liquid  form  in  order  to  produce  the  death  of  a 
person  sleejping  before  you — ^would  it  not  be  a delicate  and  diffi- 
cult operation  ? and  Dr.  Stevenson’s  experience  gave  me  back 
the  answer  that  it  would  be.  Even  to  him,  with  all  bis  knowledge, 
with  all  his  experience,  it  would  be  a difficult  operation  and  a 
delicate  operation. 

Why,  gentlemen,  I confess,  when  I had  that  answer,  I 
thought  that,  if  this  had  been  an  ordinary  case,  the  counsel  for 
the  Crown  would  have  felt  bound  to  reconsider  the  position  that 
they  had  assumed  with  respect  to  it,  and  that  the  learned  judge, 
listen!]^  to  that  answer  and  appreciating,  as  I am  sure  he  does 
appreciate,  the  great  weight  and  importwce  of  it,  coming  from 
Dr.  Stevenson,  must  have  himself  considered  how  far  the  result  of 
that  cross-examination  had  modified  the  right  of  the  Crown  to 
continue  the  prosecution,  and  had  left  it  possible  for  a jury  to 
be  allowed  with  safety  to  consider  it  as  still  evidence  upon  which 
they  might  base  a conviction. 

Before  I leave  it,  there  is  just  one  more  observation  I want  to 
make.  I put  to  Dr.  Murray  (and  I attach  great  importance  to 
the  answers  which  Dr.  Murray  gave  at  the  end  of  his  examina- 
tion, and  when  I was  permitted  by  my  lord  to  put  some  more 
questions,  and  when,  I thi3Qk,  one  or  two  members  of  your  body  put 
^ m 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Mr  Clarke 

questions  to  him) — ^1  have  put  to  the  medical  witnesses  the  question 
of  how  they  can  tell  when  insensibility  has  been  sufficiently  pro- 
duced for  the  feeling  of  pain  to  disappear,  and  for  it  to  be  possible 
for  the  operation  to  be  proceeded  with.  They  say,  fairly  enough, 
that  in  many  of  the  cases  in  which  chloroform  is  used  it  is  not 
necessary  to  produce  entire  insensibility,  and  the  chloroform  is 
used  not  altogether  for  that  purpose,  but  only  to  dull  the  sense  of 
pain ; but  I asked  Dr.  Murray,  In  administering  chloroform  for 
the  purpose  of  performing  an  operation,  must  you  not  try  and 
determine  the  exact  time  when  insensibility  begins,  that  you  may 
with  safety  commence  the  operation?  How  does  he  do  it?  He 
touches  the  eye,  and  then  he  notes  whether  the  reflex  action  of  the 
muscles  produces  the  winking  movement  of  the  eyelids.  While 
that  reflex  action  of  the  muscles  exists,  he  does  not  perform  the 
operation,  because  there  will  be  pain  and  may  be  resistance ; when 
the  reflex  action  of  the  muscles  has  ceased,  then  the  operation  may 
be  safely  performed.  But  when  the  reflex  action  of  the  muscles 
has  ceased  no  doctor  can  say  which  portion  of  the  body,  which  set 
of  muscles,  has  lost  the  capacity  for  reflex  action,  and  in  which 
reflex  action  may  still  remain.  It  is  not  believed  that  reflex  action 
of  all  the  muscles  disappears  at  the  same  time.  But  the  answer  of 
Dr.  Murray  fixed  it  to  this  knowledge  by  his  experience,  that, 
when  the  reflex  action  of  the  eyelids  has  disappeared,  the  sense  of 
pain  has  practically  gone;  but,  for  all  they  know,  the  reflex  action 
of  the  muscles  has  then  disappeared,  and  when  that  reflex  action  of 
the  muscles  is  gone,  although  it  is  possible  to  pour  chloroform  into 
the  mouth  of  a person  in  a recumbent  position  and  let  it  stay 
there,  and  although,  to  use  Dr.  Murray^ s words,  “ I think  some 
of  it  would  trickle  down  the  throat,”  the  poison  would  be  kept  in 
contact  with  the  softer  substance  of  the  mouth,  and  that  so  long 
that,  as  he  stated  in  answer  to  a question  from  one  of  yourselves, 
one  would  have  looked  for,  and  must  have  found,  appearances 
about  the  mouth  and  upper  part  of  the  throat  which  were  entirely 
absent  in  the  case  with  which  you  have  to  deal. 

Now,  gentlemen,  I hope  you  do  not  think  I have  kept  you 
too  long  and  dwelt  with  too  much  detail  on  this,  the  scientific, 
aspect  of  the  case.  I have  striven  to  get  rid,  as  far  as  I can,  of 
the  scientific  terms  and  phrases  which  might  convey  meanings  to 
the  experienced  physicians,  but  which  would  be  unfamiliar  to  the 
experience  of  yourselves  and,  I may  say,  myself.  But  I hope  I 
have  shown  you,  by  tracing  this  process  from  end  to  end,  that 
the  difficulty  is  established  not  merely  by  the  evidence  of  Dr. 
Stevenson,  but  that  this  difficulty  is  establidied  by  difierent  testi- 
'mony  with  regard  to  every  step  of  the  process  which  we  get  from 
the  best  authorities  who  have  spoken  and  written  on  this  subject, 
whether  in  England,  France,  or  America. 

I hope  I have  justified  to  you  what  I said  a little  while  ago, 
306 


Speech  for  the  Defence. 

Mr  Clarke 

that  this  case  will  be  long  memorable  in  the  annals  of  medical 
jurisprudence.  It  is  not  onlj  an  accusation  which  is  strange  as 
viewed  bj  the  light  of  the  previous  relations  existing  between  hus- 
band and  wife,  but  it  is  an  accusation  against  one  who  was,  so 
far  as  we  know,  absolutely  unstudied  in  the  ways  of  medicine; 
who,  from  what  she  said  herself  (and,  indeed,  it  is  clear),  knew 
little  indeed  of  chloroform,  the  mode  of  its  administration,  and 
the  objects  that  it  would  serve;  and  it  is  an  accusation  against 
her  that  she,  alone  in  the  room  with  her  sleeping  husband,  has 
succeeded  (was  I not  right  in  saying  almost  by  inspiration?) 
in  performing  one  of  the  most  difficult  and  delicate  operations 
possible  to  be  performed,  and  has  so  succeeded  that  no  trace,  no 
spilling  of  chloroform  by  the  nervous  hand,  no  effects  through  the 
chloroform  having  been  allowed  to  remain  long  in  contact  with 
the  soft  passages,  no  traces  in  the  post-mortem  condition  of  the 
body,  reveal  the  fact  that  she  had  succeeded  in  doing  that  most 
difficult  and  delicate  operation. 

And  so,  gentlemen,  I pass  over  the  scientific  aspect  of  the 
case — one,  I am  sure,  which  will  not  be  allowed  to  escape  your 
very  careful  attention,  and  one  as  to  which  1 venture  most  respect- 
fully to  say  that  the  result  of  the  considerations  which  I have  put 
before  you  (considerations  in  which  I have  striven  to  deal,  with  the 
most  absolute  fairness,  with  the  evidence  that  has  been  given  in  this 
Court) — I submit  to  you  that  the  result  of  those  considerations 
makes  it  impossible  for  you  to  return  a verdict  of  guilty  in  this 
case. 

But  now,  gentlemen,  1 pass  to  the  other  matters  with  which 
I have  to  deal,  and  I want  to  make  an  observation  or  two  at  this 
point  with  reference  to  what  I said  a little  while  ago  as  to  the 
possibility  of  the  learned  Attorney-General,  in  his  reply,  pointing 
out  to  you  and  dwelling  upon  topics  of  suspicion  and  of  prejudice. 
I have  carefully  read  the  note  of  the  speech  in  which  the  learned 
Attorney-General  opened  this  case,  and  he  dealt  then  quite  fairly — 
for  nothing  could  have  been  more  fair  and  temperate  and  careful 
than  the  opening  in  which  he  introduced  to  your  mind  the  con- 
sideration of  this  matter,  and  he  alluded  to  several  smaller 
matters  in  terms  which  showed  that  they  were  matters  which  might 
possibly,  it  was  thought,  affect  your  minds,  and  would  point  in 
the  one  direction  of  suggesting  the  guilt  of  Mrs.  Bartlett.  There 
were  several  of  them,  I hope  I am  not  too  confident  in  saying 
that  they  have  absolutely  disappeared  under  the  test  of  cross- 
examination,  and  that  there  is  not  one  of  those  suspicious  cir- 
cumstances which  survives  the  examination  which  we  have  made. 
Let  us  take  them  in  order. 

It  was  pointed  out  to  you  that  on  the  evening  before  her  hus- 
band’s death  Mrs.  Bartlett  spoke  about  chloroform,  and  we  know 
now  from  the  evidence  what  that  conversation  was.  On  the 

m 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Mr  duke 


I 

evening  of  that  day^  after  Mr.  Bartlett  had  come  back  from  the 
dentist’s^  Mrs.  Doggett  went  into  the  room.  Mr.  Bartlett  talked 
to  her.  Mrs.  Bartlett  was  reading  at  the  table,  but  in  the  con- 
versation which  ensued  Mrs.  Bartlett  did  interpose.  Mr. 
Bartlett  was  talking  about  what  had  happened  during  that  day.  He 
had  had  a tooth  drawn,  and  it  is  said  Mrs.  Bartlett  asked,  Did 
you  ever  take  chloroform?  of  Mrs.  Doggett,  and  Mrs.  Doggett 
said  she  had  taken  it  some  years  before,  upon  which  she  was  asked 
whether  it  was  nice,  or  pleasant.  She  was  not  quite  sure  which 
was  the  word  used,  but  there  was  the  impression  of  ihe  question, 
and  she  answered  she  did  not  remember,  it  was  so  long  ago,  I 
dare  say,  gentlemen,  you  will  have  observed  that  that  conversation 
was  at  least  as  likely  to  suggest  to  Mr.  Bartlett  the  idea  of  him- 
eelf  taking  chloroform  as  it  was  to  be  connected  with  any  thought 
of  murder  in  the  mind  of  Mrs.  Bartlett.  But  just  let  us  consider 
when  ttiat  conversation  with  Mrs.  Doggett  was.  We  were  not 
given  in  detail  or  with  exactness  the  whole  course  of  the  conversa- 


tion. It  was  not  expected  that  we  should.  We  often  expect  far 
too  much  from  witnesses  when  we  expect  from  them  in  the  witness- 
box  the  exact  detail^  and  language,  the  record  of  every  conversa- 
tion which,  at  the  time  it  was  uttered,  could  not  suggest  to  them 
the  importance  which  subsequent  events  have  given  to  it.  But 
we  ^ow  now  that  on  that  afternoon  Mr.  Bartlett  had  been  to  the 
dentist’s.  We  know  that  on  the  previous  occasion  he  had  had  his 
gums  treated  by  a local  application  producing  cold  and  destroy- 
ing the  sense  of  pain  when  teeth  were  taken  out,  and  I think— I 
am  not  quite  certain,  but  I think  he  mentioned  to  Mrs.  Doggett 
the  fact  of  having  his  gums  frozen.  Whether  that  was  so,  that 
was  the  fact  that  he  had  had  his  gums  frozen  in  order  to  prevent 
^e  sense  of  pain.  On  this  occasion — ^that  very  afternoon — ^be  had 
had  a tooth  extracted,  and  he  had  it  extracted  in  a digerent  way, 
and  he  had  taken  nitrous  oxide  gas,  and  there  had  been  a difficulty 
in  his  taking  it.  Now,  to  the  common  inexperienced  person 
nitrous  oxide  gas  and  chloroform  are  not  very  distinct.  In  either 
case  there  is  the  application  of  vapour— the  inhalation  of  vapour 
for  purpos^  of  producing  insensibility  to  pain.  Do  you  think  the 
fart  that  Mr.  Bartlett  on  that  evening  talking  to  Mrs.  Doggett 
out  that  afternoon,  and  having  it  pre^t 
^ saved  from  pain  by  means  of  an 

Msssa^c  TOver  used  with  him  before— do  you  not  think  it  is  in 

Mp  was  talking  to 

S mentioned  the  way  it  was  efiecrted, 

Ae  most  nature  way  of  joining  in  the  con- 
wsafaon  would  be,  Did  you  ever  have  anything  of  the  kind! 
Ihd  ^ evw  h&vB  chloroform!  and  the  whole  thing  is  explain^. 
^ I dp  beseeoh  you,  looking  at  tibe  wei^it  you  are  to  Sve 
to  ^ evidence  as  to  conversations,  which,  a!  I ^int  out,  aS 


Speech  for  the  Defence. 

Mr  CUrkci 

time  they  occurred  the  persons  never  imagined  would  have  any 
importance  at  all — beseech  you  to  consider  for  yourselves  what, 
in  your  judgment,  would  have  been  the  reasonable  and  probable 
course  of  the  conversation  between  Mrs.  Bartlett  and  Mrs*  Doggett 
on  that  evening. 

Just  let  me  take  another  thing.  I shall  have  to  point  out 
to  you  by-and-by,  with  regard  to  the  evidence  of  one  of  the  wit- 
nesses in  this  case,  the  way  in  which  the  moment  the  death  had 
occurred  all  sorts  of  accusations  and  suspicions  were  suggested. 
But  we  have  from  Mrs.  Doggett  a statement  on  which  some 
emphasis  has  been  laid  in  this  case.  Gentlemen,  b^  your 
pardon,  I have  omitted  one  matter  which  comes  before  it  in  order 
of  time,  and  I will  go  back  to  it  for  a moment.  There  were  two 
matters  mentioned,  also  as  matters  of  suspicion,  of  which  the 
servant  spoke,  and  which  happened  on  the  evening  before  the 
death.  One  was  that,  instead  of  taking,  as  she  was  told  to  take, 
the  basin  into  the  room,  she  was  told  not  to  come  into  the  room 
again,  but  to  leave  the  basin  on  the  table  outside.  The  other  is 
almost  too  trivial  to  mention,  but,  as  I have  said,  I must  guard 
myself  with  reference  to  every  matter  of  this  kind — ^the  fact  that 
Mrs.  Bartlett  had  not  the  same  dress  on  when  she  awoke  the 
servant  as  when  the  servant  saw  her  in  the  evening.  Let  me  say 
one  word  on  each  of  those  matters.  The  incident  about  the  basin 
has  absolutely  disappeared,  I venture  to  say,  under  the  test  of 
cross-examination,  for  what  happened  about  it  was  this.  Alice 
Fulcher  told  us  that  Mrs.  Bartlett  told  her  after  supper  to  bring 
up  a scuttle  of  coals  and  the  basin,  and  it  was  at  the  same  time 
she  gave  her  the  instructions  about  the  two  things.  Alice  Fulcher 
brought  up  the  scuttle  of  coals,  but  did  not  bring  up  the  basin. 
She  took  the  scuttle  of  coals  into  the  room  at  the  time  Mr.  Bartlett 
was  in  bed.  He  was  not  in  bed  when  the  order  was  given,  but 
he  was  in  bed  when  she  took  the  scuttle  of  coals  in  the  room,  and 
then  Mrs.  Bartlett  spoke  about  the  basin,  and  told  her  not  to 
bring  the  basin  in,  but  to  leave  it  outside.’’  There  is  the  whole 
thing  from  l^inning  to  end,  and  it  is  perfectly  obvious  that  the 
order  was  given  to  the  servant  to  bring  up  the  two  things;  she 
brought  up  one,  and  took  it  into  the  room,  and  Mr.  Bartlett  was 
in  bed,  and,  as  we  have  heard,  was  probably  trying  to  get  some 
sleep,  and  so  she  told  her  not  to  bring  it  in,  but  to  leave  it  out- 
side, and  she  left  it  outside.  There  was  a table  outside,  and  on 
that  Alice  Fulcher  put  the  basin.  It  was  there  in  the  morning; 
it  was  not  used.  It  would  have  been  used  in  the  course  of  the 
night  for  the  beef  tea,  probably,  because  Mrs,  Bartlett  kept 
Liebig’s  extract  in  the  room,  and  was  in  the  habit  of  keeping  a 
fire  throughout  the  night  and  making  beef  tea  for  her  husband, 
but  unfortunately  on  that  night  there  was  no  occasion  or  oppor- 
tunity for  her  to  administer  beef  tea  to  him. 


m 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Mr  Clarke 

About  the  dress,  is  that  to  be  a matter  for  suspicion?  It  is 
Burely  the  most  obvious  thing  in  the  world.  Mrs.  Bartlett  had 
been  out  that  day  with  her  husband.  After  the  illness  began, 
when  Mr.  Bartlett’s  bedstead  was  removed  into  the  front  room, 
Mrs.  Bartlett  never  occupied  the  bed  which  she  had  previously 
occupied  alone  in  the  back  room,  but  she  slept  upon  the  sofa, 
moved  it  in  front  of  the  fire,  and  she  slept,  as  Dr.  Leach  telle  us, 
sitting  in  that  small  chair  at  the  bottom  of  her  husband’s  bed, 
or  lying  on  the  sofa.  But  in  the  evening  she  used  to  go  into  that 
back  room  to  wash,  and  Alice  Fulcher  tells  us  the  washing-basin 
was  generally  used  late  in  the  evening  in  that  back  room.  She 
cannot  say  whether  it  was  used  on  that  particular  evening,  but  at 
all  events  that  was  the  ordinary  course  of  things.  Is  it  not  obvious 
that  what  usually  took  place  would  take  place,  that  Mrs.  Bartlett, 
when  her  husband  had  gone  to  bed,  and  was  settling  himself  for 
the  night,  would  go  into  that  room  to  wash  before  returning  to 
her  post  and  her  place  for  the  night?  She  would  take  ofi  the 
dress  in  which  she  had  been  out]  she  would  put  on  some  dress  in 
whidi  she  would  be  comfortable  and  easy  throughout  the  hours 
of  the  night,  and  we  are  told  by  one  of  the  witnesses  that  the 
dress  she  then  had  on  was  a grey,  and  a sort  of  a loose  jacket 
with  it,  and  Alice  Fulcher  said  it  was  a lighter  and  looser  dress 
than  the  one  she  had  worn  during  the  day. 

There  are  other  matters  on  which  greater  stress  was  laid, 
and  I ask  you  to  consider  what  the  real  evidence  with  regard  to 
them  is.  How  about  the  condition  of  the  fire?  What  is  the  evi- 
dence with  regard  to  that?  Mr.  Doggett  said  he  noticed  the  fire 
when  he  was  called  in.  He  noticed  the  fire  looked  as  if  it  had 
been  recently  attended  to.  Mrs.  Doggett  comes  and  says  the 
same  thing.  It  is  very  remarkable  about  Mr.  Doggett  that  when 
he  was  examined  first  before  the  coroner  he  did  not  say  a syllable 
about  the  fire.  It  cannot  have  impressed  itself  very  strongly  on 
his  mind,  or  he  would  probably  have  mentioned  it  when  first 
examined.  Until  his  wife  had  been  examined,  and  had  men- 
tioned about  the  fire,  Mr.  Doggett  (whether  it  occurred  to  him  or 
not)  had  not  mentioned  it  before  the  coroner.  So  I asked  the  wife 
in  cross-examination  with  regard  to  this  condition  of  the  fire. 
Dr.  Leach,  as  you  remember,  did  not  remember  anything  about 
the  fire  at  all.  I asked  the  wife  about  the  condition  of  the  fire. 
Did  not  her  answers  put  an  end  to  the  suggestion — ^the  idea  of 
anything  remarkable  about  the  fire?  I asked  her  whether  she  had 
at  an^^ime  had  the  sad  experience  of  watching  through  the  night 
by  a sick  bed  ? She  said  she  knew  something  of  it.  She  admitted 
-^s  any  woman  would  admit-*— that  at  night,  especially  with  a 
patient  at  all  suffering  from  sleeplessness  and  restleesness,  it 
would  be  the  most  manifest  duty  of  the  person  watching  to  pack 
the  fire,  to  build  it  up  and  make  it  last  for  hours,  that  it  might 

310 


speech  for  the  Defence. 

Mr  Carke 

go  for  a sufficient  number  of  hours  without  being  closely  attended 
to.  Then  I asked ; Did  not  this  look  like  a fire  that  had  been 
packed  and  remained  packed,  and  was  then  broken  with  a touch 
of  the  poker — just  a fire  well  packed,  and  after  some  hours,  when 
it  was  crusted  over,  broken  up  with  the  poker,  and  the  hot  coal 
prepared  for  immediate  combustion  flames  up  and  breaks  into  a 
good  fire  at  once?  She  said  yes,  that  was  the  appearance  it  pre- 
sented; it  must  have  been  an  appearance  following  on  that.  Is 
not  that  the  most  obvious  thing  in  the  world?  Mrs.  Bartlett,  pre- 
paring for  sleep  that  night,  and  having  her  husband  composed 
and  quiet  for  the  evening,  as  she  hopes,  to  get  the  sleep  which 
strenuous  efforts  had  been  made  to  obtain  for  him,  would  pack 
the  fire  in  that  way,  and  when  she  came  down  from  the  servant’s 
room,  after  sending  her  for  the  doctor,  and  calling  down  people  to 
come  to  her  in  the  room  where  her  husband  lay — is  it  not  one  of 
the  most  natural  things  to  do  to  take  wp  the  poker  and  break  up 
the  fire  into  the  condition  in  which  it.  was  seen  ? 

Well  now,  gentlemen,  there  is  one  more  matter  of  suspicion 
against  Mrs.  Bartlett  with  which  it  is  my  duty  to  deal,  although 
not  entirely  at  this  point,  but  I mention  it  because  it  leads  me 
to  some  other  observations  which  I desire  to  offer  very  respectfully 
to  your  consideration  on  this  subject.  It  is  the  matter  alleged 
against  Mrs.  Bartlett  of  her  having  made  untrue  statements  to 
Mr.  Dyson  with  respect  to  Dr.  Nichols  and  Annie  Walker,  and 
the  relation  which  had  existed  between  herself  and  them.  I shall 
be  obliged  to  diecuss  by-and-by  some  matters  connected  with  Dr. 
Nichols  and  Annie  Walker,  although  I should  not  pursue  them  to 
any  very  great  length,  but  this  brings  me  to  the  observation  as 
to  the  position  of  Mr.  Dyson.  This  matter  mainly  depends  upon 
the  evidence,  and  upon  the  recollection,  of  Mr.  Dyson,  because  it 
is  from  him  that  you  have  got  the  evidence  that  Mrs.  Bartlett 
told  him  that  her  husband  had  been  to  Dr.  Nichols;  that  her  hus- 
band was  suffering  from  an  internal  complaint;  that  she  had  ad- 
ministered chloroform  for  the  purpose  of  soothing  him  in  these 
paroxysms,  and  that  Annie  Walker  was  the  person  who  had  ob- 
tained the  chloroform  for  her,  and  could  no  longer  obtain  it 
because  she  had  gone  to  America.  Now,  in  outline,  as  completely 
as  I can  recall  it,  that  is  the  statement  allied  by  Mr.  Dyson  to 
have  been  made  by  her,  and  to  have  been,  so  the  prosecution 
suggests,  untruly  made.  ,But,  gentlemen,  I cannot  comment  upon 
this  point  of  the  case  without  remarking  what  I think  must  have 
at  once  rushed  on  your  minds,  that,  if  the  making  of  an  untrue 
statement  is  any  evidence  of  guilt,  it  is  somewhat  strange  that 
Mr.  Dyson  was  in  the  witness-box.  Now  observe,  so  far  from  chal- 
lenging in  the  least  the  course  whidh  has  been  taken  with  regard 
to  Mr.  Dyson,  I accept  the  conclusion  at  which  the  Crown  arrived, 
that  there  really  was  no  case  to  be  submitted  to  you  which  you 

311 


Adelaide  Bartlett 


Mr  Clarke 

could  be  fairly  asked  to  consider  against  him.  If  my  learned 
friend  had  thought  that  there  had  been  any  such  case,  of  course 
he  would  not  have  taken  the  course  which  he  did  take.  I am  not 
suggesting  that  there  is.  I accept — ^may  I add  that  I believe? — 
in  the  correctness  of  the  verdict  which  you  were  invited  by  the 
Crown  to  give,  and  that  Mr.  Dyson  is  free  from  complicity  in  any 
crime,  if  crime  were  perpetrated.  But  when  you  are  being  asked 
to  deal  with  the  case  against  Mrs.  Bartlett,  and  to  use  against  her, 
or  to  allow  to  be  used  against  her,  with  grave  efEect,  the  untruth- 
ful statements  which  she  has  made,  and  which  come  to  you  upon 
Mr.  Dyson’s  evidence,  and  as  he  remembers,  or  says  he  remembers, 
has  it  not  occurred  to  you  in  the  course  of  this  case  that  if  matters 
of  this  kind  are  to  have  great  weight,  how  fortunate  Mr.  Dyson  is 
that  he  is  not  standing  there  himself?  I beg  you  to  note  that  I 
do  not  impeach  hie  innocence  in  the  least.  I wish  that  no  word 
I may  say  may  appear  to  suggest — ^it  would  not  be  true  if  it  did 
suggest — any  doubt  in  my  mind  with  regard  to  the  matter.  But 
supposing  his  case  were  before  you,  what  would  you  have?  That 
Sunday  morning  he  walked  along  the  side  of  Tooting  Common 
on  his  way  to  preach  at  a chapel,  and  as  he  went  he  threw  from 
him,  with  the  gesture  which  you  saw  him  use  in  that  box,  the 
three  or  four  bottles  that  had  been  in  his  possession.  Suppose 
some  one  who  knew  him  had  seen  him  walking  along  that  morn- 
ing, and  had  seen  him  fling  away  the  bottles,  and  had  thought, 
''It  is  a little  odd  that  the  Bev.  Mr.  Dyson,  should  be  tossing 
bottles  away  on  Tooting  Common  on  Sunday  morning,”  and  had 
had  the  curiosity  to  pick  up  a bottle,  and  had  found  it  laMled 
” Chloroform.  Poison.”  Suppose  it  had  come  to  light,  at  the 
first  meeting  of  the  inquest,  that  Mr.  Dyson  was  an  habitual 
visitor  at  the  house  where  this  death  had  taken  place ; suppose  it 
had  come  to  light  that  he  had  been  in  the  habit  of  walking  out 
with  Mrs.  Bartlett,  and  that  she  had  visited  him  at  his  own 
lodgings;  suppose  it  came  to  light  that  the  terms  on  which  he  was 
dealing  with  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Bartlett  were  terms  of  an  exceptional 
character,  having  regard  to  the  circumstances  and  relations  be- 
tween him  and  the  wife ; and  suppose  it  had  come  out  by  inquiry 
at  the  chemist’s — ^whose  name  is  on  the  label — ^that,  when  Mr. 
Dyson  asked  for  the  chloroform  he  had  told  him  a falsehood, 
that  he  wanted  it  for  stains  on  his  coat — ^to  take  out  stains  which 
had  come  on  his  coat  during  his  holiday  at  Poole — ^what  would 
have  been  Mr.  Dyson’s  position?  That  strange  and  hard  man, 
Richard  Baxter,  used  to  say  that  he  never  saw  a criminal  going 
to  execution  without  observing  to  himself,  ” There,  but  for  the 
grace  of  God,  goes  Richard  Baxter.”  I think  Mr.  Dyson  will 
never  in  his  life  read  the  account  of  a trial  for  murder  without 
thinking  how  heavily  his  own  rash,  unjustified  conduct  would 
have  told  against  him  if  he  had  been  put  upon  his  trial. 

312 


Speech  for  the  Defence. 

Mr  CUrke 

I do  not  use  this  for  the  purpose  of  suggesting— I said  I was 
anxious  not  to  suggest,  for  1 do  not  entertain  the  slightest  doubt 
as  to  the  innocence  of  Mr.  Dyson ; but  I do  use  it  to  show  you  that 
where  against  him,  an  innocent  man,  a falsehood  told  for  the 
express  purpose  of  getting  this  poison  might  have  been  proved  in 
the  witness-box,  and  might  have  been  considered  by  the  jury  with 
so  fatal  an  effect,  it  would  be  hard  indeed  that  the  statement 
from  the  lips  of  that  very  man  that  Mrs.  Bartlett  told  to  him  a story 
which  was  not  wholly  true,  to  explain  her  desiring  to  possess  this 
chloroform  through  him — it  would  be  strange  indeed  if  that  were 
allowed  to  weigh  upon  your  minds  as  a serious  element  of  sus-* 
picion  against  her. 

Now,  gentlemen,  I said  that  I must  make  this  observation 
before  I dwelt  upon  the  relations  of  Dr.  Nichols  and  Annie  Walker 
to  this  case.  V^at  is  it  tiiat  Dyson  says?  He  says  that  he  was 
told  Mr.  Bartlett  had  an  internal  complaint,  and  that  he  had  con- 
sulted Dr.  Nichols,  and  that  that  internal  complaint  produced 
paroxysms  for  which  chloroform  had  been  used,  and  that  the 
chloroform  was  provided  by  Annie  Walker,  and  that  she  had  gone 
to  America.  I suggest  that  it  is  impossible  to  rely  upon  Mr. 
Dyson’s  recollection  with  regard  to  that  matter.  You  may  have 
your  own  opinion  whether  upon  some  points  in  thie  case  Mr, 
Dyson’s  evidence  is  readily  and  fully  to  be  accepted  so  far  as  it 
concerns  himself.  I think  you  will  have  reason  to  see,  from  an 
observation  I shall  presently  make,  that  at  all  events  there  is  very 
strong  ground  for  the  suspicion  that  he  has  been  anxious  to  protect 
himself  without  much  regard  to  the  actual  truth  in  his  relation 
to  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Bartlett.  And  I suggest  to  you  that  you  cannot 
rely  upon  the  entire  accuracy  of  these  statements.  But,  gentle- 
men, the  curious  thing  is  this : that,  when  one  comes  to  look  into 
the  facts  of  the  case,  these  statements  are  very  near  the  truth  in 
many  respects.  I do  not  say  true  as  they  are  given  by  Dyson, 
but  at  all  events  Dr.  Nichols  of  Fopstone  Road  is  mentioned,  and 
there  is  a Dr.  Nichols  of  the  Fopstone  Road.  Whether  Mr.  Bart- 
lett ever  saw  Dr.  Nichols  or  not,  we  do  not  know.  Dr-  Nichols 
does  not  know,  he  does  not  remember  any  such  name;  but  he 
keeps  no  record  of  the  names;  and  it  was  hardly  necessary  for 
me  to  suggest,  in  my  questions  with  regard  to  some  matters  upon 
which  Dr.  Nichols  might  be  consulted,  that  a person  who  went  to 
an  unregistered  medical  practitioner,  to  consult  him  with  regard 
to  his  own  position,  would  in  very  many  cases  be  very  unlikely  to 
give  his  own  name.  But  Mrs.  Bartlett  had  known  Mrs.  Nichols, 
who  practised  at  the  very  same  place,  and  it  was  through  Mrs. 
Nichols  that  Annie  Walker  was  recommended  to  Mrs.  Bartlett. 
For  what  reason  Mrs,  Nichols  was  consulted  by  Mrs.  Bartlett  you 
cannot  know,  for  Mrs.  Nichols  is  dead;  and  Dr.  Nichols  knows 
nothing  whatever  about  the  matter-  Mrs.  Bartlett’s  account  you 

m 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Mr  Clarke 

cannot  hear,  but  the  fact  that  Mrs.  Nichols  had  been  consulted  is 
clear,  and  this  also  is  clear — ^that  Mr.  Bartlett  had  in  his  pos- 
session this  book  of  Dr.  Nichols,  to  which  reference  has  been 
made,  and  that  when  Annie  Walker,  the  midwife  who  was  recom- 
mended by  Mrs.  Nichols,  was  staying  at  the  house  in  order  to 
discharge  her  duties,  this  book  was  there.  Before  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
Bartlett  it  was  made  no  secret  of  j it  was  shown  to  the  nurse;  it 
was  talked  about  between  them,  and  considered,  and  1 shall  submit 
to  you,  rightly  considered,  as  a book  the  having  of  which,  and 
the  reading  of  which,  involved  no  reproach  upon  anybody.  Mr. 
Dyson  says  he  does  not  remember  hearing  Dr.  Nichols'  or  Mrs. 
Nichols'  name  mentioned  with  regard  to  the  matter  of  the  con- 
finement; but  he  does  admit  something  with  regard  to  Annie 
Walker  which,  1 think,  is  of  considerable  importance.  Annie 
Walker's  name  was  not  mentioned  first  to  him  at  Claverton  Street 
when  there  came  to  be  a question  of  obtaining  diloroform.  Annie 
Walker's  name  was  mentioned  one  day  when  he  was  by  the  ceme- 
tery at  Merton,  and  you  cannot  doubt  how  that  mention  came 
about.  I am  not  sure  that  he  admitted  or  recollected  that  at 
that  time  there  was  conversation  about  there  once  having  been  one 
child,  or  anything  of  that  kind;  but  is  it  not  perfectly  obviouil 
to  you  that  the  connection  in  which  Annie  Walker's  name  would 
be  mentioned  to  him  would  be  that,  he  and  Mrs.  Bartlett  passing 
the  cemetery,  it  might  suggest  to  her  the  loss — ^which  was  a heavy 
loss  to  her  at  the  time — ^^e  loss  of  all  the  hopes  she  had  formed 
that  their  married  life  might  give  her  a child  to  love  and  to  grow 
up  into  her  companionship)  Here,  at  all  events,  was  mentioned 
Annie  Walker,  and  the  mention  of  Annie  Walker  was  long  before 
there  was  any  mention  of  chloroform.  But  supposing  Mrs. 
Bartlett  did  tell  Mr.  Dyson  about  Annie  Walker's  getting  the 
chloroform,  cannot  one  understand  why  thera  was  some  conceal- 
ment and  some  explanation  of  this  kind,  if  Mrs.  Bartlett’s  story 
is  to  be  accepted  by  you ) And  I will  show  you  reasons  by-and-by 
for  believing  that  it  was  absolutely  true.  If  Mrs.  Bartlett’s 
account  is  to  be  accepted,  the  state  of  things  was  this : that  the 
husband  who  so  long  had  been,  not  unkind  to  her,  but  cold,  was 
desiring  again  to  assert  his  marital  rights;  that  he,  acting  quite 
freely,  had  in  effect  given  her  to  Dyson,  had  recognised  the  mar- 
riage which  after  his  death  might  come  to  pass  between  these 
two,  and  had  provided,  as  far  as  he  could,  for  that  contingency 
by  making  Dyson  the  executor  of  his  will,  by  which  the  money 
was  all  left  to  Mrs.  Bartlett — ^her  statement  is  that,  he  again 
desiring  to  assert  these  rights,  she  felt,  under  those  circum- 
stances, that  it  would  be  a wrong  to  her  womanhood  to  allow  the 
revival  of  these  long-ceased  relations.  Could  she  be  expected  to 
tell  Mr.  Dyson  that?  Could  any  woman  with  any  delicacy  at 
all  have  explained  it  so  to  Mr.  Dyson)  She  gave  him  some 
314 


Mr  Clarke 


Speech  for  the  Defence. 


reason  for  desiring  to  obtain  chloroform,  and,  ■when  you  come^  to 
look  at  it  as  explained  by  him  in  answer  to  my  cross-examination 
here,  it  is  not  far  from  the  explanation  which  she  gave  after- 
wards to  Dr.  Leach.  Mr.  Dyson^s  idea,  he  says,  was  that  she 
would  sprinkle  drops  upon  the  handkerchief,  and  that  she  would 
use  that  handkerchief  for  the  purpose  of  soothing  Mr-  Bartlett, 
and  if  that  were  so,  and  those  were  the  words  in  which  it  was 
communicated,  is  it  not  perfectly  intelligible  that  Mrs.  Bartlett 
should  desire  to  veil  by  that  sort  of  account  and  explanation 
the  real  truth  which  she  could  not  be  expected  to  communicate 
to  Mr.  Dyson. 

I know  how  extraordinary  are  the  relations  which  are 
alleged  to  have  existed  between  these  persons.  I said  before  that 
these  relations  would  be  almost  inconceivable  if  they  were  not 
proved.  I am  going  to  show  you  that  they  are  proved,  or  sub- 
stantially proved;  and  I shall  show  you  that  under  Mr.^  Bart- 
lett^e  own  hand,  by  that  letter  which  has  been  put  in  evidence, 
and  which  I shall  ask  you  carefully  to  consider.  But  for  a 
moment  I am  suggesting  to  you  that  this  explanation  by  Mrs. 
Bartlett  of  the  reason  for  which  she  wanted  the  chloroform — 
this  veiled  and  hinted  suggestion  to  Mr.  Dyson,  from  whom  she 
would  have  every  reason  in  her  delicacy  for  concealing  the  right 
purpose  and  object  of  her  getting  it — ^that  that  is  by  no  means 
an  untruth  which  should  bear  with  it  such  fatal  suspicion  of  its 
being  an  indication  of  a criminal  purpose  as  would  have  attached 
to  the  falsehoods  told  by  Mr.  Dyson  when  he  tried  to  get  the 
chloroform,  if  Dyson  himself  were  the  person  against  whom 
this  evidence  was  to  be  taken,  and  with  regard  to  whose  evidence 
it  would  be  applicable. 

The  Court  adjourned  for  a short  time.  After  the 
adjournment, 

Mr.  CnABEB  proceeded — Gentlemen,  at  the  time  the  Court 
adjourned,  I had  been  dealing  with  the  question  of  the  state- 
ments made  by  Mrs.  Bartlett  as  to  Dr.  Nichols  and  Annie  Walker. 
There  is  only  just  one  word  which  I think  1 ought  to  say  further 
with  regard  to  that.  I have  pointed  out  to  you  that  we  do  not 
know,  and  cannot  know,  what  communication  there  may  have 
been  at  some  time  between  Mr.  Bartlett  and  Dr.  Nichols.  I 
dare  say  that  you  will  have  observed  that  there  were  peculiari- 
ties about  the  earlier  and  about  the  later  symptoms  of  die  illness 
which  commenced  on  9th  December  which  suggested  to  the  doctor 
first  called  a cause  for  some  of  those  symptoms  which  were  not 
further  investigated.  But  that  Mr.  Bartlett  had  something 
wrong  with  him  no  one  can  doubt,  at  all  events  if  one  accepts  the 
evidence  of  Mr.  Dyson.  I am  in  this  diflSlcuIty  with  r^ard  to 

315 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Mr  Clarke 

the  evidence  that  Mr,  Dyson  has  given.  That  evidence  may  be 
trusted  by  you  entirely,  or  may  be  trusted  by  you  in  part  and 
with  certain  limitations;  but,  with  regard  to  the  facts  which  do 
not  affect  his  interests  after  the  death  had  taken  place,  1 suggest 
to  you  that  Mr.  Dyson  has  given  us  the  evidence  of  truth,  and  the 
only  reason  that  I can  see  for  doubting  whether  the  whole  of  that 
evidence  is  true,  in  the  sense  that  it  is  the  whole  truth,  is  that 
undoubtedly,  when  the  death  occurred,  considerations  came  crowd- 
ing upon  the  mind  of  Mr.  Dyson  suggesting  to  him  injuries,  in 
consequence  of  the  result  of  that  inquiry,  upon  his  after-career 
which  possibly  affected  to  some  extent  the  candour  of  the  state- 
ments which  he  made  with  regard  to  anything  that  took  place  after 
the  death.  But  if  you  believe  Mr.  Dyson  as  to  facts,  there  was 
something  wrong  with  Mr.  Bartlett.  A.  man  does  not  stop  in  the 
midst  of  his  dinner,  and  clutch  at  his  side,  and  complain  of  pain, 
unless  there  ia  some  reason  for  it.  I do  not  suggest  to  you  that 
there  was  mu^  reason  for  it ; but  what  I do  suggest  to  your  con- 
sideration is  this,  that  in  the  statement,  possibly — ^probably — of 
its  relation  to  the  question  of  chloroform,  which  was  made  to  Mr. 
Dyeon  by  way  of  explanation,  at  all  events  there  is  a foundation 
of  truth  in  a part  of  it. 

I diall  not  now,  and  I will  not  at  any  time  in  this  case,  pursue 
that  question  as  to  the  nature  of  the  indications  of  disease  that 
were  found  in  Mr.  Bartlett’s  mouth,  established  at  the  time  of 
Dr.  Leach’s  first  examination.  It  is  not  from  any  scruple  as  to 
speaking  of  it  that  1 hesitate  to  do  so.  Of  all  those  maxims  that 
have  passed  through  the  centuries,  and  exercised  an  influence  on 
men’s  minds,  in  my  judgment  the  most  mischievous  of  all  is  that 
which  tells  men  only  to  speak  good  of  the  dead.  It  has  enfeebled 
the  moral  judgment  of  the  world,  and  I for  one  will  never  recog- 
nise it  as  an  authority.  But  those  considerations  have  no  place 
here,  and  I do  not  think  that  it  is  necessary  I should  follow  into 
and  examine  the  possible  causes,  curious  though  they  may  have 
been,  of  the  condition  of  the  mouth  when  Dr.  Leach  saw  it,  and 
of  the  ultimate  necrosis  which  set  in,  according  to  Dr.  Leach’s 
account,  on  29th,  30th,  and  31st  December.  But  the  marital  rela- 
tions which  existed  between  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Bartlett  are  certainly 
matters  of  very  serious  consideration.  In  the  first  place,  just  let  me 
point  this  out  to  you.  Mrs.  Bartlett  was  apparently  an  estimable 
woman.  The  women,  few  in  number  though  they  were— only  two, 
so  far  as  we  know — ^who  came  into  personal  communication  with 
her,  saw  nothing  in  her  to  dislike.  Mrs.  Matthews  was  her  friend; 
and  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Matthews  were  the  persons,  the  only  persons, 
who  visited  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Bartlett  in  their  home.  But  she  had 
made  one  other  friend.  By  the  introduction  of  Mrs.  Nichols,  she 
made  the  personal  acquaintance  of  Annie  Walker;  and  Annie 
Walker,  who  spent  with  her  four  weeks  before  her  confinement, 
316 


Speech  for  the  Defence. 

Mr  Clarke 

and  spent  with  her  those  other  three  weeks  when  the  disappointed 
mother — ^the  mother  without  a child — ^was  gradually  recovering 
stren^  from  the  painful  illness  which  had  tried  and  torn  her — 
Mrs.  Walker  had  undoubtedly  conceived  for  her  an  affectionate 
friendship,  and  the  poor  woman,  so  to  speak,  in  the  solitude  of  her 
life  had  taken  to  her  friendship  this  hired  companion  of  her  hours 
of  suffering;  and  from  time  to  time  Annie  Walker  went  to  see 
her,  and  gave  her  portrait  to  her,  and  seems  to  have  been  attracted 
by  her  character  and  her  disposition.  At  all  events,  there  was 
nothing  in  her  or  about  her  that  alienated  a woman's  affection 
from  her,  and  prevented  that  afieotion  becoming  habitual  and 
constant. 

Now,  the  question  of  the  marital  relations  of  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
Bartlett  is  remarkable,  and  is  a very  curious  question,  and  it  is 
one  which  connects  itself,  in  my  judgment,  very  much  with  this 
woman.  And  I venture  to  say  that,  looking  at  all  the  circum- 
stances of  the  case,  I am  glad  that  statement  was  brought  out  by 
Mr.  Dyson  with  regard  to  Dr.  Nichols  and  Annie  Walker.  For 
if  it  had  not  been  for  that  statement,  although  1 feel  that  it  may 
prejudice  her  case  before  you,  and  that  it  will  be  used  to  show— 
and  it  is  the  only  instance  in  the  case  in  which  her  statements 
diverge  from  the  truth — although  it  will  be  used  to  show  there 
was  that  divergence,  I am  glad  that  it  was  brought  out,  for  that 
connection  with  Dr.  Nichols  and  his  wife  directly  bears  upon  the 
extraordinary  moral  relations  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Bartlett.  Gentle- 
men, those  moral  relations  were  so  strange  that^  it  is  only  upon 
the  most  conclusive  evidence  that  one  would  accept  it.  I am  not  pre- 
pared to  a^it  that  they  are  relations  unparalleled  in  the  exj^ri- 
ence  of  one’s  life.  There  are  many  cases  vrhere,  for  different 
reasons,  either  in  the  husband  or  in  die  wife,  the  sacred  relation- 
ship of  marriage  becomes  simply  a companionship  of  love,  of 
confidence,  and  of  mutual  help ; and  there  have  been  many  cases — 
and,  so  long  as  our  nature  is  subject  to  the  ailments  whidh  afflict 
it,  there  will  be  many  cases— where  a wife  or  a husband  has  been 
called  upon  to  bear  a burden  for  years  of  the  companionship  of 
married  life  with  the  denial  of  its  entire  happiness  and  enjoy- 
ment; and  hundreds  and  thousands  of  men  and  women  have  gone 
forward  on  that  life,  and  have  borne  it  as  Christians  may  bear 
it,  and  with  a resignation  which  after  a time  would  become  even 
use.  But  in  this  case  I quite  agree  it  is  so  exceptional  a relation 
that  you  need  very  strong  evidence  of  its  existence;  and  1 look  to 
see  what  evidence  there  is  in  this  case  with  regard  to  that  matter. 
That  Mr.  Bartlett  himself  was  a man  of  strange  ideas  does  not 
depend,  in  this  case,  upon  one  witness.  I call  your  attention  to 
a most  singular  fact.  In  the  first  sentence  of  that  statement  that 
was  made  by  Mrs.  Bartlett  on  26th  January  to  Dr.  Leach  she  said 
that  her  husband  was  a man  of  strange  ideas— -who  had  an  idea, 

U1 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Mr  Clarke 

when  he  married  her,  that  a man  might  have  two  wives,  one  for 
service  and  the  other  for  companionship;  and  it  is  a strange 
thing  that,  curiously  enough,  there  are  two  witnesses  who  cor- 
roborated that  specific  statement.  I do  not  rest  upon  the  evidence 
of  Mr.  Dyson.  If  that  stood  alone,  I agree  it  would  not  be  so 
material.  But  the  other  witness  is  a witness  from  whom  a single 
word  of  evidence  in  favour  of  Mrs.  Bartlett  is  a treasure  beyond 
price  to  the  counsel  who  defends  her.  It  is  that  witness  whose 
sordid  and  vengeful  malice  nourished  the  idea  of  murder,  sug- 
gested it  at  the  first  moment,  dwelt  upon  it,  .worked  to  establish 
it;  that  is  the  witness  who  did  not  shrink  from  coming  into  that 
witness-box,  and  repeating,  againefc  the  widow  of  his  dead  son, 
the  foul  slander  from  which  that  son  protected  her  while  he  was 
here.  He  it  is  from  whom  I get  the  acknowledgment;  and  he  says, 

I remember  once  he  told  me  that  a man  might  have  two  wives,*' 
and  he  spoke  of  it.  How  came  he  to  remember  it?  He  tried  to 
weaken  its  force,  to  destroy  its  effect,  by  putting  in  the  observa- 
tion, “ I heard  a man  say  yesterday  that  he  would  like  forty," 
and  a laugh  was  caused,  as  possibly  he  expected.  But  the  ob- 
servation of  which  he  spoke  about  his  son,  the  observation  as  to 
a man  having  two  wives,  is  an  observation  which  had  fixed  itself 
upon  his  recollection,  and  he  admitted  that  when  I put  it  to  him; 
and  the  very  same  observation  as  to  the  two  wives  was  made  by 
Mr.  Dyson.  When  Mr.  Dyson  gave  his  evidence  in  the  box,  and 
spoke  of  that  observation,  and  I was  cross-examining  about  it,  do 
you  remember  the  question  that  my  lord  put  upon  his  evidence? 

Was  it  said  jocosely  or  seriously?  " Mr.  Dyson  used  a strange 
expression;  and  his  answer  to  that  question  was,  that  at  first  it 
was  put  tentatively,  and  afterwards  repeated  more  seriously; 
and  Mr.  Bartlett,  if  you  can  accept  Mr.  Dyson's  evidence,  and 
according  to  that  evidence,  did  ask,  as  a serious  question,  of  this 
minister  of  the  Gospel,  who  was  visiting  at  his  house,  whether  it 
was  consistent  with  the  teaching  of  God's  Word  that  a man  should 
have  two  wives?  Gentlemen,  that  was  exactly  what  was  said  by 
Mrs.  Bartlett  in  her  statement  to  Dr.  Leach.  There  may  be  this 
question  about  it,  and  I pressed  Mr.  Dyson  on  the  point — Did 
you  understand  Ikat  he  meant  two  wives,  each  of  whom  was  to 
enjoy  the  full  companionship  and  personal  affection  of  the  hus-^ 
band?"  Mr.  Dyson  put  that  aside:  Oh,  he  never  mentioned 
it  with  regard  to  himself;  it  was  a general  observation."  But 
do  you  believe  that  Mr.  Bartlett,  speaking  to  a man  whom  then 
he  knew  only  as  a minister  of  a place  of  Christian  worship,  to 
which  he  himself  went,  that  he  seriously  suggested  to  him  that  a 
man  should  be  allowed  to  have  two  wives  in  the  full  sense  of  the 
term? 

There  may  be  an  explanation,  and  I confess  that  I think  it  is 
found  in  this  book.  I have  had  occasion,  of  course,  to  examine  this 
318 


speech  for  the  Defence. 

Mr  ClArke 

book  in  the  course  of  the  trial ; it  is  not  for  me  to  say  what  opinion 
or  judgment  I have  formed  about  it.  I shall  only  be  entitled  to 
read  the  book  itself  to  you;  but  we  are  not  unacquainted  in  our 
criminal  procedure  with  the  publication  of  works  which  have  had 
for  their  vicious  object  the  spreading  about  to  the  public 
of  explanations  of  the  way  in  which  physical  passion 
may  be  gratified  without  the  risk  of  responsibility  being  incurred. 
This  book,  whatever  it  may  be,  is  no  book  of  that  kind.  So  far 
from  that  being  so,  1 asked  Annie  Walker  (and  I am  very  anxious 
not  to  transgress  my  right  in  the  matter),  whether  she  had  read 
the  book,  and  whether  there  was  anything  immoral  or  improper 
in  it,  and  she  said  there  was  nothing  of  the  kind.  I asked  Dr, 
Nichols,  when  he  was  called,  whether  the  statement  in  the  preface, 
that  he  tried  to  make  this  as  well  as  his  other  books  good  and 
useful,  the  books  true  in  science  and  pure  in  morals,  and  con- 
tributing to  the  highest  state  of  humanity,  was  true,  and  he  said 
it  was,  and  there  was  no  suggestion  to  him  at  all  of  any  observa- 
tion conflicting  with  it.  So  far  from  this  book  being  an  immoral 
book,  it  contains  counsels  of  perfection  too  high  for  the  ordinary 
life  of  men  and  women.  It  lap  down  the  rule  that  it  is  only 
for  the  continuation  of  the  species  that  the  indulgence  of  sexual 
passion  is  permissible;  that  the  moment,  that  indulgence  is  sup- 
posed to  have  resulted  in  a natural  and  legitimate  consequence, 
from  that  moment  the  wife  is  sacred  from  the  husband  until  the 
time  of  the  nursing  of  the  child  has  expired.  I do  not  discuss 
these  doctrines;  I have  nothing  to  do  with  them;  their  truth,  their 
application,  is  indifferent  to  me;  but  the  book,  such  as  it  is,  is  a 
book  which,  so  far  from  lending  itself  to  the  lower  influences 
and  the  lower  passions  of  men,  is  a book  which  endeavours  to 
restrict,  to  guide,  and  to  limit  the  indulgence  of  those  passions 
according  to  rules  which,  in  their  strictness,  would  be  almost  im- 
possible to  ordinary  human  nature,  but  which  undoubtedly  are 
compatible,  as  the  sentence  in  this  book  which  I before  read  pointed 
out,  are  compatible  with  the  lives  of  a very  large  numter  of  men 
amongst  us.  I will  read  no  passage  from  this  book  which  I have 
not  read  before;  but  you  will  remember  that  I read  a passage  as 
to  the  one  way  which  the  danger  and  responsibility  of  childbirth 
could  be  naturally  and  effectually  prevented,  and  that  was  absti- 
nence ; (and  hep  is  the  importance  of  it,  it  belonged  to,  and  was 
habitually  considered  and  talked  about  in  Mrs.  Walker^s  presence 
by  Mr.  Bartlett,  as  well  as  by  his  wife)  that  is,  to  refrain  from 
the  sexual  act.”  It  is  easily  done  by  most  women  and  by  many 
men.  In  every  civilised  community  thousands  live  in  celibacy, 
many  from  necessity,  many  from  ^oice.  In  Catholic  countries 
the  whole  priesthood  and  great  numbers  of  religious  of  both  sexes 
take  vows  of  perpetual  chastity.  This  practice  has  existed  for 
at  least  sixteen  centuries. 


319 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 

Mr  CUrke 

Tou  can  easily  imagine  that  I do  not  desire  in  this  place,  and 
in  these  surroundings,  to  enter  into  these  questions  in  this  book. 
I have  anxiously  thought  how  far  1 was  entitled  to  limit  my  ob- 
servations with  regard  to  it,  and  I hope  my  lord,  who  no  doubt 
has  seriously  considered  the  aspect  of  this  case,  will  not  think  that 
I have  transgressed  the  limits  which  I have  imposed  upon  myself 
in  discussing  it;  but  the  importance  of  it  is  not  in  the  teaching 
of  the  book;  the  importance  of  it  is  that  this  book  is  found  in  the 
possession  of  people  with  regard  to  whom  there  is  so  much  other 
evidence  as  to  the  relation  in  which  they  lived.  The  great  im- 
probability of  the  account  which  has  been  given  as  to  their  lives 
has,  of  course,  struck  you  all.  1 have  more  than  once  referred 
to  it,  but  just  let  us  see  what  the  facts  are  about  which  there  can 
be  no  dispute.  And  I was  going  to  say  providentially,  and  I do 
not  see  why  I should  shrink  from  the  word  providentially,”  for 
Mrs.  Bartlett^s  protection  there  has  been  preserved  one  letter,  the 
importance  of  which  in  this  case,  I think,  it  is  impossible  to  over- 
rate. It  is  the  letter  about  whose  authorship  there  is  no  doubt, 
as  to  the  occasion  for  the  reading  of  which  wo  have  clear  evidence, 
and  which  remains  to-day  in  the  handwriting  of  her  dead  hus- 
band. Then  Mr.  Dyson  is  called.  I do  not  know  if  you  thought, 
or  that  my  lord  thought,  he  dealt  quite  fairly  with  some  of  my 
questions.  It  occurred  to  mo,  but  I think  it  is  a matter  for  your 
judgment  entirely,  that,  when  he  came  to  the  question  of  the  rela- 
tions between  himself  and  Mrs.  Bartlett,  he  was  anxious  as  far 
as  possible  to  escape  from  the  admission  of  the  relation  that  he 
had  been  in,  and  the  position  he  held,  and  the  same  lack  of 
courage,  to  put  it  mildly,  which  led  him  to  try  and  get  from  her 
possession  the  poetry  which  he  had  written  and  given  to  her,  and 
which  her  husband  had  seen,  led  him  to  try  and  tone  down  as 
much  as  he  could  the  relations  existing  between  them.  But  you 
remember  the  mode  in  which  he  gave  his  answer  to  the  first  im- 
portant question  carrying  him  back  irresistibly  to  the  earlier 
period  of  the  strange  relationship  between  himself  and  Mrs, 
Bartlett,  He  described  that  in  October,  at  Claverton  Street,  when 
paying  there  one  of  his  frequent  visits,  Mr.  Bartlett  had  found 
some  fault  with  his  wife  and  scolded  her,  and  Mr.  Dyson  said, 
in  substance,  these  words,  for  I do  not  pretend  to  recite  them 
with  verbal  accuracy,  ” T^en  she  comes  under  my  care,”  or,  I 
have  charge  of  her,  I will  do  so  and  so.”  Of  course,  it  strikes 
every  one  at  once  that  could  not  be  the  first  observation— a man 
does  not  go  to  a friend’s  house  to  see  a friend  and  his  wife  and 
say,  ” When  your  wife  is  under  my  care,  I will  do  ” this, 'that, 
or  the  other.  It  irresistibly  carried  him  back  to  the  earlier  time, 
and  WM  forced  back  step  by  step;  he  was  brought  back  to  the 
month  of  September,  and  to  the  conversation  that  took  place  with 
Mr,  Bartleifct  when  he  came  back  from  Dover  and  crate  and  called 
3ae 


Speech  for  the  Defence. 

Mr  Clarke 

on  Dyson.  Now,  that  conversation  was  a remarkable  one,  strange 
and  unexplained,  but  it  is  in  evidence  before  you  on  oath  as  part 
of  the  evidence  upon  which  you  are  to  decide  this  case,  and  the  con- 
versation was  this — Mr.  Dyson  told  Mr.  Bartlett  that  he  was  feeling 
uneasy,  that  he  had  conceived  an  affection  for  Mrs.  Bartlett  which 
interfered  with  his  work,  and  that  he  thought  it  would  be  better 
that  he  should  discontinue  the  visits.  He  had  at  that  time 
spoken  to  Mrs.  Bartlett  of  that  a&ction,  and  so  he  told  the 
husband;  and  instead  of  the  husband  resenting  it,  as  you  would 
expect,  the  husband  not  only  did  not  resent  it,  but  he  indorsed  it ; 
he  gave  it  his  sanction,  his  consent  and  approval ; and  from  that 
day  to  the  day  of  his  death  he,  the  husband,  cherished  and  nur- 
tured, as  far  as  he  could,  the  opportunities  of  communication 
and  of  growing  affection  between  his  wife  and  the  young  Wesleyan 
minister.  It  is  a strange  story.  If  it  rested  alone  upon  the 
evidence  given  after  the  husband  is  dead  you  might  doubt  it; 
but  it  does  not.  We  have  got  three  documents,  which  are  of  con- 
siderable importance,  with  regard  to  it.  On  3rd  September  Mr. 
Bartlett  made  his  will  at  Herne  Hill.  Now,  observe,  there  was  no 
question  of  anybody  influencing  him  in  making  that  will ; he  was 
not  with  his  wife,  he  was  not  with  Mr.  Dyson ; he  signed  it  at  his 
place  of  business  at  Herne  Hill ; it  was  witnessed  by  the  two  assist- 
ants in  the  shop,  who  came  up  and  saw  him  write  his  name  to 
it.  There  can  be  no  suggestion  of  any  influence  that  anybody 
exercised  on  him  with  regard  to  that.  How  did  that  alter  the 
disposition  of  his  property)  Until  that  time,  so  far  as  the  evidence 
goes,  it  was  believed  his  will  had  left  Mrs.  Bartlett  his  property 
upon  the  condition  that  she  should  not  marry  again — ^that  it  had 
been  one  of  those  wicked  wills  which  men  are  making  every  day, 
and  with  which  they  are  outraging  the  feelings  of  the  wife  they 
leave  behind.  But  on  3rd  September  he  altered  it,  and,  instead 
of  leaving  it  to  her  only  in  case  she  did  not  get  married,  he  left  it 
to  her  absolutely,  and  he  appointed  as  one  executor  of  that  will 
the  Bev.  George  Dyson. 

But  now,  gentlemen,  early  in  September  the  interview  took 
place  between  these  two  men,  and  the  young  Wesleyan  minister  told 
the  husband  of  the  love  which  he  had  conceived  for  the  wife,  and 
of  which  he  had  assured  her.  There  are  two  documents  more. 
There  is  the  document — ^the  letter  written  by  Mr.  Bartlett  to  Mr. 
Dyson  on  21st  September,  and  there  is  the  answer  of  Mr.  Dyson 
to  Mr.  Bartlett  on  the  23rd.  Now,  gentlemen,  nothing  can  exceed 
in  this  case,  having  regard  to  this  part  of  the  question  with  which 
you  have  to  deal,  the  importance  of  that  letter  from  Mr.  Bartlett. 
Let  me  read  it  to  you,  and  let  me  a(&  you  to  listen  to  it,  having 
present  in  your  minds  the  statement  that  has  been  made  by  Mr. 
Dyson  with  regard  to  the  communication  that  he  made  to  Mr. 
Bartlett.  Dear  George, — ^Permit  me  to  say  that  I feel  great 
^ 321 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Mr  a«rke 

pleasure  in  thus  addressing  you  for  the  first  time.^^  That  letter 
shows  that  shortly  before  that  letter  the  relationship  of  the  parties 
had  changed,  and  that  Mr.  Dyson  had  been  admitted  to  a confidence 
and  intimacy  which  had  not  been  given  to  him  before.  “ To  me 
it  is  a privilege  to  think  that  I am  allowed  to  feel  towards  you  as 
a brother,  and  I hope  our  friendship  may  ripen  as  time  goes  on, 
without  anything  to  mar  its  future  brightness/'  Now  listen  to 
this,  gentlemen : “ Would  that  I could  find  words  to  express  my 
thankfulness  to  you  for  the  very  loving  letter  you  sent  Adelaide 
to-day."  Now,  when  you  consider  that  letter,  and  consider  that 
it  is  written  by  a husband  to  another  man,  and  that  in  that 
sentence  he  mentions  his  wife  by  her  Christian  name,  you  have 
gone  a very  long  way  indeed  to  confirm  the  statement  which  is 
made  as  to  their  relations.  A “loving  letter"  written  to 
Adelaide!  Why  did  he  speak  of  her  as  Adelaide  to  another  man? 
Why  did  he  write  to  express  thankfulness  to  another  man  for 
having  written  that  letter  to  his  wife?  A loving  letter  to  his  wife  1 
There  is,  so  far  as  I can  see,  no  conceivable  explanation  of  it  but 
this-— that  the  relations  between  his  wife  and  himself  were  not  the 
relations  of  marriage  in  its  deepest  and  in  its  closest  ties,  but  that 
they  were  such  relations  that  he  could  quietly,  calmly,  without 
any  pang  of  jealousy,  look  upon  the  rising  and  growth  of  an 
afiectionate  attachment  between  that  wife  and  another  man.  Hear 
how  he  goes  on  : “ The  very  loving  letter  you  sent  Adelaide  to-day. 
It  would  have  done  anybody  good  to  see  her  overflowing  with  joy  as 
she  read  it  whilst  walking  along  the  street,  and  afterwards  as  she 
read  it  to  me." 

There  must  be  something  exceptional,  something  extraordinary, 
something  very  difficult  to  beUeve  about  the  story  that  was  given 
to  you  of  the  marital  relations  of  these  persons;  there  is  nothing 
more  remarkable  than  the  fact  which  is  shown  in  that  sentence 
of  that  letter  that  the  husband  should  write  in  thankfulness  to 
another  man  for  that  letter  that  comes — the  loving  letter — so  loving 
that  Adelaide  overflows  with  joy  as  she  reads  it  when  she  walks 
along  the  street,  and  afterwards  when  she  reads  it  to  her  husband. 
If  that  sentence  stood  alone,  if  there  were  no  corroboration  of  it 
either  by  Mr.  Dyson,  no  statement  made  to  Dr.  Leach  by  Mrs. 
Bartlett — say  tiiat  sentence  alone  is  capable  of  no  explanation 
whatever  save  this,  that  the  marital  relations  between  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
Bartlett  were  relations  of  a strange  and  unusual  character,  rela- 
tions which  allowed  the  husband  to  speak  of  another  man  with 
regard  to  his  wife,  and  of  his  wife's  aflection  for  another  man, 
and  I say  that  can  only  be  explained  by  the  suggestion  that  hus- 
band and  wife  were  to  each  other  loving  and  faithful  companions, 
but  companions  and  nothing  more.  “ I felt  my  heart  going  out 
to  you.  I long  to  tell  you  how  proud  I felt  at  the  bought  I should 
soon  be  able  to  clasp  the  hand  of  the  man  who  from  his  heart 


Mr  CUrke 


Speech  for  the  Defence. 


could  pen  such  noble  thoughts.  Who  can  help  loving  you.  I felt 
that  I must  say  to  you  two  words,  ‘ Thank  you  ’ ; and  my  desire 
to  do  so  is  my  excuse  for  troubling  you  with  this.  Looking  towards 
the  future  with  joyfulness,  I am  yours  affectionately,  Edwin.’’  Of 
all  the  strange  things  that  this  Court  has  heard,  and  the  multi- 
tude of  cases  which  have  here  been  tried,  involving  the  closest 
and  deepest  relationship  of  lives,  nothing  stranger  has  ever  been 
lead  than  that  letter,  where  “ yours  affectionately,  Edwin,”  is 
with  humble  and  apologetic  humility  thanking  the  man  who  had 
written  a loving  letter  to  the  wife  which  made  her  overflow  with 
joy  as  she  read  it  to  her  husband.  That  letter  is  the  key  of  the 
whole  case.  Without  it,  it  might  not  be  possible  to  believe  the  state- 
ment that  Mrs.  Bartlett  made  as  to  their  marital  relations;  with 
it,  I venture  to  say  it  is  impossible  to  disbelieve  that  statement  and 
to  suggest  an  intelligible  explanation  of  the  words  and  phrases 
that  that  letter  contains. 

Now,  there  are  two  other  matters  before  I pass  to  their  marital 
relations.  One  is  a little  matter  that  has  arisen  to-day.  Of  all 
the  learned  counsel  who  have  appeared  in  this  case  on  the  part  of 
the  prosecution  there  is  not  one  whose  diligence  has  so  exacting 
an  effect  as  my  learned  friend  Mr.  Poland,  and  nothing  whatever 
will  be  lost  or  forgotten  when  that  scrutinising  and  all-remembering 
intellect  is  brought  to  bear  upon  it.  This  morning  Alice  Fulcher 
was  recalled,  and  Mrs.  Doggett  was  recalled,  for  the  purpose  of 
giving  you  some  information  as  to  the  habits  of  life  at  Claverton 
Street.  1 have  already  commented,  and  the  observation  my  lord 
was  good  enough  to  make  upon  it  entirely  answered  the  part  of 
the  comment,  upon  the  way  in  which  the  witnesses  were  asked  were 
they  living  as  man  and  wife — a phrase  which  may  imply  a good 
deal,  and  the  value  of  the  answer  to  which  depends  absolutely 
on  the  means  of  observation,  and  the  reason  for  observation,  of  the 
witnesses.  But  I am  very  grateful  to  my  learned  friend  for  the 
scrupulous  care  with  which  every  item  of  evidence  is 
brought  before  you,  for  the  evidence  brought  before  you  this 
morning  has  established  a very  remarkable  thing  with  regard 
to  the  lives  of  these  people.  When  they  went  to  take  these 
rooms  at  Claverton  Street,  Mr.  Bartlett  was  in  good  healA,  but 
it  was  stipulated  when  they  went  there  that  they  should  have  two 
beds,  and  it  was  only  because  Mrs.  Doggett  could  not  go  to  the 
stores  for  two  or  three  days  to  order  it,  and  then  that  the  stores 
took  two  or  three  days  to  send  it  home — it  was  only  owing  to  that 
that  a week  elapsed  during  which  there  was  only  one  bed  in  that 
room.  And  as  soon  as  could  be  that  second  bed  was  supplied  to 
the  back  room,  and  from  that  time  both  those  beds  were  used. 
It  is  not  so  very  remarkable  even  in  our  own,  but  it  is  much 
less  common  in  this  country  than  in  countries  not  far  off,  where 
the  use  of  two  beds  is  frequent.  But  there  it  is,  and  as  ‘far  as  it 


Adelaide  Bardett 


Mr  CUrke 

goes  it  gives  support  to  the  statement  you  have  heard  as  to  their 
marital  relations.  The  statement,  you  observe,  relates  to  matters 
so  absolutely  private  that  it  is  impossible  to  suspect  you  would 
ever  get  very  much  evidence  to  support  it. 

But  there  is  another  point  to  which  I attach  a great  deal  of  im- 
portance, and  that  is  given  in  the  evidence  of  Dr,  Leach.  Dr. 
Leach,  in  the  witness-box,  was  a self-conscious  witness,  and  un- 
doubtedly Dr.  Leach  was  very  anxious  as  to  his  own  appearance 
before  the  world,  and  to  protect  himself  from  misunderstanding 
and  from  complaint  in  the  matter.  Gentlemen,  I own  I feel  a 
great  deal  of  sympathy  for  Dr.  Leach ; to  a man  like  him,  carrying 
on  an  ordinary  practice  in  a place  where  he  may  not  be  too  much 
known,  and  going  through  the  daily  round  of  the  ordinary 
general  medical  practitioner’s  life,  it  is  an  appalling  thing  to  have 
suddenly  thrust  into  his  life  all  the  responsibility,  and  public 
responsibility,  of  a case  like  this.  He  is  confronted  with  medical 
problems  which  perplex  men  who  have  spent  years  in  that  special 
study.  He  is  called  upon,  in  the  fierce  light  of  public  observation, 
to  recount,  to  explain,  to  give  statements  as  to  fact,  and  to  vindi- 
cate medica.1  opinion  in  a way  which  would  test  the  capacity  and 
the  nerve  of  the  ablest  and  best  men  in  his  profession.  And  I 
must  say  for  Dr.  Leach  that,  apart  from  that  question  of  self- 
consciousness,  I think  he  has  l^en  most  anxious  to  give  full  infor- 
mation to  the  jury  and  to  the  coroner  when  he  was  called  as  to  all 
that  he  had  observed  with  regard  to  this  matter.  And  in  the 
witness-box,  it  is  for  you  to  judge  whether  he  did  not  seem  to 
you,  under  that  crust  and  appearance  of  self-consciousness,  at  all 
events  most  anxious  to  bring  to  his  evidence  and  to  the  answers 
which  he  gave  to  questions  in  examination  and  cross-examination 
the  honest  desire  to  tell  you,  without  favour  on  one  side  or  the 
other,  what  it  was  he  had  observed  in  this  case.  Well,  now.  Dr. 
Leach,  before  he  was  first  examined  before  the  coroner,  asked  Mrs. 
Bartlett  to  tell  him  what  had  happened  on  that  evening,  and  she 
gave  to  him  an  account  over  which  at  this  moment  I need  not  travel, 
but  which  was  absolutely  identical  with  the  account  which  she 
gave  to  other  people.  Of  all  the  events  of  that  night,  so  far 
as  they  referred  to  the  finding  of  her  husband,  and  the  condition 
in  which  he  was,  the  matter  which  awoke  her,  and  so  on,  she  has 
given  four  accounts.  She  gave  an  account  to  Mr.  Doggett;  she 
gave  an  account  to  Dr.  Leach;  she  gave  another  to  Mrs.  Matthews; 
she  gave  another  to  Mr.  Dyson.  Those  four  witnesses  have,  here 
in  Court,  repeated  the  accounts  she  gave,  and  there  is  absolutely 
no  difference  of  any  material  character — ^no  difference,  I mean, 
except  in  just  the  merest  form  of  words,  between  the  accounts  she 
gave  on  those  four  different  occasions.  That  was  before  Dr.  Leach 
was  first  examined,  but  at  a later  time  another  statement  was  made 
to  him  by  Mrs.  Bartlett.  It  was  on  2fith  January.  He  had  seen 


speech  for  the  Defence. 

Mr  aarke 

her  twioe  in  the  interval,  on  the  14th  and  on  the  18th,  and  on 
those  occasions  she  had  consulted  him,  not  with  reference  to  the 
inquest,  or  these  matters  at  all,  but  with  regard  to  her  own  private 
condition  of  health.  On  26th  January  he  had  a conversation  with 
her,  and  there  was  a matter  about  this  conversation  which  I brought 
out  in  cross-examination,  and  the  full  bearing  of  which  1 do  not 
suppose  was  obvious  at  the  moment  that  1 was  making  the  cross- 
examination.  That  statement  was  never  intended  for  a public 
statement.  In  this  country  a doctor  has  no  privilege.  There  is 
one  country  at  least  in  civilised  Europe  where  the  privilege  of 
the  doctor  is  recognised,  and  where  he  is  not  called  upon — ^just 
as  we  do  not  call  upon  a solicitor — ^he  is  not  called  on  to  reveal 
what  has  taken  place  in  consultation.  In  this  case  Dr.  Leach 
seems  to  have  thought  that  he  would  not  be  called  upon,  and  could 
not  be  called  upon,  to  state  what  was  then  said.  The  first  time 
he  had  asked  for  a statement  to  enable  him  to  give  his  evidence 
before  the  coroner;  the  second  time  he  receives  the  deepest  and 
most  delicate  confidence  of  Mrs.  Bartlett,  and  it  was  so  impressed  on 
his  mind  that  that  confidence  was  given  to  him  in  his  character 
of  a physician  that  when  before  the  coroner  he  struggled  to  escape 
from  the  necessity  of  giving  in  evidence  the  statement  which  had 
so  been  made.  I think  you  will  follow  me  when  I say  that  that 
fact  is  a very  material  one  for  my  ease.  That  statement  was  never 
made  for  the  public  ear.  She  never  knew  that  those  words  then 
spoken  would  go  upon  the  coroner's  deposition,  and  be  published 
to  all  the  world.  They  contain  her  statement  made  to  the  physician 
to  whose  skill  she  herself  had  applied  for  her  own  personal  necessi- 
ties, and  1 claim  for  that  statement  this : it  was  not  a statement 
offered  to  an  accusing  world  as  an  explanation  of  circumstances 
which  had  cast  suspicion  upon  her,  it  was  a private  coxmnunica- 
tion  of  the  most  private  matter  to  the  physician  in  whose  skill 
she^  was  trusting  for  her  own  treatment,  and  it  was  a statement 
which  comes  to  you  in  such  circumstances  as  to  bear  with  it  almost 
the  irresistible  presumption  that  that  statement  is  true. 

Now,  what  is  that  statement  1 I need  not  read  it  to  you  in 
detail — ^I  am  speaking  in  your  correction,  and  in  liie  correction 
of  those  that  heard  it,  and,  if  I do  not  read  all  that  document  in 
detail,  I will  carefully  give  as  far  as  I can  its  exact  effect.  It 
began  by  a statement  made  to  Dr.  Leach  with  regard  to  the  marital 
relations  between  her  and  her  husband.  How  was  that  statement 
brought  about  ? At  that  moment  nothing  had  been  said  by  her 
^ to  her  having  possession  of  chloroform,  but  curiously  enough, 
in  a way  which  is  absolutely^  inconsistent  wiiJi  any  consciousness 
of  guilt,  she  had  been  discussing  and  refuting,  to  use  Dr.  Leach's 
own  remarkable  word,  refuting  the  suggestion  that  had  been  made 
as  to  the  other  causes  of  death.  On  the  S6th,  Dr.  Leach  says  to 
her : **  I have  good  news  for  you,  Mrs.  Bartlett ; they  say  that 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Mr  Clarks 

chloroform  is  supposed  to  be  the  cause  of  your  husband’s  death.” 
And  he  says — ^you  will  observe  he  had  heard  before  about  the  rela- 
tives, and  the  suspicions  that  they  entertained — It  is  fortunate 
enough  for  you  that  it  was  not  prussic  acid,  or  some  matter 
of  that  kind,  because  then  it  is  possible,  although  he  might  have 
taken  it  himself,  strong  suspicion  would  have  attached  to  you,” 
upon  which  she  gives  this  answer  j she  says,  ” I wish  it  had  been 
anything  but  chloroform.”  Why?  Then  comes  the  answer: 
“What  I have  to  tell  you  now  requires  a preface,”  and  then,  to 
her  thinking,  in  the  absolute  secrecy  of  a confidence  between  herself 
and  her  medical  man,  she  goes  on  to  give  him  this  account  of  their 
marital  relations.  A strange  account.  She  says:  was  very 

young,  and  w^en  I married  my  husband  he  had  the  idea  that  a 
man  should  have  two  wives,  one  for  companionship  and  the  other 
for  use,  and  it  was  for  companionship  that  he  chose  me.”  She 
says:  ” I was  so  young  I did  not  understand  the  contract  I was 
making.”  And  that  is  true,  for  nearly  three  years  after  she  was 
married  the  greater  part  of  her  time  was  spent  at  a boarding- 
school  or  one  of  the  convent  schools  of  Belgium.  She  said : ” I 
did  not  understand  the  contract  when  1 made  it,  but  I was  loyal  to 
it.  For  six  years  that  contract  was  kept  between  us,  and  then 
there  came  to  my  heart  the  wish  that  I,  too,  might  be  a mother,  and 
have  a child  at  my  knee  to  love  me,  and  on  my  entreaty  my  husband 
broke  through  the  contract  that  had  been  made,  once,  and  once 
only.”  And  there  is  a strong  light  upon  this  from  that  book  of 
Dr.  Nichols’,  a book  in  which  he  speaks  of  the  proper  and  moral 
condition  of  men  and  women  after  conception  has  once  taken  place 
— ” Once,  and  once  only,”  she  says,  ” I was  admitted  to  my  hus- 
band’s love,  and  when  the  months  had  gone  by,  instead  of  the  child 
there  came  the  weeks  of  agony,  and  of  life  nearly  lost  in  the 
labour-struggle,  and  from  that  time  my  hope  and  wish  for  a child 
went,  and  we  resumed  our  old  relations.” 

^ Now,  gentlemen,  the  circumstances  under  which  that  communi- 
cation was  made  were  circumstances  which,  in  my  contention  be- 
fore you,  give  it  the  sanction  of  truth.  But  there  is  another  re- 
markable thing  which  is  stated  by  Dr.  Leach.  He  went  to  work 
—I  do  not  complain  of  him;  I think,  looking  at  it,  he  was  right 
an  tiis,  that,  when  he  found  how  important  these  matters  were 
getting,  he  should  sit  down  quietly  at  home,  undisturbed  by  the 
dash  and  wrangle  of  examination  and  cross-examination  at  the 
inquest  and  ihe  trial,  that  he  should  set  down  on  paper,  so  far  as 
he,  quietly  thinking,  could  remember,  the  statements  that  had  been 
made.  But,  gentlemen,  what  was  the  impression  on  his  mind  ? He 
wrote  that  down,  and  he  says  after  the  passage  which  I have  para- 
phrased, although  correctly  paraphrased,  I believe,  I personally 
was  to  some  extent  cognisant  of  the  facts  up  to  this  point  before 
the  26th ; they  had  been  partly  told  me,  partly  implied,  and  partly 

926 


speech  for  the  Defence. 

Mr  CUrbe 

gathered  from  observation.  The  rest  was  nearly  all  new/'  I 
tried  with  great  care— I think  you  will  bear  me  out — to  sift  that 
statement,  and  to  see  how  far  it  was  observation,  how  far  it  was 
information,  that  had  given  him  knowledge  of  these  facts,  and 
we  do  get  this  from  him,  that  when  she  made  that  statement  to 
him  it  did  not  strike  him  as  being  an  extraordinary  and  unbeliev- 
able thing,  but  the  relations  which  he  had  seen  existing  between 
her  and  her  husband,  the  way  in  which  they  spoke  to  each  other, 
the  habitual  tone  of  their  companionship,  came  back  to  his  mind 
as  to  some  extent  supporting  that  statement.  I can  go  no  further 
than  that.  There  is  no  more  evidence  to  support  it.  It  is  amaz- 
ing that  there  should  be  so  much,  for  in  this  case,  where  marriage 
itself  has  become  a platonic  relation,  I do  not  imagine  that 
others  visiting  at  the  house,  simply  meeting  the  husband  and  wife, 
would  guess,  or  have  any  means  of  knowing,  what  the  real  state 
of  things  was.  But  what  I point  out  is  this ; so  far  as  there  is 
any  evidence  at  all  in  the  case,  it  goes  to  support  that  statement. 
The  statement  itself  is  one  made  in  circumstances — circumstances 
of  confidence  with  Dr.  Leach — ^which  removed  Mrs.  Bartlett  from 
attempting  an  untruth — gave  her  no  object  for  inventing  a story ; 
and  that  statement,  so  far  as  the  other  evidence  in  the  case  is  con- 
cerned, is  supported  by  that  evidence,  and  not  contradicted  by  it.  I 
do  not  pause  to  speak  of  the  trivial  nature  of  that  conversation  in 
the  cab  as  they  were  going  to  the  dentist;  there,  again,  is  a sug- 
gested contradiction,  and,  in  the  course  of  a case  like  this,  little 
matters  toss  up  to  the  surface  and  disappear,  and  that,  I think,  dis- 
appeared when  Dr.  Leach  said  that  Mrs.  Bartlett  was  always 
trying  to  be  cheerful  and  k^p  up  her  husband's  spirits,  and  in  con- 
versation and  other  ways  would  make  suggestions  that  would 
lighten  the  burden  on  him — ^the  burden  of  anxiety,  and  no  doubt 
at  that  moment  the  apprehension  of  pain,  for  an  operation  was 
going  to  be  performed. 

But  now,  gentlemen,  there  is  a word  1 ought  to  say  here,  I 
have  called  your  attention  to  the  circumstances  in  which  that  state- 
ment was  made,  and  I should  not  make  another  comment  on  it  but 
for  the  ecrtraordinary  way  in  which  my  learned  friend  Mr.  Poland 
insisted  on  examining  Marshall,  the  police  constable,  as  to  the  fact 
that  Mrs.  Bartlett  was  not  called  to  give  evidence  as  a witness 
before  the  coroner.  I may  say  at  once  it  was  not  Mrs.  Bartlett's 
act,  and  could  not  be  on  Mrs.  Bartlett's  election.  I have  been 
greatly  assisted  in  this  case  by  my  friends  Mr.  Mead  and  Mr.  Beal, 
and  my  friend  Mr.  Mead  will  be  the  first  to  agree  with  me  in  the 
observation  I am  about  to  make,  that  I think  Mrs.  Bartlett  is 
greatly  indebted,  and  1 know  that  I myself  am  greatly  indebted, 
to  the  judgment  and  ability  with  which  Mr.  Beal  discharged  the 
anxious  and  onerous  duties  that  fell  on  him  in  representing  her  at 
the  inquiry  before  the  coroner  and  before  the  magistrate.  If  there 

327 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Mr  Clarke 

had  been  a question  as  to  whether  Mrs.  Bartlett  should  be  called  as 
a witness  or  not,  I know  him  well  enough  to  know  that  he  accepted, 
as  I in  a similar  situation  would  accept,  the  full  responsibility  of 
the  course  that  was  taken;  and  my  learned  friend  the  Attorney- 
General,  1 thought,  had  relieved  me  from  any  question  of  that  kind 
at  all  when  he  told  you  in  his  opening  that  no-  prejudice  or  inference 
was  to  be  drawn  against  Mrs.  Bartlett  from  the  fact  that  she  was 
not  called  as  a witness  at  the  inquest.  But  I go  further.  Dr. 
Leach  had  given  at  the  inquest  a kind  of  statement  that  she  had 
made  to  him,  and  my  point  to  you  is  this : If  that  statement  had 
been  made  at  the  inquest — ^had  been  made  for  the  purpose  of  divert- 
ing suspicion  from  herself,  and  of  justifying  her  acts  in  circum- 
stances which  otherwise  would  have  looked  and  told  heavily  against 
her — it  might  have  been  the  subject  of  suspicion.  But  Mrs.  Bartlett 
had  confided  to  her  doctor  that  most  strange  and  delicate  explana- 
tion of  the  relations  with  regard  to  herself  and  her  husband.  He 
had  given  it  in  evidence,  and  there  was  nothing  for  her  to  add. 
She  made  that  statement  to  Dr.  Leach  on  26th  January;  she  stands 
1^  that  statement  now;  there  was  nothing  for  her  to  add;  no 
reason  for  her  to  have  gone  into  the  witness-box  and  exposed  herself 
to  cross-examination  (I  was  going  to  use  an  epithet  about  it,  but  I 
refrain)  of  the  solicitor  whom  Mr.  Bartlett,  senior,  had  employed 
at  that  inquest.  It  would  have  been  to  expose  herself  to  a trial  as 
severe  and  terrible  as  a woman  could  ever  have  undergone,  and 
would  have  added  nothing  to  the  statement  she  had  already  made, 
and  which,  through  Dr.  Leaches  lips,  had  been  put  on  the  public 
record,  of  her  share  in  the  transaction. 

1 pause  for  a very  short  time  to  call  your  attention  to  the 
history  of  the  illness,  because  my  learned  friend  the  Attorney- 
General,^  in  opening  this  case,  suggested  that  there  were  only  three 
alternative  explanations  of  his  death : either  that  the  man  took  the 
chloroform  by  accident,  or,  said  my  learned  friend,  he  took  it 
with  a suicidal  intent,  or  he  took  it  by  being  administered  to  him 
by  another  person  with  the  intent  to  murder.  I have  called  your 
attention  fully,  1 hope  not  too  fully,  to  the  medical  questions  which 
have  arisen  in  this  case,  and  which  afiect  the  third  of  these  theories, 
namely,  murder ; but,  with  regard  to  the  others,  I have  a word  or 
two  to  say ; but  the  matter  is  reduced  to  the  idea  of  suicide,  acci- 
dental taking,  or  murder.  You  have  heard  from  Dr.  Tidy  that 
of  the  cases  of  death  from  the  administration  of  liquid  chloroform 
that  are  recorded,  by  far  the  larger  proportion  and  the  over- 
whelming majority  are  cases  of  suicide.  So  that  suicide  is  by  far 
the  most  common  of  the  causes  of  death  from  liquid  chloroform. 
Gentlemen,  let  me  make  this  observation  to  you  before  I enter  upon 
the  consideration  of  the  history  of  that  illness;  it  is  not  for  you 
to  decide  whether  Mr.  Bartlett  committed  suicide,  or  whether  he 
was  murdered.  That  ia  not  the  question  that  is  put  to  yotr;  there 


Speech  for  the  Defence. 

Mr  Clarke 

being  two  alternatives,  you  are  not  to  call  upon  the  defendant  here 
to  establish  before  you  that  Mr.  Bartlett  committed  suicide.  No 
such  burden  falls  upon  those  who  represent  the  defendant.  The 
prosecution  have  got  to  establish  before  you  beyond  reasonable 
doubt  that  he  was  murdered,  and  murdered  by  the  hands  of  the 
defendant  here;  and  that  is  the  matter  to  which  I have  to  address 
myself.  But,  when  we  have  to  consider  this  question  of  the  proba- 
bilities of  the  case,  we  start  thus : Dr.  Tidy,  who  knows  the  history 
of  all  these  cases,  says  that,  apart  from  the  evidence,  the  enormous 
preponderance  of  probability  would  be  on  the  side  of  suicide. 
Well,  let  us  examine  what  the  condition  of  things  was  during  the 
illness.  1 am  not  going  day  by  day  through  &e  record  of  those 
days,  but  as  one’s  mind  goes  back  over  the  evidence  that  has  been 
given,  and  traces  the  salient  points  in  the  history  of  the  illness, 
there  are  matters  to  which  it  is  not  undesirable  to  call  to  your  atten- 
tion. The  first  point  I should  like  to  put  before  you  is  thisi — ^that 
you  have  as  complete  and  exact  a record  of  all  that  took  place  during 
that  illness  as  probably  a jury  ever  had  in  a case  of  this  kind ; and 
it  is  by  no  means  unimportant.  From  9ih  December  to  31st 
December  this  illness  was  running  its  course,  and  during  the  whole 
of  that  time  Mrs.  Bartlett  was  under  the  immediate  inspecting 
eye,  and  under  to  some  extent  the  hostile  inspection,  of  those  who 
have  been  called  as  witnesses  before  you.  Under  whose  eye  was 
this  illness  running  its  course?  She  wrote  every  day  to  Mr.  Baxter, 
or  nearly  every  day.  Her  husband’s  heart  was  in  his  business 
work;  he  was  a man  of  whom  we  hear  that,  when  they  were  staying 
at  Dover,  he  would  get  up  at  three  in  the  morning  to  catch  the 
boat-train  and  come  up  to  London,  go  to  Herne  Hill,  attend  to  his 
business,  and  go  back  to  Dover  so  late  at  night  that  he  did  not  get 
back  to  his  wife  sometimes  till  ten  o’clock,  so  that  he  would  some- 
times only  spend  five  or  six  hours  practically  out  of  the  twenty-four 
in  her  company.  And  when  his  illness  began,  the  first  thing  he 
told  the  doctor  was  that  he  had  been  overworked  both  physically  and 
mentally ; and  the  first  advice  which  the  doctor  gave  him  was  this — 
that  he  should  abstain  altogether  from  all  talk  and  all  thought  of 
business,  and  keep  his  mind  to  difierent  subjects  for  a time. 

Well,  gentlemen,  every  day  the  prisoner  wrote  to  Mr.  Baxter, 
just  to  say  how  her  husband  was  getting  on,  and  from  time  to  time 
Mr.  Baxter  came  to  visit  at  the  house,  and  he  visited  at  the  house 
so  late  as  the  last  three  days  before  the  death,  when  he  brought  the 
mango-chutney,  or  something  that  has  been  mentioned  in  the  course 
of  the  case.  Immediately  after  the  illness  began  she  called  in 
another  witness,  Dr.  Leach.  He  knew  nothing  of  them;  he  was 
a perfect  stranger.  The  great  advantage  was,  with  regard  to  him, 
that  he  lived  close  by,  and  that  he  could  come  in  constantly  to  attend 
upon  her  husband ; and  Dr.  Leach  has  told  you  that  he  never  could 
have  wished  for  a more  attentive,  a more  faithful,  or  a more  affec- 


Adelaide  Bardett. 


Mr  Clarke 

tionate  ziTirse  than  ahe  proved  heraelf  to  be  during  all  the  period  of 
that  illness.  She  had  one  failing,  and  only  one — ^her  memory  was 
not  very  good ; but  she  kept  a record  from  hour  to  hour  of  the  little 
incidents  of  the  day  and  of  the  invalid^s  condition,  and  she  kept 
that  record  for  the  doctor  to  see.  She  tried  to  cheer  her  husband 
from  time  to  time;  ^e  talked  of  going  away;  she  did  all  she  could 
to  raise  his  drooping  spirits ; she  provided  for  the  doctor  every  sort 
of  information  that  he  could  possibly  want,  in  order  that,  by  test- 
ing the  contents  of  the  stomach  when  those  had  been  rejected,  he 
might  be  able  to  understand  exactly  the  course  of  the  trouble  and 
the  course  of  the  treatment.  Dr.  Leach  was  there,  not  daily  only, 
but  two-  or  three  times  a day,  on  many  of  the  days  during  that 
period;  and  Dr.  Leach  had  arranged,  on  the  night  of  the  Slat, 
that  he  was  to  come  again  on  the  morning  of  the  1st  in  order  to 
visit  Mr.  Bartlett;  so  &at,  from  the  beginning  to  the  end,  she  was 
under  his  independent  judgment. 

But  there  was  another  thing  she  knew,  and  her  husband  knew, 
that  there  was  one  member  of  his  family  who  looked  upon  her  with 
jealousy,  suspicion,  and  dislike — there  was  one  member  of  the 
family  who  used  to  visit  at  that  house — it  was  the  father,  who 
had  been  promised  a home  for  life,  and  who,  for  reasons  which  you 
can  well  imagine,  had  not  been  allowed  to  continue  an  inmate 
of  that  home.  He  was  the  one  member  of  the  family  who  visited 
at  the  house,  and  on  18th  December,  in  consequence  of  what  the 
father  had  said,  Dr.  Leach  was  asked  to  find  another  physician. 
The  father  had  said,  according  to  himself,  that  he  would  like  to 
send  down  a physician.  Well,  that  was  very  kind  of  him,  for  his 
money  was  obtained  from  the  son,  and  he  would  have  sent  down 
a physician  at  the  son’s  expense;  but  his  statement  that  he  would 
like  to  send  down  a physician  was  repeated  to  the  husband,  and 
the  husband,  with  an  anxious  desire  to  save  his  wife  from  any 
chance  of  that  terrible  suspicion  which  now,  in  spite  of  all  his 
care,  has  fallen  upon  her,  and  which  has  condemned  her  to  the 
agony  of  this  trial — the  husband  speaks  to  the  medical  man,  and 
tells  him  that  the  family  have  not  liked  her,  and  had  not  under- 
stood her ; that,  if  the  illness  goes  on  and  he  does  not  get  better, 
the  family  may  say  that  she  was  poisoning  him;  and  so  he  asked  Dr. 
Leach  to  find  some  stranger,  upon  whom  no  suspicion  could  fall, 
with  whom  there  could  be  no  fear  at  all  of  his  absolute  ’bona 
fidesy  and  to  call  him  in  and  let  him  see  the  case.  The  husband 
says,  " I will  not  be  treated  by  him.  You  alone,”  he  says  to  Dr. 
Leach,  shall  treat  me,  but,  for  my  wife’s  protection,  call  in  a 
doctor  to  see  me  once,  and  let  him  express  his  opinion,  and  be 
able  to  express  an  opinion  if  need  be.”  And  so,  on  19th  Decem- 
^r.  Dr.  Dudley  was  called  in,  and  that  absolute  independent 
judgment  we  have;  and  that  independent  judgment  was  intended 
for  the  good  purpose  of  shielding  the  wife  against  that  malice 


Speech  for  the  Defence. 

Mr  Clarke 

which  he  knew  existed,  and  which  would  suggest  in  any  case  that 
there  had  been  foul  play.  But  she  was  under  the  inspection  of 
the  father-in-law  himself.  He  has  been  called  into  the  witness-box, 
and  he  has  told  you  what  he  had  to  say.  He  complained,  or  sug- 
gested, rather,  that  there  should  be  another  doctor ; he  complained 
with  regard  to  the  nursing,  and  suggested  that  there  should  be 
another  nurse.  Another  nurse  I Why  1 The  man  who  was  ill,  and 
who  was  tended  thus  by  his  wife,  as  Dr.  Leach  told  you — think 
it  was  Dr.  Leach — ^would  not  have  listened  to  the  suggestion  of 
another  nurse.  Dr.  Leach  did  suggest  another  nurse  afterwards 
— ^but  for  what  reason?  Not  because  there  was  a failure  of  care 
in  the  loving  wife  who  was  tending  her  sick  husband,  but  be- 
cause that  love  had  carried  her  to  a devotion  which  was  telling 
upon  her  health — ^because  night  after  night,  for  thirteen  or  four- 
teen nights,  she  had  spent  the  restless  and  broken  hours  of  the 
night,  sitting  by  and  watching  over  her  husband,  and  because  the 
doctor  feared,  not  that  the  patient  would  be  neglected,  but  that 
the  nurse  would  break  down  under  the  strain.  But  Mr.  Bartlett 
cherished  his  suspicions;  he  complained  that  he  was  kept  away. 
He  was  one  of  the  first  persons  to  be  communicated  with,  When 
the  death  took  place  it  was  not  to  Mr.  Dyson  that  she  telegraphed. 
She  wrote  to  Mr.  Dyson,  just  as  she  wrote  to  Mr.  Wood,  the  other 
executor ; but  the  three  telegrams  that  were  sent  off  that  morning 
were  sent  to  Mrs.  Matthews,  to  Mr.  Baxter,  and  to  Mr.  Bartlett, 
Mr.  Bartlett  did  not  get  that  telegram  until  a little  later.  He 
had  heard  from  Mr.  Baxter,  before  he  got  his  own  telegram,  that 
the  death  had  taken  place,  and  he  rushed  off  to  the  place  where 
his  son  was  lying  dead;  he  went  up  to  the  bed  where  his  son  was 
lyiDLgj  fl«nd  smelt  at  his  lips  for  prussic  acid.  Why?  Because  that 
preconceived  idea — -Aat  idea  against  which  the  husband  had  tried 
to  shield  her — ^was  in  his  mind;  and  he  was  smelling  there  at  his 
dead  son’s  mouth  with  the  idea  that  he  should  find  something  to 
implicate  and  to  blame  in  that  death  the  daughter-in-law  whom  he 
had  always  disliked,  and  against  whom  the  husband  knew  that  he 
bore  a revengeful  feeling.  That  is  not  all.  He  smells  for  the 
prussic  acid;  he  turns  to  the  doctor,  and  says,  “ We  cannot  let 
this  pass — ^there  must  be  an  examination— wo  cannot  let  this 
pass,  I will  not  have  a doctor  from  the  neightourhood,  or 
one  connected  with  the  case.  I insist  that  some  independent  doctor 
shall  come  down  to  test  the  cause  of  death.”  And  it  does  not  stop 
there.  He  goes  and  finds  a solicitor,  and  he  takes  a solicitor 
down  to  Somerset  House  to  inspect  the  will,  which  he  hopes  to 
upset.  He  comes  here — and  I describe  not,  because  you  saw  it, 
his  conduct  when  the  will  was  put  before  him,  and  he  was  asked 
about  the  signature;  and  he  does  not  scruple  now — ^now  that  the 
wife  has  no  husband  to  protect  her — ^he  does  not  scruple  now  to 
tell  you— now  from  the  witness-box— that  the  foul  accusation  that 

331 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Mr  Clarke 

he  zu&de  against  her  seven  years  ago — ^for  which  he  had  then 
in  writing  expressed  the  greatest  penitence — as  to  which  he  then 
confessed  that  it  was  an  absolutely  unfounded  slander  on  his  part 
— ^he  does  not  scruple  now  to  repeat  that  slander,  and  to  stand  by 
its  truth,  and  to  persist  in  the  odious  accusation  which  he  desires 
to  revive  after  these  years  against  the  reputation  of  one  of  his 
own  sons  and  the  honour  of  the  widow  of  the  son  who  kept  him. 
Gentlemen,  this  was  the  sort  of  watching  under  which  this  illness 
passed— this  was  the  sort  of  test  that  has  been  applied  to  her 
conduct.  There  was  no  resource  of  suspicion,  dislike,  and  malig- 
nity which  has  not  been  given  to  the  conduct  of  this  case — for 
that  witness  instructed  the  solicitor  to  cross-examine  the  witnesses 
at  the  inquest. 

Now  then,  gentlemen,  that  was  the  illness  passing  under  that 
scrutiny,  and  subject  to  that  construction,  and  what  was  the  history 
of  that  illness?  1 will  take  this  as  rapidly  as  1 can.  On  the 
10th  Dr.  Leach  was  called  in,  and  there  was  something  very  re- 
markable about  Mr.  Bartlett’s  condition.  It  was  not  so  much 
that  physical  mischief  was  betrayed  in  the  frame  and  condition 
of  the  man,  but  he  was  hypochondriacal,  he  complained  of  sufiering 
from  great  sleeplessness,  he  was  depressed  in  spirit,  and  when  his 
mouth  was  looked  at  there  was  a very  curious  result  impressed 
upon  the  doctor’s  mind.  The  condition  of  the  gums,  and  the 
characteristic  blue  line,  told  Dr.  Leach  that  there  had  been  mercury 
taken.  We  know  not  what  had  produced  this  result,  which  might 
be  produced  either  by  large  quantities  of  mercury,  or  might  be 
produced  by  a small  quantity  of  mercury  administered  in  the  case 
of  a patient  who  had  a peculiar  idiosyncrasy  for  that  drug.  But 
there  it  was,  and,  whatever  the  cause  of  it,  it  so  impressed  itself 
on  Dr.  Lead’s  mind  that  he  waited  until  Mrs.  Bartlett  was  out 
of  the  room,  and  then  he  asked  Mr.  Bartlett,  Have  you  been 
taking  any  medicines?”  The  answer  was  “ No,”  and  Dr.  Leach 
has  recorded  the  impression  which  was  then  on  his  mind,  namely, 
that  Mr.  Bartlett  had  been  to  some  quack,  who,  for  real  or  sup- 
posed syphilis,  had  administered  mercury,  which  had  produced  this 
result.  It  was  absolutely  denied  by  Mr.  Bartlett.  He  explained  it 
afterwards  as  being  caused — and  certainly  it  was  a very  odd  ex- 
planation— ^he  explained  it  as  being  caused  by  a pill  that  he  picked 
out  of  a box  of  sample  pills.  It  is  a curious  thing  for  a man  to 
take  a pill  in  that  way,  and  one  is  not  surprised  that  Dr.  Leach 
did  not  readily  accept  this  explanation;  and  hence  the  suspicion 
in  his  mind  that  there  was  some  other  explanation  of  the  matter. 
But  the  symptoms  of  gastritis  or  dyspepsia  that  existed  on  10th 
December  disappeared  to  some  extent  under  Dr.  Leadi’s  treat- 
ment; and  undoubtedly  when  Dr.  Dudley  was  called  in  on  19th 
December  the  physical  condition  of  Mr.  Bartlett  had  greatly  im- 
proved. 


Mr  Clarke 


Speech  for  the  Defence. 


Well,  gentlemen,  but  there  was  a very  curious  relapse,  in  this 
sense.  Dr.  Leach  has  said  that  things  got  better — a good  deal 
Ijetter — from  the  19th,  I think,  until  the  24th  or  25th.  But  he 
used  this  expression:  “ On  the  25th  the  appearance  of  the  lumbri- 
coid  worm  upset  everything  again,'’  and  we  know  from  the  evidence 
that  the  appearance  of  that  worm  had  very  seriously  affected  the 
spirits  and  the  mind  of  Mr.  Bartlett.  We  have  got  the  evidence 
of  Mr.  Dyson,  who  returned  on  26th  December,  and  who,  on  the 
26th  and  27th,  visited  at  the  house,  and  he  describes  Mr.  Bartlett  as 
being  at  that  time  in  a very  depressed  condition.  The  improve- 
ment which  had  taken  place  during  the  earlier  days  of  the  illness 
had  been  an  improvement  of  physical  symptoms,  but  there  had  been 
no  great  improvement  in  mental  condition,  l^cause,  if  you  will 
remember,  when  Dr.  Dudley  tried  to  describe  the  condition  Mr. 
Bartlett  was  in  on  the  19th,  he  described  him,  1 think,  os  restless, 
disinclined  to  move,  disinclined  even  to  open  his  eyes,  looking  at 
him  through  half-closed  eyelids,  and  altogether  in  a condition 
which,  if  it  were  not  physically  one  of  a serious  character,  was  at  all 
events  one  which,  as  far  as  one  can  see,  mentally  and  morally  was 
a condition  of  great  depression.  But  the  condition  was  enormously 
increased  in  its  gravity  when  you  come  to  26th  December. 

Let  us  just  see  what  happened  on  that  day.  The  lumbricoid 
worm  made  its  appearance,  and  Dr.  Leach  says  the  man  was  greatly 
alarmed  and  troubled  about  that  worm.  Some  vermifuge  was 
given,  santonins  was  given,  to  treat  this.  What  is  Dr.  Leach’s 
statement  on  that  treatment?  That  if  vermifuge  was  given,  and 
was  not  speedily  removed  by  purgatives  from  the  system,  the  effect 
on  the  mind  and  spirits  would  1^  very  serious  indeed — so  serious 
that  Dr.  Leach  says,  I have  experienced  them  myself,  and  I wish 
nobody  to  experience  for  themselves  those  serious  consequences.” 
What  was  the  effect?  The  santonine  was  administered,  and  Dr- 
Leach  made  every  effort  to  relieve  the  bowels  and  exclude  the  vermi- 
fuge. What  was  the  effect?  None  whatever.  The  drug  remained 
in  the  system,  and  its  effect  must  have  been  very  great.  He  had 
had  two  purgative  draughts  and  two  globules  of  croton  oil,  and 
exactly  the  same  sort  of  thing  was  obiSrved  with  regard  to  those 
purgatives  as  Dr.  Leach  had  observed  as  to  the  sedatives.  Some- 
thing was  given  him  to  procure  sleep.  It  had  no  effect  at  all;  he 
was  as  restless  as  ever.  Croton  oil  was  administered— —a  remedy 
^ strong  that  one  would  have  supposed  it  would  have  produced 
immediate  evacuation  with  considerable  looseness;  and  this  amazing 
patient  said  to  Dr.  Leach  that  it  was  very  comforting,  that  he  felt 
very  comfortable,  and  he  was  very  glad  to  have  it.  But  it  had 
no  effect.  He  had  taken  these  things  into  the  stomach,  and  no 
effect  was  produced;  he  had  hot  tea  and  coffee,  that  were  used  to 
try  and  give  them  efficiencjr,  in  vain.  At  last  Dr.  Leach  galvanises 
the  abdomen,  still  all  in  vain;  and  Dr.  Leach  says,  I gave  it  up 

m 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Mr  C3arke 

in  .despair  ; and  on  that  day,  the  26th,  having  ezhanated  all  the 
means  he  had  adopted  to  remove  this  vermifuge,  which  was 
absolutely  necessary.  Dr.  Leach  went  away.  He  comes  again,  I 
think,  in  a day  or  two.  But  just  let  me  remind  you  of  another 
thing.  Dr.  Leach  said  he  should  not  come  and  see  him  again, 
and  he  tells  you  there  was  no  real  reason,  in  his  judgment,  for 
coming  to  see  this  man  constantly,  but  whenever  he  suggested  that 
he  would  not  come,  Mr.  Bartlett  was  distressed;  and  he  says  on 
that  day  Mr.  Bartlett  seemed  distressed  at  his  threat  not  to  come. 
On  the  27th  he  had  a somewhat  better  day,  1 suppose.  Dr.  Leach 
says,  “ On  the  27th  he  obtained  some  relief,*’  and  undoubtedly 
if,  after  all  the  accumulation  of  remedies,  he  did  get  relief,  the 
probability  is  it  was  a relief  of  that  kind  which  left  him  in  a very 
low  and  depressed  condition.  Then  two  days  pass.  He  got  relief 
on  the  27th,  and  on  the  29th  a fresh  trouble  comes.  He  had  been 
twice  to  the  dentist’s  already.  ‘He  had  had  removed  from  his  jaw 
a number  of  roots  of  teeth,  and  he  had  also  had  removed  a number 
of  stumps  which  were  left,  and  had  been  sawn  ofi,  and  now  on  the 
29th,  Dr.  Leach  says,  The  jaw  eymptpma  became  alarming.” 
Gentlemen,  that  word  has  been  used  by  Dr.  Leach  over  and  over 
again.  '\^en  they  came  afterwards  to  examine  the  jaw,  it  turned 
out  that  the  necrosis  was  of  a superficial  and  not  of  a very  important 
character;  but  on  the  29th,  the  30th,  and  the  31st  Dr.  Leach  says 
those  symptoms  were  alarming.  How,  gentlemen,  what  does  that 
mean,  or  what  would  it  mean  to  him?  We  know  that  Mr.  Bartlett 
knew  it,  and  1 will  tell  you  why ; necrosis  had  been  discussed  between 
Dr.  Leach  and  Mrs.  Bartlett  before  the  visit  to  the  dentist  on  the 
31st;  and  so  nervous  was  Mr.  Bartlett  with  regard  to  a matter  of 
this  kind  that  Dr.  Leach  endeavoured  to  spare  him  the  horror  and 
dread  of  going  to  the  dentist  by  not  telling  him  anything  about  it 
till  arrangements  had  been  made  and  they  were  ready  to  go.  Then 
he  did  go.  Before  that  time  there  had  been  a conversation  about 
necrosis. 

The  next  piece  of  evidence  is  of  enormous  importance — it  is 
the  evidence  of  Mr.  Boberts,  the  dentist — because  he  says,  when  the 
operation  had  been  performed,  as  we  know  it  to  have  been  with 
some  difficulty  under  nitrous  oxide  gas,  double  the  usual  time  being 
taken  in  the  operation — ^he  said  it  was  mentioned  before  him  that 
necrosis  was  setting  in.  What  would  that  mean  to  him,  ” Necrosis 
was  setting  in  ”?  ” Necrosis  ” is  a word  of  itself  suggestive  of 

most  unpleasant  imaginations ; it  means  death ; and  in  its  adopted 
form  of  city  of  the  dead,  necropolis,  has  probably  become  familiar 
to  people  who  would  not  attach  any  meaning  to  the  word  otherwise 
— ^it  means  death  of  the  structure,  whatever  it  is.  Necrosis  of  the 
jaw  means  the  death  of  the  bone,  coming  usually,  as  the  witness  told 
you,  either  from  syphilis,  or  from  an  administration  of  mercury, 
whether  syphilis  be  present  pr  not.  Sometimes  it  may  be  checked, 
334 


Speech  for  the  Defence. 

Mr  Clarke 

sometimes  only  involving  a purely  superficial  injury ; the  bone  may 
be  removed ; but  sometimes,  as  the  doctor  told  you,  involving  grave 
efiects  to  the  bone,  until  the  bone  structure  itself  of  the  jaw  has  to 
be  interfered  with  and  removed,  and  occasionally  involving,  if  it 
progresses,  consequences  which  are  actually  fatal  to  life. 

It  is  true,  when  his  body  was  examined  after  death,  necrosis 
was  found  to  be  limited,  and  of  a superficial  character.  On  the 
31st,  it  is  true,  Mr.  Roberts  did  not  attribute  the  most  serious  aspect 
to  the  presence  of  necrosis;  but  on  that  day,  in  Mr.  Bartlett's 
presence,  it  was  said  necrosis  was  setting  in ; and  such  an  intima- 
tion coming  to  a man  who  had  gone  through  the  illness  which  has 
been  detailed  to  you  in  evidence,  and  which  I have  but  sketched 
in  the  merest  outline,  would  necessarily  and  severely  affect  his 
spirits. 

Now  one  has  come  to  the  evening  on  which  this  happened.  We 
have  got  the  account  of  that  evening.  The  supper  went  up,  the 
oysters  and  the  mango-chutney  and  so  on,  and  it  was  partaken  of 
by  Mr.  Bartlett.  The  conversation  with  Mrs.  Doggett;  then  the 
servant  takes  in  the  coals  and  says  Good-night,"  and  goes  down- 
stairs at,  I think,  about  half-past  eleven.  Twenty-five  minutes 
past  eleven  ^e  goes  downstairs — I am  not  quite  sure  about  the 
exact  time— it  may  be  twenty -five  minutes  past  eleven,  or  at  twenty- 
five  minutes  to  twelve,  she  takes  in  the  coals,  is  told,  as  Mr.  Bartlett 
is  in  bed,  that  she  is  to  put  the  basin  outside,  and  there  the  evidence 
of  eye-witnesses  stops  The  next  time  that  other  persons,  Mr.  and 
Mrs.  Doggett  and  the  doctor,  go  into  that  room,  Mr.  Bartlett  is 
dead.  Now,  gentlemen,  just  let  me  ask  you  to  consider  the  state- 
ment that  Mrs.  Bartlett  has  made  with  regard  to  that  matter.  Let 
us  consider  what  would,  in  the  ordinary  course  of  things,  happen 
after  that.  Observe,  the  day  is  over.  Mrs,  Bartlett  has  no 
friends  with  her  with  whom  she  is  going  to  say  farewell  to  the  old 
year^  and  exchange  congratulations  on  the  birth  of  the  new  one. 
She  IS  alone  with  her  husband  in  that  front  room.  In  the  ordinary 
course  of  things,  now  that  he  has  gone  to  bed,  she  would  make  up 
the  fire  for  the  night,  she  would  go  into  the  back  room  and  wash 
acwrding  to  her  usual  wont,  and  she  would  change  the  dress  she 
had  worn  during  the  day  for  that  lighter  and  looser  dress  she  was 
going  to  wear  through  the  hours  of  the  night.  Then,  in  the  ordi- 
nary course  of  things,  she  would  come  back  to  her  place  at  the  foot 
of  his  bed,  and  there  settle  to  sleep.  If  the  statement  of  Mrs  Bart- 
lett be,  ^ I suggest  to  you  it  is,  the  true  statement  of  all  that  she 
can  speak  to  as  having  taken  place  on  that  night,  what  was  it  that 
happened?  I have  called  your  attention  to  the  circumstances  in 
which  that  statement  was  made  to  Dr,  Leach;  I have  called  your 
attention  to  the  first  part  of  it,  and  his  comment  upon  it.  Now  let 
me  call  your  attention  to  the  statement  which  she  made  as  to  that 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Mr  Clarktt 

She  told  him  that  she  had  felt  it  a duty  to  her  womanhood 
to  resist  the  resumption  by  her  husband  of  the  marital  rights  so 
long  abandoned;  she  told  him  she  had  prepared  herself  to  resist, 
and  to  assist  herself  in  her  resistance  to  that  attempt  by  supplying 
herself  with  chloroform.  Nobody  who  ever  knew  anything  about 
the  use  of  chloroform  would  have  dreamed  of  doing  such  a thing 
as  that.  Mr.  Dyson  and  Mrs.  Bartlett  were  probably  equally 
ignorant  of  the  effects  of  chloroform,  and  of  the  way  in  which 
chloroform  could  have  been  used.  But  then  she  said  this.  She 
told  Dr.  Leach  that  she  possessed  herself  of  a bottle  of  chloroform, 
and  secretly  resolved  that,  in  the  event  of  her  husband  approaching 
her,  " she  would  put  some  of  the  chloroform  on  to  a handkerchief 
and  wave  it  in  his  face,  believing  thereby  to  make  him  lie  down 
again  to  sleep,  as  often  as  the  occasion  required.  1 congratulated 
her  on  not  having  to  try  the  experiment,  saying  that  its  accom- 
plishment would  have  b^  impossible,  and  in  the  scramble  the 
bottle  would  probably  have  capsized.’’  “ She  said,  never  having 
kept  anything  from  her  husband,  the  presence  of  that  bottle  in  her 
drawer  troubled  her  mind,  and  ^e  felt  she  would  do  a very  wrong 
thing  if  she  really  used  it,  so  determined  to  tell  her  husband  and 
make  a clean  breast  of  it;  so,  on  the  last  night  of  the  year,  she  sat 
down  and  broached  the  subject  to  him  while  he  was  lying  in  bed. 
She  told  him  to  what  extremes  she  was  driven,  and  gave  the  bottle 
into  his  hands.  They  talked  affectionately  about  their  relations 
one  with  the  other  for  a short  time,  and  he  seemed  much  grieved. 
She  told  me  no  details  of  their  conversation,  but  1 gather  it  was  not 
a long  one,  for  he  soon  turned  round  and  pretended  to  sleep  or  to 
sulk.  Then,  soon  after  midnight,  she  fell  a^eep,  and  once  waking, 
heard  her  husband  breathing  in  a peculiar  manner,  but  her  sus- 
picions were  in  no  way  aroused.  She  next  awoke,  probably  an 
hour  or  two  later,  with  a cramped  feeling  of  her  left  arm,  the  one 
round  his  foot ; she  saw  he  was  lying  on  his  face ; she  got  up  to  turn 
him  into  a more  comfortable  position,  and  was  greatly  alarmed 
at  his  condition;  she  rubbed  his  chest  witibt  brandy.”  Now,  that 
statement,  made  in  the  circumstances  I have  suggested  to  you,  gives 
it  a great  probability  of  its  being  the  absolutely  true  account.  Is 
it  a possible  account?  Why,  the  facts  that  we  toow  fit  in  with 
that  statement  in  a way  which,  1 venture  to  submit  to  you,  makes 
the  account  which  I gather  from  that  statement,  and  from  the  facts 
given  in  evidence,  not  merely  the  most  probable,  but  almost  the 
certain,  history  of  the  transactions  of  that  night.  Observe  those 
curious  relations  that  had  been  set  up  between  them.  The  husband 
who  was  to  succeed  him  had  been  in  fact,  with  his  assent,  selected. 
Mr.  Bartlett  had  so  behaved  as  in  fact  to  have  given  or  dedicated 
his  wife  for  the  future  to  Mr.  Dyson.  Then  he  desires  to  re-assume 
his  rights,  but  is  resisted;  and  on  this  night,  when  he  has  suffered 
during  the  day,  when  he  has  undergone  this  operation,  and  must 
336 


speech  for  the  Defence. 

Mr  Clark« 

undoubtedly  have  sufered  from  his  condition,  he  is  told  by  her, 
substantially,  that  the  consent  'which  he  has  given  with  regard  to 
Dyson’s  relations  is  treated  by  her  as  an  irrevocable  decision,  that 
to  her  he  has  ceased  to  enjoy  the  rights  that  a husband  may  exercise, 
that  she  has  taken  him  at  his  word,  that  written  word,  in  fact, 
which  I have  read  you  in  that  letter,  and  that,  from  this  time  after- 
wards, copartnership  must  remain  copartnership,  and  shall  never 
he  allowed  again  to  pass  into  the  associations  of  marriage.  He  was 
grieved,  he  appeared  very  grieved,  and  he  turned  over. 

Suppose  you  now  ^etch  in  imagination  what  took  place. 
Suppose  she  left  the  room  as  usual  to  wash,  and  he  had  placed  on 
the  mantelpiece  this  bottle  of  chloroform.  There  was  a wineglass 
there,  that  wineglass  was  found  afterwards,  and  while  she  was  away 
it  was  perfectly  easy  for  him  without  leaving  his  bed,  lifting  him- 
eeii  only  upon  his  elbow,  to  pour  into  this  wineglass  the  less  than 
half  a wineglass  of  chloroform  which  may  have  constituted  that 
fatal  dose,  having  poured  that  into  the  wineglass,  having  replaced 
the  bottle,  then  to  have  taken  it  off.  If  he  swallowed  it  in  that 
way,  and  swallowed  it  up  quickly,  there  would  not  be,  as  there 
were  not,  appearances  of  long  exposure  of  the  softer  substances  of 
the  mouth  and  throat  to  the  chloroform.  Having  drunk  it,  he  re- 
assximes  his  recumbent  position,  the  chloroform  passes  down  his 
throat  and  reaches  the  stomach.  There  is  no  difficulty,  nothing 
unreasonable,  nothing  extraordinary,  as  tested  by  the  cases  which 
have  been  quoted  here;  within  two  or  three  minutes  after  that  he 
might  be  passing  into  a state  of  coma,  that  might  have  been  when 
she  came  back,  or  when  she  awoke,  because  how  can  she  tell  if  this 
was  done  when  she  was  absent  from  the  room,  or  while  she  was 
dozing  at  the  foot  of  his  bed  ? There  might  have  been  when  silto 
awoke  or  when  she  came  back  this  stertorous  breathing,  which  is 
one  of  the  signs  of  having  taken  chloroform,  and  which,  if  she 
had  been  a murderess,  she  never  would  have  mentioned  as  she  did 
mention  it  to  the  man  to  whom  she  was  giving  the  account ; there 
may  have  been  this  breathing  which  did  attract  her  attention,  and 
was  mentioned  by  her  when  telling  it.  Then  she  herself  goes  to 
sleep,  and  her  husband’s  coma  deepens  into  insensibility,  and 
insensibility  passes  into  death.  There  has  been  before  the  death 
just  the  turn  upon  the  pillow,  the  turn  into  the  uncomfortable 
attitude  described  with  tihie  head  turned  over  on  the  pillow,  but 
except  that  there  has  not  been,  nor  would  science  predict  or  expect 
to  find,  any  other  disturbance  or  convulsion*  And  then  the  hours 
go  by.  She  has  heard  them,  happier  than  she,  in  the  other  part 
of  the  house  speaking  to  each  other  of  the  brighter  hopes  of  the  New 
Year  that  is  beginning,  but  the  first  thing  ime  awakens  to  in  that 
New  Tear  is  the  sad  consciousness  that  the  husband  who  might  not 
have  fully  deserved  the  love  that  he  received,  but  who,  at  all  events, 
had  treated  her  with  affection,  with  confidence,  with  the  desire  to 

m 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 

Mr  CUrke 

protect  her — ehe  awakens  to  find  that  husband  apparently  cold  and 
dead.  She  springs  to  his  side;  there  is  close  to  the  end  of  the 
mantelpiece,  for  we  know  it,  this  wineglass  from  which  he  has  taken 
that  fatal  draught;  the  woman’s  instinct  is  at  once  to  administer 
brandy  in  hopes  to  restore  him  to  himself.  She  pours  into  the 
glass  some  brandy  and  tries  to  pour  it  down  his  throat,  I am  not 
sure  she  does  much;  with  shaking  hand  she  spills  some  brandy  on 
his  chest  which  the  doctor  smells  afterwards;  she  tries  to  rub  his 
chest  with  a little  brandy.  It  is  no  use;  she  puts  back  on  the 
mantelpiece,  where  it  was  found  when  they  came  into  the  room, 
this  wineglass  with  the  brandy  in  it,  a wineglass  which  only  con- 
tained brandy ; there  was  no  admixture  of  chloroform  with  it,  but 
a wineglass  which  her  husband  had  used  for  chloroform  it  well  may 
be.  Mr.  Doggett,  on  first  going  in  and  smelling  the  glass,  may 
have  detected  the  odour  of  chloroform  about  it,  though  it  was  only 
brandy  it  contained.  All  we  know  is  the  glass  was  there,  we  know 
that  that  part  of  the  mantelpiece  was  within  his  reach.  If  you 
believe— and  how  dare  youi  reject  the  statement  which  she  in  those 
circumstances  made  as  to  what  took  place  on  that  night? — accept 
that  statement,  the  whole  history  is  clear.  There  was  no  scientific 
miracle  worked  by  the  grocer’s  wife  under  circumstances  where  it 
could  not  have  been  worked  by  the  most  experienced  doctor  who 
ever  gave  himself  to  the  study  of  this  matter.  There  was  unhappily 
the  putting  within  the  reach  of  a man  who  was  broken  by  illness, 
and  upon  whom  there  had  come  this  disappointment,  and  absolute 
and  final  severance  of  the  effectual  marriage  tie  between  himself 
and  his  wife — ^there  was  the  putting  within  his  reach  of  the  poison 
which  he  might  have  used,  and  which  he  probably  did  use,  but 
there  was  nothing  more,  and  from  that  moment  there  was  not  a 
word  of  hers,  there  was  not  an  action,  not  a look,  which  was  not 
the  look,  or  the  word,  or  the  action  of  the  loving  wife  who  had 
nursed  him  through  his  illness  to  this  point,  and  who  now  found 
him  suddenly  gone  for  over.  She  rushes  upstairs,  she  calls  the 
servant,  she  bids  her  go  and  fetch  the  doctor  as  soon  as  she  can; 
not  content  with  that,  she  arouses  the  people  in  the  house  in  the 
hope  that  they  may  give  some  help,  and  then  she  breaks  the  fire, 
and  she  waits  till  help  comes,  and  the  first  who  comes  in  to  whom 
she  can  ask  the  question,  and  on  whose  judgment  she  r^ies,  the 
doctor,  she  says,  " Doctor,  is  he  really  dead?  ” And  the  doctor 
goes  to  the  Iwdside  and  loolu,  and  feels,  makes  his  examination,  and 
tells  her  he  is  really  dead ; and  then  the  widow  bursts  into  a passion 
of  tears,  and,  when  that  passion  of  tears  has  subsided,  she  is  the 
first  person  to  ask  the  doctor,  What  can  he  have  died  of?  ” She 
was  anxious  to  have  the  mystery  solved.  The  doctor  says,  I do 
not  know;  I think  a small  blood  vessel  may  have  broken,  but  I 
cannot  tell;  there  must  be  a post-mortem  examination.”  A post- 
mortem examination  she  does  not  shrink  from.  She  said  ” Must 

338  ’ 


Speech  for  the  Defence. 

Mr  CUrke 

there  be  an  inquest?  ” as  almost  every  one  has  said  when  death 
in  sudden  form  has  come  and  stricken  down  the  dear  one.  Must 
this  be  open  to  public  investigation — ^must  all  this  be  gone  through? 
The  inquest  she  shrinks  from,  but  the  post-mortem  she  of  all  people 
is  the  one  most  anxious  to  have.  She  desires  not  only  to  have  the 
post-mortem  examination,  but  to  have  it  as  promptly  as  possible, 
and  to  have  it  conducted  by  the  highest  skill.  Spare  no  expense. 
Cannot  he  come  to-day?  ” 

Why,  gentlemen,  Squire’s  Companion  ” has  been  produced, 
from  which  it  is  said  she  would  know  about  chloroform.  It  tells 
you  nothing  but  that  chloroform  is  volatile.  If  there  had  been  tihe 
smallest  knowledge  or  idea  in  he^*  mind  of  chloroform  having 
produced  the  effect,  and  of  her  being  blamed,  the  delay  in  the  post- 
mortem examination  would  have  been  delightful  to  her,  a relief. 
But  she  must  have  it.  She  chafed  and  was  restless  an  the  idea  that 
for  one  hour  this  mystery  should  be  left  unsolved.  **  Spare  no 
expense,'  fetch  any  one,”  she  suggested.  “What  could  it  be?” 
The  doctor  says,  “ Can  it  be  prussic  acid?” — “ No.”  “ Could  it 
be  any  other  poison  ?” — “ There  was  no  other  poison  he  could  get 
without  my  knowing  it.”  “ Could  it  be  anything  else — opium?” 
— “I  am  so  glad  I did  not  give  him  the  pills  ” ; and  she  goes 
to  the  cupboard  and  takes  out  the  two  pills  from  the  box  and  shows 
them  to  Dr.  Leach,  and  she  has  not  given  them  to  him.  And  from 
beginning  to  end  her  every  action  and  word  and  thought  appears 
to  be  the  act  and  word  and  thought  of  a woman  who  is  chafing  under 
the  cruel  uncertainty:  what  can  it  be  that  has  suddenly  robbed 
her  of  her  husband? 

There  is  another  suggestion  made  about  the  death.  I am  not 
sure  if  at  that  moment,  or,  if  not  then,  afterwards,  the  doctor 
suggested  chlorodyne — it  was  afterwards,  after  the  post-mortem 
examination;  but  on  that  morning  she  was  combating  the  idea 
of  poisoning. 

Mr.  Justice  Wills — It^  was  then,  Mr.  Clarke. 

Mr.  Clarke — I am  obliged  to  your  lordship.  It  emphasises 
what  I said;  I am  glad.  There  was  a bottle  of  chlorodyne  on  the 
mantelpiece.  To  show  how  little  you  can  rely  on  the  evidence  of 
witnesses  as  to  what  they  found  at  that  particular  time,  you  know 
Doggett  swore  he  made  a careful  examination  of  the  room,  and 
there  was  no  bottle  on  the  mantelpiece,  and  Dr.  Leach  as  distinctly 
swore  there  was  a small  bottle  containing  chlorodyne.  Dr.  Leach 
suggested,  “ Could  he  have  died  of  chlorodyne?” 

Gentlemen,  if  there  had  been  any  thought  in  her  mind  of  guilt 
of  this  death,  she  would  have  sprung  at  the  idea.  How  could 
she  tell  the  difference  between  chloroform  and  chlorodyne — ^the  dif- 
ference there  might  be  in  post-mortem  appearances?  But  when 
the  doctor  suggested  chlorodyne,  die  would  not  have  it — the  last 
thing  in  the  world.  Chlorodyne  I No,  he  never  swallowed  it.” 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Mr  CUurke 

“ If  he  took  it  into  his  mouth  he  might  have  swallowed  it?'*  No, 
it  is  impossible/’  she  said;  he  only  used  a little  ohlorodyne  to  rub 
his  gums  with ; he  could  not  have  swallowed  enough  for  that  pur- 
pose ” ; and  there  ends  the  interview.  She  has  demanded  that 
immediate  examination  which,  if  she  had  been  guilty,  she  might 
have  known  would  be  the  surest  way  of  finding  out  her  own  guilt. 
She  has  repudiated  and  refuted  the  suggestion  of  the  doctor  with 
regard  to  other  modes  of  death  which  would  have  freed  her  from 
any  imputation. 

But,  gentlemen,  what  happens  afterwards?  She  sends  im- 
mediately for  Mrs.  Matthews,  for  Mr.  Bartlett,  and  for  Mr. 
Baxter.  Mrs.  Matthews  is  an  old  friend.  Mrs.  Matthews  comes 
and  spends  the  day  with  her.  There  is  no  attempt  to  get  into 
solitude  in  order  that  she  may  run  no  risk  of  letting  out  to  others 
that  terrible  secret  of  a crime.  She  is  with  the  people  she  has 
been  in  the  habit  of  meeting.  She  spends  the  day  with  Mrs. 
Matthews.  On  the  following  day,  the  Saturday,  the  post-mortem 
examination  takes  place.  Now  observe,  was  there  in  her  mind  on 
that  day  of  the  post-mortem  examination  any  doubt,  any  anxiety, 
as  to  her  being  incriminated  ? What  did  she  do  ? The  post-mortem 
examination  took  place.  The  doctor  communicated  to  her  that 
there  had  been  a smell  of  chloroform,  and  he  told  her  at  the  same 
time,  on  the  Saturday,  that  he  believed  that  the  doctors  were 
wrong,  and  that  it  was  not  chloroform,  but  chlorodyne.  But  what 
was  her  act?  That  bottle  of  chloroform  was  at  that  moment  in 
the  drawer  in  that  room — in  one  of  those  rooms ; but  what  was  her 
behaviour  after  the  post-mortem  examination?  She  did  not  go 
and  touch  the  drawer.  She  did  not  suggest  that  she  should  be 
allowed  to  take  an3rthing  away.  She  took  her  keys  from  her 
pocket.  She  gave  them  to  Dr.  Leach  to  go  and  fetch  the  drawer, 
and  he  brought  the  drawer.  She  took  from  it  the  hat  she  was  to 
go  away  in.  He  took  the  drawer,  and  put  it  in  its  place;  and, 
except  the  hat  she  wore  to  go  away,  the  only  other  thing  she  took 
away  was  the  cloak,  the  cloak  whi^  she  was  actually  willing  to  go 
without,  about  which  that  witness  Bartlett  said,  I will  be  re- 
sponsible for  the  cloak,”  and  he  felt  whether  there  were  pockets 
in  it,  and  whether  anything  was  being  taken  away  in  those 
pockets,  before  he  gave  her  l5xe  cloak.  In  the  hat  and  cloak  she 
went  away  from  the  house.  It  was  suggested  that  the  keys  diould 
be  given  to  her  solicitor.  That  was  resisted;  they  were  not 
given;  they  were  given  into  the  impartial  hands  of  Dr.  Leach; 
and  away  she  went  from  that  house.  And  it  was  not  until  days 
after when  Dr.  Leach  said  that  the  coroner’s  officer — TAt.  Dyson 
gave  it  in  evidence — ^had  got  all  he  wanted  from  the  rooma— ^it  was 
not  until  after  that  she  went  back  to  the  rooms  and  took  away  this 
bottle  of  chloroform.  TEen  she  threw  it  away. 

Gentlemen,  it  is  true  she  threw  the  bottle  of  chloroform  away» 
340  ’ 


Mr  CUrkfl 


Speech  for  the  Defence. 


just  as  Dyson  threw  away  the  bottles  from  which  he  had  taken  the 
chloroform;  but  she  did  not  throw  away  that  bottle  of  chloroform 
until  three  days  after  Dyson  had  thrown  away  those  bottles;  and 
before  she  threw  away  that  bottle  of  chloroform  there  had  occurred 
that  remarkable  conversation  between  her  and  Dyson  with  regard 
to  which  Mrs.  Matthews  spoke.  Gentlemen,  on  Monday,  4th 
January,  there  was  that  conversation,  there  was  the  conversation 
between  them,  and  when  Mrs.  Matthews  went  into  the  room  she 
heard  Dyson  say,  “You  told  me  that  Edwin  would  die  soon”;  she 
heard  her  deny  it,  and  then  she  saw  him  bovr  down  on  the  piano 
and  then  go  out,  saying,  “ I am  a ruined  man.”  He  had  been 
at  that  interview  bothering  her  about  a piece  of  paper — ^what  piece 
of  paper?  Why  should  he  bother  her  about  that  piece  of  paper? 
It  was  a piece  of  paper  on  which  he  had  written  some  verses  to 
her  which  I suppose  he  thought  were  in  tone  and  character  incon- 
sistent with  his  position,  and  verses  which  he  did  not  wish  to 
have  come  before  the  public  eye,  and  therefore  at  that  visit,  when 
she  was  under  the  grief  of  that  awful  calamity  which  had  come 
upon  her  three  days  before,  he  was  bothering  her  to  return  his 
wretched  verses  to  him.  For  what  purpose?  In  order  that  he 
could  get  rid  of  them,  and  that  they  should  not  rise  up  in  public 
witness  against  him.  You  will  decide  whether  or  not  his  answer  to 
the  question  as  to  whether  he  had  not  required  to  have  all  his 
letters  back  again  was  true.  It  is  a trifle — she  was  angry  on  the 
4th  about  his  bothering  about  a piece  of  paper  with  verses  on  it 
at  such  a time  as  that ; but  she  behaved  to  him  far  better  than  he 
behaved  to  her — she  did  keep  his  verses  for  him,  she  gave  him  those 
verses  on  Saturday,  9th  January,  and  T^en  she  was  in  confidence 
telling  Dr.  Leach  the  story  of  that  night,  and  Dr.  Leach  asked 
her,  “Who  got  the  chloroform  for  you?”  she  did  not  tell  him; 
she  did  not  bring  Dyson  or  his  name  into  this  controversy, 
but  she  gave  him  back  his  verses;  and  since  then  she  has  never 
had  a conversation  with  him;  since  then  the  only  time  during 
which  she  has  heard  the  voice  which  had  become  familiar  to  her 
during  those  months  has  been  the  time  when  die  heard  it  from 
the  witness-box  against  her  when  she  stands  upon  trial  for'  her 
life.  But  upon  that  9th  of  February  one  thing  happened;  it 
was  from  her  lips  that  the  first  challenge  came  to  him,  or  to 
any  one,  to  accuse  her  of  this  crime.  He  got  his  miserable  paper 
on  9th  January,  and  then  he  was  satisfied.  He  got  rid  of  the 
bottles,  and  his  verses  had  disappeared,  and  he,  I suppose,  felt 
himself  a little  safer ; but  then  he  says  something  about  the  chloro- 
form, and  she  turned  on  him  angrily  and  said,  “ Do  not  mince 
matters;  say,  if  you  want  to  say  it,  that  I gave  him  the  chloro- 
form.” Gentlemen,  apart  from  all  the  scientific  aspects  of  the 
case,  apart  from  all  the  matters  I have  discussed,  I am  sorry,  at 
such  lengtih,  and  I desire  not  to  occupy  your  time  unnecessarily 

341 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Mr  Clarks 

on  this — apart  from  all  the  scientific  difl&culties  there  stands  that 
fact,  that  from  the  moment  of  that  death  every  word  and  act  and 
look  of  hers  has  been  the  word  and  act  and  look  of  a woman  con- 
scious of  her  innocence,  though  shrinking,  and  naturally  shrink- 
ing, from  the  suspicion  which  at  last  she  saw  would  gather  with 
awful  force  and  strength  around  her.  Every  word  and  look  and 
action  has  been  the  word  and  look  and  action  of  innocence.  The 
first  challenge  to  the  world  to  bring  this  charge  came  from  her 
lips. 

I have  now,  I think — I hope  I have — ^to  the  best  of  my  ability 
dealt  with  the  topics  in  this  case,  and  to  you  the  responsibility  will 
Aortly  pass,  I do  not  desire  to  touch  you  or  to  influence  your 
judgment  by  anything  more  than  by  a reasonable  and  fair 
appeal  to  you  as  to  the  conclusions  formed  on  the  evidence  before 
you,  but  it  has  not  been  possible  for  me  to  discharge  during  these 
days  the  duty  which  I have  been  honoured  to  bear  without  a 
deepening  feeling  of  the  intensest  interest  in  the  result  of  this 
case. 

This  woman  has  not  had  the  happiest  of  lives.  She  has  been  de- 
scribed to  you  as  one  who  had  no  friends.  She  found  a friend  in  Mrs. 
Matthews,  she  found  another  friend  in  continuing  the  acquaintance 
of  the  nurse  who  was  called  before  you,  but  beyond  that  we  know 
of  no  friends,  and  the  habits  of  her  husband's  life  left  her  much 
alone.^  There  is  no  hint  of  misconduct  or  wrong  upon  her  part  at 
any  time  of  this  association  of  husband  and  wife  except  the  trivial 
and  malignant  invention  of  that  witness  who  came  first.  She  had 
no  friends  in  the  sense  that  has  been  mentioned,  but  she  had 
one  friend — ^her  husband.  He  did  stand  by  her,  strange  as  his 
ideas  may  have  been,  disordered,  as  it  would  seem  from  some  things 
that  have  been  said,  as  his  intellect  in  some  respects  must  have  been. 
Witness  the  statements  that  were  made  by  him,  for  instance,  to 
Dr.  Leach.  Yet  still  in  his  strange  way  he  stood  by  her  and 
he  protected  her.  He  was  afiectionate  in  manner,  and,  when  her 
reputation  was  assailed,  he  defended  it  as  only  the  husband  could 
defend  it.  And  to  her  at  this  moment  it  may  seem  most  strange 
that  he  to  whom  she  had  given  this  persistent  afiection,  even  during 
the  years  of  such  a life,  should  be  the  one  of  whose  foul  murder  she 
now  stands  accused.  And  if  he  himself  could  know  what  passed 
among  us  here— how  strange,  how  sorrowful,  it  might  seem  to 
JuEOt — how  strange  that  such  an  accusation  should  have  been  for- 
mulated and  tried  in  Court  in  spite  of  the  efforts  which  he  en- 
deavoured to  make  to  prevent  it;  the  precautions  which  perhaps, 
by  his  own  rash  and  despairing  act,  he  too  completely  defeated. 

Gentlemen,  that  husband  too  has  gone,  but  she  is  not  left 
without  a friend^  she  will  find  that  friend  here  to-day  in  the 
spirit  which  guides  your  judgment  and  clears  your  eyes  upon  this 
case.  It  is  a great  responsibility  for  men  to  be  called  suddenly 


Mr  Clarke 


Speech  for  the  Defence. 


from  their  business  and  their  pleasures,  and  to  be  shut  oS  as  you 
have  been  from  the  ordinary  habits  of  your  life,  to  decide  upon 
issues  of  life  and  death.  There  are  trivial  incidents  sometimes 
about  the  conduct  of  every  case,  but  we,  the  ministers  of  the  law, 
are  ministers  of  justice,  and  I believe  that,  as  a case  like  this  goes 
on  from  day  to  day,  there  comes  into  your  hearts  a deep  desire 
which  is  in  itself  a prayer  that  the  spirit  of  justice  may  be  among 
us,  and  may  guide  and  strengthen  each  one  to  fulfil  his  part. 
That  invocation  is  never  in  vain.  The  spirit  of  justice  is  in  this 
Court  to-day  to  comfort  and  protect  her  in  the  hour  of  her  utmost 
need.  It  has  strengthened,  I hope,  my  voice;  it  will,  I trust, 
clear  your  eyes  and  guide  your  judgment.  It  will  speak  in  calm 
and  measured  tones  when  my  lord  deals  with  the  evidence  which 
aroused  suspicion,  and  also  with  the  evidence  which  I hope  and 
believe  has  demolished  and  destroyed  that  suspicion,  and  that 
spirit  will  speak  in  firm  and  unfaltering  voice  when  your  verdict 
tells  to  the  whole  world  that  in  your  judgment  Adelaide  Bartlett 
is  not  guilty. 


The  Court  adjourned. 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Tbe  Attomey^Geaeral 

The  Attorney-General — In  a liquid  form.  The  counsel  who 
defended  Palmer  might  have  said  the  same  of  strychnine;  the 
counsel  who  defended  Lamson  might  have  said  the  same  of  aconi- 
tine; it  is  no  answer,  it  has  no  weight,  to  suggest  this  is  a 
medium  for  destroying  human  life  of  which  there  is  no  prior  re- 
corded usage.  The  question  in  this  case  is,  has  the  evidence  been 
reasonable — ^has  the  evidence  with  reasonable  certainty  brought 
home  to  your  minds  that  here  there  was  criminal  use  of  chloroform, 
and  that  that  criminal  use  was  by  the  prisoner  at  the  bar?  One 
other  introductory  point  to  which  my  learned  friend  adverted, 
and  1 come  to  the  substance  of  this  case.  My  learned  friend  was 
good  enough  to  express  his  approval,  and,  knowing  the  value  of 
my  friend’s  opinion  and  his  capacity  as  a lawyer,  I am  not  sur- 
prised he  did  so,  of  the  course  that,  after  very  careful  and  anxious 
consideration,  my  learned  friend  and  myself  thought  right  to  take 
with  reference  to  Mr.  Dyson.  And  my  learned  friend  was  good 
enough  to  state  that  he  agrees  that  there  was  no  case  proper  to 
be  presented  to  you  against  Mr.  Dyson.  But  he  pressed  that  cir- 
cumstance with  a good  deal  of  rhetorical  ingenuity  in  favour  of 
the  prisoner  at  the  bar,  and  said,  ''  If  no  criminal  intent  is  to  be 
drawn  against  Mr.  Dyson  because  of  the  misstatements  he  made 
when  he  got  the  chloroform,  and  no  criminal  inference  is  to  be 
drawn  against  him  because  he  threw  away  the  bottles  of  chloro- 
form in  secret,  then  no  criminal  inference  is  to  be  drawn  against 
her.”  Let  me  ask  you  to  consider  for  a moment,  does  my  friend 
fairly  complete  the  parallel  ? If,  in  addition  to  Mr.  Dyson  having 
done  those  things,  which  are  suspicious,  but  suspicious  only,  it 
could  be  shown  that  Mr.  Dyson  had  the  possession,  and  that  he 
alone  had  the  possession,  of  the  poison  which  caused  the  death, 
that  he  alone,  if  it  was  intentionally  and  criminally  used,  could 
have  been  the  person  co  use  it,  then  he  alone  was  the  person  who 
could  have  given  explanation,  if  explanation  were  to  be  given 
consistently  with  innocence,  as  to  how  it  came  to  be  administered, 
then  indeed  the  antecedent  circumstances  of  possession  and  con- 
cealment would  have  accumulative  force.  At  least  it  would  be  for 
the  jury  to  say  whether  it  had  not  accumulative  force  pointing  to 
the  conclusion  of  guilt. 

One  other  word.  My  learned  friend  thought  it  was  right 
for  him  to  make  an  attack  upon  the  father  of  the  dead  man. 
Gentlemen,  I think  some  allowance  must  be  made  for  that  father. 
He  came  to  the  conclusion,  a conclusion  which  the  facts  have  made 
but  too  apparent,  that  this  was  not,  as  Dr.  Leach  at  first  sug- 
gested, a death  from  natural  causes ; he  came  to  the  conclusion  that 
this  was  a death  from  unnatural  causes,  and  he  was  right;  his 
suspicions  further  pointed  to  death  from  unnatural  causes  brought 
into  operation  by  criminal  means.  That  question,  of  course,  is  un- 

346 


Closing  Speech  for  the  Prosecution. 

The  Attorney-General 

determinable,  and  must  remain  undeterminable,  until  your  verdict 
has  been  pronounced.  But  when  my  learned  friend  goes  on  to 
attack  the  father  of  the  deceased,  and  to  point  to  his  evidence  in 
the  witness-box  as  evidence  of  the  malign  feelings  that  he  enter- 
tains towards  the  prisoner,  it  is  but  fair  to  remind  you  that 
it  was  upon  cross-examination,  and  not  by  any  voluntary  state- 
ment of  the  witness,  that  Mr.  Bartlett,  the  father,  referred  to  the 
antecedent  charge  that  he  had  made  against  the  prisoner  in  the 
dock,  and  for  w'hich  he  apologised  in  writing.  But  my  learned 
friend,  I think,  for  the  moment  forgot  that  letter  written  on  the 
Sunday  night  on  the  illness  of  his  son  by  Adelaide  Bartlett,  in 
which  she  says:  “ Dear  Mr.  Bartlett, — I hear  that  you  are  a little 
disturbed  because  Edwin  has  been  too  ill  to  see  you.  I wish,  if 
possible,  to  be  friends  with  you,  but  you  must  place  yourself 
on  tho  same  footing  as  other  people — ^that  is  to  say,  you  are  wel- 
come here  when  I invite  you,  and  at  no  other  time.”  That  is  to 
say,  he  might  not  come  to  see  his  son,  who  is  ill,  except  at  the 
time  it  pleased  her  to  permit  him.  “ You  seem  to  forget  that  I 
have  not  been  to  bed  for  thirteen  days,  and  am  consequently  too 
tired  to  talk  to  visitors.”  As  we  know,  the  illness  began  on  the 
10th,  and  this  letter  was  written  on  the  23rd.  ” I am  sorry  to 

speak  so  plainly.  I wish  you  distinctly  to  understand  that  I have 
neither  forgotten  nor  forgiven  the  past.  Edwin  will  be  pleased  to 
see  you  on  Monday  evening  any  time  after  six  o’clock.” 

Now,  gentlemen,  when  he  was  examined,  he  was  asked  to  what 
that  referred,  and  at  first  you  will  recollect  he  declined  to  make  any 
reference  to  it.  It  was  only  when  the  matter  was  persisted  in,  it 
was,  so  to  say,  brought  in  in  cross-examination,  he  stated  that 
opinion — into  the  justice,  or  otherwise,  of  which  I do  not  stop  to 
inquire,  namely,  his  belief  in  the  accusation  which  had  originally 
be^  made,  although  he  had  undoubtedly  unequivocally  and 
absolutely  withdrawn  it. 

But,  gentlemen,  those  are,  after  all,  small  matters.  I come 
to  the  real  question  in  this  case.  At  a quarter-past  four  on  the 
morning  of  1st  January  Dr.  Leach  finds  the  deceased,  his  patient, 
at  86  Glaverton  Street,  and,  forming  the  best  opinion  he  can,  thinks 
that  dc^th  must  have  taken  place  about  three  hours  previously; 
that  brings  us  back  to  half-past  one  o’clock  in  the  morning.  We 
have  it  proved,  in  the  statement  which  the  prisoner  made,  that 
before  the  prisoner  composed  herself  to  sleep  on  that  night  she  had 
heard  downstairs  the  kindly  New  Tear’s  greeting  between  friends, 
and  in  her  statement  to  Dr.  Leach  she  makes  some  reference,  I 
'think,  to  the  same  incident.  Therefore  we  have  got  the  important 
part  of  this  inquiry  to  which  your  attention  must  now  be  addressed 
practically  confined  to  what  took  place  in  that  period,  probably 
not  exceeding  an  hour  and  a half,  if  it  amounted  to  so  much.  How- 
ever, inquiry  has  established  that  the  dead  man  met  his  death  by 

347 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Tha  Attoroey^Geiieral 

the  effects  of  an  irritant  poison  introduced  into  his  stomach,  and 
the  question  in  the  case — and  the  only  question  in  the  case — is,  how 
came  that  there?  It  is  not  suggested — I followed  my  friend’s  able 
speech  with  the  attention  which  it  certainly  deserved,  and  I noticed 
that  my  learned  friend  did  not  suggest  the  question  of  accident; 
nor  could  he.  He  confined  his  case  to  suggesting  the  difficulties  in 
the  way  of  the  administering  of  this  irritant  poison  by  any  one 
else,  and  marshalled  his  facts  and  arguments  in  support  of  one 
suggestion,  and  one  suggestion  only — suicide,  deliberate  suicide,  on 
the  part  of  the  deceased. 

Now,  let  me  remind  you  that  this  is  one  of  those  cases  in  which 
you  can  never  have — ^the  nature  of  the  thing  forbids  it — ^proof  to 
dem'onstration  of  the  crime  committed.  In  a case  of  poisoning, 
those  who  are  endeavouring  to  find  a clue  to  the  truth,  and  to  follow 
that  clue  to  the  end  until  it  legitimately  leads  to  the  guilt  or  inno- 
cence of  the  accused,  must,  so  to  speak,  grope  in  the  d^k. 
Murders  by  poison  are  not  committed,  like  crimes  of  sudden  passion, 
often  in  the  light  of  day.  They  are  necessarily  mysterious  and 
hidden  in  their  operation.  Gentlemen,  it  seems  to  be  necessary 
in  order  that  you  may  follow,  not  only  my  learned  friend’s  line  of 
defence,  but  in  order  that  you  may  appreciate  its  true  weight,  and 
in  order  also  that  you  may  follow  the  points  to  which  I respectfully 
call  your  attention,  it  is  necessary  that  I should  say  a word  or  two, 
and  only  a word  or  two,  descriptive  of  the  antecedent  history  of 
these  persons. 

The  prisoner  at  the  bar  was  born  in  1866.  She  was  some  years 
younger,  therefore,  but  with  no  marked  disparity,  however,  than 
her  husband.  She  was  married  in  1875.  Therefore,  she  was,  at 
the  date  of  her  marriage,  between  nineteen  and  twenty  years  of 
age.  She  told,  indeed,  in  what  1 must  ask  leave  to  characterise 
as  that  extraordinary  statement  to  Dr.  Leach — she  told  him,  indeed, 
that  she  was  married  at  sixteen. 

Mr.  Clarke — ^No ; he  said  he  was  not  sure. 

The  Attorney-General — Yes;  I have  it  before  me. 

Mr.  Clarke — ^He  said,  in  cross-examination,  he  was  not  sure. 

The  Attorney-General — ^Very  well;  he  took  it  down  at  the 
time 

Mr.  Clarke — ^No. 

The  Attorney-General — 1 was  going  to  say  he  took  it  down  at 
the  time  when  he  alleges  the  matter  was  fresh  in  his  memory. 

Mr.  Justice  Wills — ^He  put  it  down. 

The  Attorney-General — ^Yes. 

Mr.  Justice  Wills — I thought  you  meant  he  took  it  down. 

The  Attornby-Gbotraij — ^No. 

Mr.  Justice  Wills — ^He  put  it  down  on  ith  February. 

The  ATT0RNBY-GBNBRAL--On  4th  February  he  took  it  down ; he 
•said  he  took  it  down  when  it  was  fredh  in  his  memory,  but  he  says 

348 


Closing  Speech  for  the  Prosecution. 

The  AttorneT^General 

he  is  not  quite  certain  if  she  said  she  was  married  at  the  age  of 
sixteen ; but  he  then  at  a later  stage  begins  by  stating,  At  the  age 
of  sixteen  she  was  selected  by  him  in  the  former  capacity/'  and 
then  he  said,  " I did  not  know  what  she  meant,  that  ‘ I was  married 
at  sixteen,’  or  thereabouts."  But  the  suggestion  is  in  relation  to 
that  under-statement  of  age,  that  she  did  not  understand  in  its 
fullness  the  nature  of  the  marriage  contract  into  which  she  was 
entering,  and  the  obligations  it  imposed  and  the  rights  it  gave. 
You  must  deal  with  a suggestion  of  that  kind,  and  I ask  you 
whether  it  is  reasonable  to  give  eSect  to  such  a suggestion  as  that? 

The  deceased  man  seems  to  have  wished  to  improve  her  educa- 
tion, which  was  apparently  somewhat  defective,  and,  as  has  been 
shown,  in  the  interval  of  the  vacations,  at  which  she  was  not  at 
school,  he  and  his  wife  cohabited ; and  their  ordinary  relations,  so 
far  as  observers  and  friends  could  judge,  were  those  of  man  and 
wife.  And,  finally,  we  take  up  the  story  of  their  life  with  her 
coming,  I think  for  the  first  time,  in  1877,  to  live  with  her  husband 
at  the  shop  in  Station  Road,  Herne  Hill.  Then  in  the  next  year 
(1878)  was  that  distressing  incident  in  which  the  father-in-law  of 
the  prisoner  played  the  part  of  accuser,  and  for  which  he  afterwards 
in  an  unqualified  and  absolute  manner  apologised.  Then  next  in 
order  of  date  is  the  event  of  the  birth  of  a child,  about  ^ristmas 
of  1881.  Then  tny  learned  friend  made  some  observations,  in 
referring  to  that  incident,  the  justice  of  which,  the  probability  of 
which,  you  must  judge.  It  is  alleged  that  at  that  time,  and 
previous  to  that  time,  she  had  conceived  a desire  to  he  a mother, 
and  that  she  had  submitted  to  one,  only  one,  act  of  sexual  inter- 
course as  between  her  and  her  husiMnd. 

This  part  of  the  caw,  in  my  judgment,  is  important  to  be 
considered.  If  you  believe,  as  men  of  common  sense,  the  story 
which  without  any  corroboration,  as  I think  I can  show  you,  she 
told  to  Dr.  Leach  of  those  unutterably  unnatural  relations  between 
herself  and  her  husband,  it  may  go  some  way  to  account  for  what 
is  otherwise  unaccountable;  but,  if  you  cannot  accept  that  state- 
ment, r^arded  fairly  and  justly,  but  always  the  light  of  common 
sense,  your  rejection  does  not  stop  in  its  effect  merely  by  cutting  out 
of  the  story  so  much  of  the  statement  which  is  so  rept^ant,  and 
which  is  so  much  rejected.  One  act  of  coition  in  order  to  gratify 
her  desire  to  have  a child  I How  did  she  know-how  could  she 
know— that  one  act  of  coition  would  place  her  in  tilie  position  to 
count  with  certainty  or  probability  on  the  fruition  of  her  hopes  I 
Does  it  suggest  itself  as  possible  to  be  accepted  as  the  truth}  Tefc 
that  is  the  statement— married  in  1876;  that  in  ten  years  of 
married  life  there  was  one  act  of  sexual  intercourse  between  man 
and  wife,  and  on®  act  of  sexual  intercourse  only.  The  hirtii  of 
that  sSillbom  child— that  dead  duld—  seems  to  have  been  a source 
of  great  physical  anguish  and  trial  to  hw,  and  she  seems  to  have 

349 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


The  Attoraey-Geiieral 

then  eispressed  the  resolution  that  she  would  not  have  any  more 
children.  Her  desire  to  be  a mother,  to  have  a child  of  the 
marriage  (as  my  learned  friend  touchingly  expressed  it)  at  her 
knee,  to  grow  up  and  be  a comfort  to  her,  and  to  bo  a thing  which 
she  could  cherish,  and  round  which  the  best  feelings  of  her  nature 
might  cling  and  cluster,  seems  to  have  soon  disappeared  from  her 
mind  3 but  the  language  she  used  to  Annie  Walker  was  consistent 
only  with  the  desire  to  avoid  childbearing.  It  does  not  necessarily 
point  to  a cessation  of  marital  intercourse;  and  there  is  one  fact 
proved  in  this  case — I mean  the  fact  of  what  was  found  in  the 
clothes  of  the  dead  man  at  No.  86  Glaverton  Street — ^which  at  least 
suggests  the  probability  that,  while  there  may  have  been  sexual 
intercourse,  means  were  resorted  to  to  prevent  any  conception  from 
the  act  of  coition. 

But  take  the  whole  of  the  story — ^the  whole  of  the  evidence 
given  on  that  part  of  the  case,  and  up  to  the  date  that,  in  October, 
1885,  they  came  to  live  on  the  first  floor  of  85  Claverton  Street. 
Is  there  one  scintilla  of  evidence  to  support  the  suggestion  that 
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Bartlett  were  living  upon  any  other  than  the  ordi- 
nary terms  of  husband  and  wife?  So  far  as  I know — and,  if  I 
am  wrong,  I,  of  course,  will  only  be  too  glad  to  be  corrected  and 
put  right— up  to  that  time  there  is  not  even  the  suggestion  that 
they  had  separate  beds.  There  is  no  suggestion  at  any  time  that 
they  had  separate  rooms ; and  so  far  as  I know — and  again  I say 
that,  if  I am  wrong,  I shall  be  glad  to  be  put  right — ^there  is  not 
up  to  the  month  of  October,  when  they  went  to  No.  86  Claverton 
Street,  the  slightest  suggestion  that  they  did  not  habitually  sleep 
in  the  same  bed.  At  86  Claverton  Street,  unquestionably,  for  the 
first  week  they  continued  to  sleep  in  the  same  bed,  but  that  was 
because,  apparently,  the  landlady,  Mrs.  Doggett,  with  whom  a 
stipulation  had  been  made  that  a second  bed  should  be  bought, 
delayed  somewhat  in  buying  it,  and  apparently  after  that  date  up 
to  10th  December  they  used  the  same  room,  sleeping,  however,  in 
separate  beds. 

Why,  gentlemen,  if  during  their  whole  married  life  they  had 
been  using  the  same  room  and  occupying  separate  beds,  that  cer- 
tainly would  have  gone  but  a little  way  to  suggest  that  there  was 
not  the  habitual  and  ordinary  intercourse  between  man  and  wife. 
Tou  know  that  is  the  habit  of  many  persons  in  different  classes 
of  life,  although  no  doubt  in  what  are  called  the  lower  classes  it 
is  rare  and  uncommon.  After  10th  December,  when  that  illness 
begins,  the  deceased’s  bed  was  moved  into  the  drawing-room, 
and  she,  Mrs.  Bartlett,  occupied  principally  the  sofa,  which  was 
wheeled  before  the  fire,  and  at  times  slept  in  the  armchair  which 
has  been  referred  to. 

, But  now  I get  to  that  part  of  the  story,  and  I do  not  wish 
to'  come  back  to  the  story  of  iJieir  relations.  Early  in  1886  Mr. 

360 


closing  Speech  for  the  Prosecution. 

The  Attorney-General 

and  Mrs.  Bartlett  make  the  acquaintance  of  Mr.  George  Dyson. 
What  is  the  character  of  the  acquaintance  between  those  three  per- 
sons? What  were  the  relations  they  in  truth  stood  towards  one 
another?  What  were  the  relations  between  the  prisoner  at  the 
bar  and  George  Dyson?  We  px-obably  cannot  be  certain  that  we 
have  got  before  us  fully  and  completely  reliable  data  upon  which 
to  form  a completely  reliable  opinion.  Some  things,  however,  are 
quite  clear.  It  is  quite  clear  that  George  Dyson  was  received  upon 
terms  of  close  intimacy,  and  I will  say  dangerous  intimacy,  by 
Mrs.  Bartlett  and  by  ^Irs.  Bartlett's  husband.  There  is  no  doubt 
that  she  was  interested  in  him,  and  that  she  probably  thought  he 
was  equally  interested  in  her ; but  it  is  fair  to  the  prisoner  to  say, 
it  is  fair  to  Dyson  to  say,  that  whatever  may  have  been  their  terms, 
and  their  expectations  of  what  was  possible  in  the  future,  there 
does  not  seem  to  be  any  just  ground  for  asserting  that  she  was 
unfaithful  to  her  dead  husband,  and  that  Dyson  had,  in  that 
particular  at  least,  abused  the  friendship  and  confidence  which 
the  dead  man  had  shown  him.  1 am  sorry  to  say  that,  as  I gather 
the  tenor  of  my  learned  friend's  argument,  it  pointed  in  a very 
different  direction.  My  learned  friend's  argument,  as  I under- 
stood it,  was  in  effect  this : that  the  dead  man  saw  a growing 
affection  and  admiration  between  George  Dyson  and  his  wife; 
that  he  recognised  the  fact  that  it  tras  a growing  friendship  and 
admiration  which  in  the  future,  and  in  the  possible  event  of  his 
death,  was  to  culminate  in  a closer  and  nearer  relation — ^that  is 
to  say,  in  the  relation  of  man  and  wife;  and  that  he  had  so  far 
contemplated  the  possibility  of  his  own  prior  death — ^he,  a man 
but  a few  years  the  senior  of  either — as  to  have,  in  that  extra- 
ordinary language  which  Mrs.  Bartlett  used  to  Dr.  Leach,  made 
over  in  reversion  his  living  wife  to  a man  whose  friendi^ip  he 
was  then  cultivating.  The  sequence  of  that  argument — and  I must 
come  back  to  this  point  later — ^the  sequence  of  that  argument  is 
that  this  compliant  husband,  who  had  in  this  way  made  over  his 
wife  as  the  future  wife  of  his  friend  George  Dyson,  finally,  when 
he  was  told  by  his  wife,  Tou  have  made  me  over  to  Dyson;  it  is 
unfair  to  him  that  you  should  exercise  your  rights  as  a husband  " — 
her  husband  turns  on  his  pillow,  and  does  an  act  which  re- 
moves the  only  obstacle  which  stands  in  the  way  of  the  union  which 
he,  the  dead  man,  while  living  had  contemplated. 

My  learned  friend  has  spoken  of  what  he  described  as  the  devo- 
tion of  the  prisoner  at  the  bar.  I shall  have  a word  or  two  to  say 
on  that;  but  it  is  certainly,  I think  you  will  feel — think  my 
learned  friend  must  have  felt — the  sad  necessity  of  this  case,  and 
the  sad  necessity  of  her  defence,  that  she  should,  by  the  mouth  of 
her  counsel,  be  obliged  to  cast  this  grievous  stigma,  this  damning 
slur,  on  the  memory  of  her  dead  husband.  Is  there,  outside  her 
statement,  anything  in  the  case  to  warrant  that  stigma  with  which 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


The  Atkoraey^General 

the  memory  of  the  dead  man  is  to  be  branded  ? We  are  referred 
to  two  letters. 

Mr.  Clarks — ^What  stigma  1 

The  Attoknbt-Gbnbral — My  learned  friend  asks  me  what 
stigma  1 The  stigma  that  the  living  husband,  with  obligations  and 
with  rights,  caused  those  obligations  and  rights  to  be  forgotten; 
he  entered  into  a compact  by  which,  in  the  event  of  his  death,  his 
wife  was  handed  over  to  the  embraces  of  another  man,  and  that 
he  stood  by  complacently  agreeing.  Does  the  correspondence  war- 
rant that  stigma?  I will  read  the  two  letters — ^the  two  principal 
ones  referred  to.  One  is  in  September,  1885 ; it  is  from  Bartlett  to 
Dyson — Dear  George, — ^Permit  me  to  say  1 feel  great  pleasure 
in  thus  addressing  you  for  the  first  time.  To  me  it  is  a privilege 
to  think  that  I am  allowed  to  feel  towards  you  as  a brother,  and  I 
hope  our  friendship  may  ripen  as  time  goes  on,  without  anything 
to  mar  its  future  brightness.  Would  that  I could  find  words  to 
express  my  thankfulness  to  you  for  the  very  loving  letter  you  sent 
Adelaide  to-day.  It  would  have  done  anybody  good  to  see  her 
overfiowing  with  joy  as  she  read  it  whilst  walking  along  the  street, 
and  afterwards,  as  she  read  it  to  me,  I felt  my  heart  going  out  to 
you,  I long  to  tell  you  how  proud  I felt  at  the  thought  I should 
soon  be  able  to  clasp  the  hand  of  the  man  who  from  his  heart 
could  pen  sucii  noble  thoughts.  Who  could  help  loving  you?  I 
felt  that  I must  say  to  you  two  words,  ' Thank  you,’  and  my  desire 
to  do  so  is  my  excuse  for  troubling  you  with  this.  Looking  towards 
the  future  with  joyfulness,  I am  yours  affectionately,  Edwin.” 

What  is  the  answer?  “September  23,  1886.  My  dear 
Edwin, — Thank  you  very  much  for  the  brotherly  letter  you  sent 
me  yesterday,  I am  sure  I respond  from  my  heart  to  your  wish 
that  our  friendship  may  ripen  with  the  lapse  of  time,  and  I do 
so  with  confidence,  for  I feel  that  our  friendship  is  founded  on  a 
firm  abiding  basis — ^trust  and  esteem.  I have  from  a boy  been 
ever  longing  for  the  confidence  and  trust  of  others.  I have  never 
been  so  perfectly  happy  as  when  in  possession  of  this.  It  is  in 
this  respect,  among  many  others,  that  you  have  shown  yourself  a 
true  friend.  You  have  thanked  me,  and  now  I thank  you.  Yet 
I ought  to  confess  that  I read  your  warm  and  generous  letter 
with  a kind  of  half-fear — a fear  lest  you  should  ever  be  dis- 
appointed in  me  and  find  me  a far  more  prosy,  matter-of-fact 
creature  than  you  expect.  Thank  you,  moreover,  for  tibe  telegram ; 
it  was  very  considerate  to  send  it.  I am  looking  forward  with 
much  pleasure  to  next  week.  Thus  far  I have  been  able  to  stave  off 
any  work,  and  trust  to  be  able  to  keep  it  clear.  Dear  old  Dover, 
it  will  ever  possess  a pleasant  memory  for  me  in  my  mind  and  a 
warm  place  in  my  heart. — ^With  very  kind  regards,  believe  me, 
yours  affectionatdy,  George.” 

Is  there  anything  in  this  letter  to  suggest,  I mean  reasonably 


Closing  Speech  for  the  Prosecution. 

The  Attorney^General 

to  suggest — recollect,  we  have  now  got  within  three  weeks,  less 
than  three  weeks,  in  fact,  of  the  termination  of  this  sad  story  of 
the  last  days  of  Edwin  Bartlett’s  life — is  there  anything  to  suggest, 
in  the  light  of  commonsense,  any  state  of  things  except  this : that 
Dyson,  a man  of  education,  as  he  has  told  you,  probably  a man 
of  some  literary  ability,  had  become  interested  in  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
Bartlett,  particularly  Mrs.  Bartlett,  and  that  they,  particularly 
Mrs.  Bartlett,  had  become  interested  in  him?  Is  there  anything 
in  that  letter  to  suggest  that  there  was  anything  in  any  letter  to 
either  one  or  the  other  of  those — ^any  feeling  other  than  a feeling 
of  mutual  respect  and  admiration,  with  one  exception — and  that  is 
the  statement  which,  I understand,  my  learned  friend — I may 
be  wrong — accepted  from  3\fr.  Dyson  as  the  witness  of  truth — 
when  Mr,  Dyson  went  to  ^Ir.  Bartlett  and  said  to  him,  straight- 
forwardly, that  he  found  he  was  becoming  interested  in  Mrs.  Bart- 
lett, and  suggested  whether  it  was  prudent  that  their  intimacy 
should  continue?  Mr.  Bartlett  had  confidence,  apparently,  in 
Dyson,  and  apparently  had  confidence  also  in  his  wife. 

Now,  gentlemen,  nothing,  I think,  took  place  which  it  is  im- 
portant to  call  your  attention  to  until  September,  the  same  month 
that  I have  mentioned,  when  the  deceased  man  made  his  will,  and 
by  that  will  he  shows  his  confidence  in  Dyson,  for  he  makes  Dyson 
one  of  his  executors,  and  he  shows  his  confidence  and  ail'ectiou 
for  his  wife,  because  she  is  the  person  benefited  under  that  will. 

We  now  come  to  the  slory  of  the  illness  beginning  on  10th 
December.  What  was  that  illness?  Of  course,  my  learned  friend 
exerted  his  ingenuity  and  his  ability,  and  most  properly  so,  to 
present  the  story  of  that  illness  to  you  in  a grave  and  serious 
aspect;  but  does  it  truly  and  properly  bear  that  complexion? 
What  is  the  worst  that  has  been  said  of  it  ? He  was  found  to  be 
suffering  from  sub-acute  gastritis.  Well,  gentlemen,  that  sounds 
very  formidable,  just  as  ecchymosis  of  the  visual  organ  sounds 
appalling;  but  just  as  the  one  means  a black  eye,  so  does  the 
oilier  mean  an  attack  of  indigestion.  From  that,  and  that  only, 
was  he  suffering;  for  that,  and  that  only,  was  he  treated  until  the 
appearance  of  the  worm,  which,  of  course,  Dr.  Leach  is  too  sensible 
a man  to  attach  serious  importance  to ; and  the  only  apparent  diSi- 
ouliy  in  the  treatment,  according  to  Dr.  Leach’s  experience,  was 
that  the  bowels  of  his  patient  were  apparently  obstinately  costive. 
He  is  suffering  from  his  teeth,  and  pays  several  visits  to  the  dentist, 
and  gets  relief;  and  it  stands  on  the  evidence  of  Dr.  Leach  that 
on  26th  or  26th  December,  I forget  which,  he  was  in  exceptionally 
good  spirits ; and  on  31st  December  he  was  also  in  very  good  spirits. 
**  I cannot  say  good/’  said  Dr,  Leach,  but  said,  1 must  qualify 
it  for  this  reason,  that  on  the  28th  and  26th  he  was  in  exceptionally 
good  spirits.”  On  31st  December  he  pays  another  visit  to  the 
dentist. 

u m 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


The  Attorney-General 

1 said  in  opening  this  case,  and  I repeat  it,  that  there  is  no 
ground  for  suggesting  that  Mrs.  Bartlett  has,  so  far  as  can  be 
judged,  failed  in  her  attention  to  her  husband;  but  you  must  be 
good  enough  to  bear  in  mind,  in  that  connection,  that  if  you  should 
come  to  the  conclusion,  after  patiently  hearing  the  case,  as  you 
have  done,  that  there  was  the  criminal  resolve  in  her  mind,  and 
that  criminal  resolve  had  taken  a definite  shape  on  2Sth  or  29th 
December,  when  she  requested  chloroform  to  be  bought,  you  would 
expect  the  conduct  of  a person  who  had  formed  such  a design  to  be 
such  as  not  to  attract  observation,  or  to  suggest  any  apparent 
want  of  affection  and  change  of  feeling  in  relation  to  the  person 
as  to  whom  she  had  conceived  the  criminal  intent.  I will  ask 
you  whether — say  no  more  than  that — ^whether  that  scene  to 
which  Dr.  Leach  has  spoken  in  the  cab  on  the  way  to  the  dentist's, 
under  circumstances  not  particularly  romantic,  or  suggestive  of 
the  expression  of  romantic  feeling,  on  the  way  to  the  dentist's  to  get 
out  another  stump,  or  two  or  three  stumps,  she  expressed  her  wish 
they  might  be  married^  over  again,  her  married  life  had  been  so 
completely  happy,  and  it  is  suggested,  and  very  likely,  if  the  scene 
described  took  place,  he  honestly  joined  in  the  expression  of  the 
same  sentiment.  Well,  gentlemen,  on  that  night  of  31st  Decem- 
ber, he  retires  to  bed,  so  far  as  one  can  judge,  with  but  little  to 
complain  of.  He  was  so  well  in  his  general  health  that  the  doctor 
said  it  was  really  unnecessary  for  him  to  keep  attending  him  from 
day  to  day.  He  had  eaten  a hearty  dinner  of  jugged  hare;  he. 
had  eaten  a hearty  supper  of  oysters ; he  had  even  ordered  of  the 
servant  what  he  would  eat  for  breakfast  next  morning.  It  was 
intended  that  in  a day  or  two  (I  do  not  know  exactly  that  the 
^y  was  fixed)  he  should  go  to  the  seaside  for  a change ; and 
it  was  suggested  that  the  doctor  should  go  with  him,  and  the  wife 
who  was  spoiling  him  should  not  come. 

That  was  the  condition  of  things  up  to  the  last  moment  when 
the  servant  closes  the  door  on  them  in  that  front  room  and  is 
told  by  the  prisoner  that  she  need  not  come  unless  she  is  called 
for.  But  something  had  taken  place  before  that.  On  27th  Decem- 
ber she  asked  Dyson  to  get  her  chloroform.  He  tries  to  get  her 
— and  even  does  get  for  her  a considerable  quantity  of  chloro- 
form. I won't  stop  to  inquire  whether  it  is  possible  to  suppose 
that  Dyson,  even  if  he  desired  to  invent,  could  have  invented 
that  statement  which  the  prisoner  is  supposed  to  have  made  to  him 
about  Dr.  Nichols,  of  Fopstone  Eoad,  or  about  Annie  Walker, 
now  in  America,  who  had  previously  got  the  prisoner  the  chloro- 
form she  needed,  or  about  the  story  of  its  being  wanted  for  external 
application,  because  Edwin  was  sufiering  from  an  internal  afllic- 
tion.  I do  not  stop  to  inquire  into  the  details  of  this  statement. 
And,  even  if  you  see  any  ground  for  supposing  that  Dyson  could 
have  invented  that  matter,  some  excuse  ought  to  be  given,  some 


Closing  Speech  for  the  Prosecution. 

The  Attorney-General 

reason  ought  to  be  given.  You  cannot  doubt  some  reason  was 
given.  She  obtains  the  chloroform^  and  why  does  she  obtain  iti 
That  she  knew,  or  said  she  knew,  something  about  medicines,  and 
something  about  poisons,  seems  to  be  clear  from  her  own  state- 
ment, if  it  be  reliable,  for  Dyson  thought  she  had  a medicine 
chest. 

Mr.  Clarke — ^There  was  not  a syllable  about  poisons. 

The  Attornet-Genbral — I beg  your  pardon — ^that  she  had 
“ Squire’s  Companion,”  which  spoke  of  chloroform,  and  which 
speaks  of  it  as  an  irritant  poison. 

Mr.  Clarke — Whore  is  the  book? 

The  Attornet-Genbral — ^Whether  the  book  does  or  does  not — 
and  you  can,  if  I am  wrong,  look  at  it — whether  it  speaks  of  it 
as  poison,  or  whether  it  does  not  speak  of  it  as  poison,  the  chloro- 
form is  labelled  Poison,”  as  you  have  heard.  The  chemist  sells 
it  properly  so  labelled,  because  it  is  in  fact  an  irritant  poison. 
I am  asking  you  to  ask  yourselves  this  question,  because  it  seems 
to  me,  with  great  deference,  to  be  important : Why  did  she  want 
it  then?  For  what  did  she  want  it  then?  The  statement  is — and 
the  only  statement,  I pray  you  to  bear  in  mind — ^that  she  had  had 
no  act  of  intercourse  with  her  husband  during  the  whole  of  her 
married  life  but  one,  which  resulted  in  the  birth  of  a stillborn 
child;  that  when  he  was  beginning  to  get  better,  about  16th  Decem- 
ber, he  began  to  show  signs  of  returning  passion  and  desire  to 
have  intercourse  with  her  again.  Is  that  likely?  Is  it  likely 
that  passion,  which,  according  to  her  statement,  had  lain  dormant 
for  all  those  years — ^ten  of  married  life,  with  that  one  single 
act  excepted — should  in  this  conjunction  of  circumstances,  and  at 
this  time,  be  again  aroused  within  him  ? He  then  lying  upon  his 
sick  bed — ^he  then  being,  on  that  27th  of  December,  treated  as  an 
invalid,  although  not  suffering  from  a serious  illness — ^why  was 
it,  how  came  it,  that  at  this  time  this  passion  manifested  itself, 
and  how  came  it  that  that  was  the  first  time  that  it  manifested 
itself?  And  how  came  it,  further,  that  the  necessity  for  attempting 
to  meet  and  to  repel  the  assertion  upon  his  part  of  a legitimate  right 
— ^to  which  it  would  be  her  duty,  if  it  were  asserted,  to  submit — ^how 
came  it  that  it  occurred  to  her,  as  a potent  means  of  resisting 
the  exercise  of  that  right  on  his  part,  that  she  should  sprinkle 
chloroform  upon  a handkerchief,  and,  when  he  was  seeking  to 
approach  her,  wave  it  over  his  head?  Gentlemen,  if  you  can 
^cept  that  statement  or  that  explanation,  by  all  means  accept 
it.  Nay,  I will  go  further.  If  you  do  not  feel  compelled,  by 
the  exercise  of  your  common  sense  and  your  judgment — if  you 
do  not  feel  compelled  by  the  exercise  of  that  common  sense  which 
in  the  ordinary  affairs  of  life  would  govern  and  control  all  your 
views  to  reject  it,  by  all  means  give  fair  effect  to  it. 

I come  now  to  the  matter  in  hand  still  more  closely.  I re- 

d56 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


The  Attonwsr^General 

minded  you  that  the  doctor  has  sworn  that,  at  half-past  four  he 
judged,  forming  the  best  opinion  that  he  could,  that  Edwin  Bart- 
lett had  been  dead  three  hours,  which  brings  the  period  of  his 
death  to  about  half-past  one.  I reminded  you  that,  upon  the 
statement  of  the  prisoner  herself,  she  had  not  gone  to  rest  until 
after  midnight  on  that  night,  for  she  heard  the  people  of  the  house 
exchanging  kindly  New  Tear’s  greetings  j and  therefore  the  period 
of  time  is  reduced  to  a period  at  the  most  of  an  hour  and  a half ; 
and  probably  it  is  reduced  to  a period  even  less  than  that  in  which 
the  administration  in  some  way  or  other,  or  the  acceptance  in  some 
way  or  other  of  Ihis  poison  took  place,  and  in  which  it  worked  its 
fatal  result,  because,  as  you  have  heard  from  the  medical  evi- 
dence (which  is  in  agreement  on  this  point,  whatever  differences 
may  exist  in  it  upon  others)  that  it  is  not  infrequent  that  a con- 
siderable time  elapses,  even  after  a considerable  and  a fatally  strong 
dose,  before  death  ensues. 

Now,  gentlemen,  what  are  the  theories  and  what  are  the  sug- 
gestions that  have  to  be  dealt  with  now  ? I have  pointed  out  that 
there  is  no  suggestion,  and  there  could  be  no  suggestion,  of  acci- 
dent in  the  matter.  I remind  you  that  death  must  have  been 
caused,  and  could  only  have  been  caused,  either  by  the  intentional 
administration,  or  by  the  intentional  suicide,  by  the  taking  of 
this  poisonous  irritant.  There  are  two  ways  in  which  it  may  have 
been  administered.  The  one  which  was  suggested  by  the  medical 
evidence  before  the  magistrate  at  the  Police  Court  was  that  the 
administration  down  the  throat  might  have  been  preceded  by  a 
state  of  insensibility  produced  by  inhalation — a state  of  insensi- 
bility total  or  partial.  With  that  my  learned  friend  has  dealt, 
and  dealt  at  great  length.  It  is  not  for  the  prosecution  to  sug- 
gest theories,  or  to  ask  the  jury  to  accept  theories.  It  is  for  the 
prosecution  to  see  that  the  full  facts  of  the  case  are  before  the 
jury,  to  point  to  the  result  which  seems  to  them  to  be  fairly  the 
result  deducible  from  those  facts,  and  to  leave  the  jury  to  apply 
their  own  judgments  as  to  what  is  the  theory  upon  which  Ihis 
result  of  guilt,  if  it  were  guilt,  should  be  based. 

I took  the  liberty  of  suggesting  to  my  learned  friend  yester- 
day, at  the  adjournment,  that  there  was,  of  course,  another  possible 
view  of  the  administration  of  this  poisonous  irritant.  But  my 
learned  friend,  in  his  discretion,  did  not  think  it  necessary  to 
deal  with  it,  and  I shall  merely  utter  a sentence  about  it,  and  leave 
you  to  deal  with  it.  For  I do  not  desire  to  conceal  from  myself 
-HDn  the  contrary,  I wish  to  make  it  apparent  to  you — ^that,  what- 
ever theory  is  suggested  in  this  case  as  to  the  mode  in  which  the 
poison  got  into  the  stomach  of  the  dead  man,  about  every  theory 
there  is  a difficulty.  But  there  are,  in  the  case  of  the  suggested 
theory  of  suicide,  difficulties  which,  it  is  my  submission  to  you, 
are  insuperable.  The  suggestion  which  I ventured  to  make  was 


closing  Speech  for  the  Prosecution. 

The  Attorney-General 

this : that,  in  addition  to  the  possibility  of  the  prisonei*  having 
administered  chloroform  while  the  man  was  lying  on  his  back, 
and  with  his  mouth  open,  in  a state  of  partial  or  total  insensi- 
bility, there  was  another  way — ^that,  if  the  draught  had  been 
handed  to  him  in  a glass,  and  given  to  him  as  if  for  an  ordinary 
purpose,  with  drops  of  chloroform  in  it,  and  water  or  some  other 
thing,  to  drink,  then  it  was  conceivable  that  the  dying  man  would 
have  gulped  it  down,  believing  in  its  innocence,  and  not  suspect- 
ing that  the  prisoner  had  administered  something  which  was  wrong 
and  injurious. 

Mr.  Clarke — My  lord,  it  is  with  great  reluctance,  but  I feel 
bound  to  interpose  at  this  point.  I protest  against  any  such  sug- 
gestion being  put  forward,  for  the  first  time,  at  this  stage  of  the 
case,  when  it  was  not  even  hinted  by  the  learned  counsel  for  the 
prosecution  in  his  opening,  or  in  the  examination  of  any  of  the 
witnesses.  My  lord,  it  is  the  fact  that  yesterday  the  learned 
Attorney-General,  at  the  adjournment,  told  me  that  he  thought 
that  the  case  was  open  to  that  suggestion.  That  was  when  1 was 
in  the  middle  of  my  speech,  when  1 had  dealt  with,  and  had  finally 
left,  the  medical  evidence  in  regard  to  this  case.  I founded  my 
comments  and  my  cross-examination  on  the  passage  in  my  learned 
friend's  opening,  in  which  he  said;  “There  remains  only  one 
other  mode  (apart  from  the  one  pointed  out)  by  which  it  could 
have  been  taken.  Tou  will  say  that,  if  it  was  administered  by  a 
third  person,  tibie  physical  efiect  would  be  the  same;  and  you  will 
be  quite  right,  provided  the  administration  into  the  stomach 
was  not  preceded  by  an  external  application  by  which  the  person 
was  lulled  into  a state  of  stupor.”  But  I really  do  not  recognise 
any  private  communication  in  the  course  of  this  case  as  a matter 
with  which  I have  to  deal ; and  I do  respectfully  protest  that  this 
suggestion  ought  not  to  be  made  in  sutetitution  of  the  original 
suggestion  that  has  been  made. 

The  Attornbt-Gbnbral — I am  not  making  any  suggestion,  or 
any  substitution  of  any  suggestion ; but  when  my  learned  friend 
is  erecting  one  theory — ^namely,  the  theory  of  suicide — am 
entitled — ^nay,  I will  not  put  it  so  low  as  that — am  bound,  as  1 
think,  to  submit  any  theory  which  would  point  in  a more  probable 
direction,  and  which  would  go  to  negative  the  suggestion  which 
my  learned  friend  would  make.  X was  adding  to  my  comment 
at  the  moment  when  my  learned  friend  interposed,  that  1 do  not 
suggest  that  that  theory  is  one  which  is  free  from  difficulties  either. 
It  is  not;  because  it  will  immediately  have  occurred  to  you  that 
the  theory  that  it  was  administered  by  the  hand  of  the  prisoner, 
and  that  it  was  taken  by  the  deceased  man  in  confidence  and 
gulped  down,  might  possibly  have  removed  some  difficulties,  but 
it  would  not  have  removed  all,  because  he  would  be  conscious  of 
the  presence  in  his  stomach  of  an  irritant  poison,  or  at  all  events 

357 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Hie  Attorney^General 

of  the  presence  of  something  in  his  stomach  which  was  causing  him 
pain  and  anguish,  the  result  of  which  would  probably  have  been 
violent  exclamations  and  violent  physical  effort  on  his  part.  I am 
not,  therefore,  at  all  putting  it  forward  to  you  as  a theory  which 
is  free  from  diflBlculties,  but  I do  put  it  forward  as  a theory  to 
which  the  medical  evidence  mainly  was  addressed;  and  I do  put 
it  forward  also  as  a theory  which  presents  difficulties  which  are 
nothing,  or  which  sink  into  insignificance,  as  compared  with  those 
difficulties  which  meet  one  upon  the  theory  that  under  these  cir- 
cumstances this  man  deliberately  did  an  act  to  take  away  his  own 
life.  My  learned  friend,  indeed,  in  his  speech  seemed  to  me 
rather  to  have  had  present  to  his  mind  the  other  theory  which  I 
have  suggested,  although  he  did  not  think  it  right  to  deal  with  it, 
even  when  I spoke  to  him  on  the  matter,  because  my  learned  friend 
said  in  his  opening  that  chloroform  could  not  be  poured  down  a 
person's  throat  unless  he  or  she,  being  unwilling,  had  been  ren- 
dered practically  insensible  before. 

Mr.  Clabes — think  that  was  by  way  of  reference,  and  in 
fact  it  was  almost  a quotation  from  my  learned  friend's  own 
speech. 

The  Attobnbt-Gbnbral — So  much  the  better- 

Mr.  Clarke — ^It  begins,  “ My  learned  friend  said  in  his  open- 
ing." Those  were  my  words. 

The  Attoknbt-Gbnbraii — Quite  right.  I say  it  shows  that 
my  learned  friend  appreciated  that  when  I was  speaking  of  the 
administration,  first  by  the  preliminary  step  of  inhalation  causing 
insensibility,  and  then  followed  by  the  conveyance  into  the  stomach, 
of  the  chloroform — ^that  my  learned  friend  had  in  his  mind,  as  I 
had_  apparently  in  my  mind,  the  case  of  the  patient  being  un- 
willing, and  therefore  that  I was  contemplating  the  case  where  the 
patient — ^fche  dead  man — ^had  the  glass  handed  to  him,  and  gulped 
it  doym  willingly  and  in  confidence,  believing  that  it  did  not 
contain  anything  poisonous  or  noxious. 

Gentlemen,  in  reference  to  the  theory  as  to  which  the  medical 
men  have  spoken,  let  us  examine  it  for  a moment  or  two.  They 
say,  in  relation  to  that  question,  that  causing  insensibility  to  a 
person  asleep  is  possible,  although  attended  with  some  difficulty. 
But  does  it  follow  in  this  case,  if  that  course  was  followed  at  all, 
that  the  attempt  to  render  insensible  the  deceased  man  even  began 
when  he  was  asleep?  Why  ma^  it  not  have  preceded  that  stage? 
If  that  was  the  difficulty,  the  difficulty  as  to  causing  insensibility 
by  inhalation  by  a man  who  is  asleep  disappears-  Then  comes 
the  second  point.  My  learned  friend's  argument  is  this : that  the 
evidence  Aows  that,  in  a position  such  as  I have  described,  a state 
of  insensibility  is  reached  which  is  accompanied  by  contraction 
of  the  musdes,  and  probably  a contraction  of  the  jaws.  My 
learned  friend  will  remember  that  the  evidence  did  not  point 
358 


Closing  Speech  for  the  Prosecution. 

The  Attorney-General 

to  that  as  an  invariable  accompaniment  at  all^  and  in  the  next 
place  that  they  spoke  of  that  as  not  being  a constant  accompani- 
ment of  the  administration  of  chloroform  by  inhalation.  It  is 
true  they  went  on  to  say,  and  it  is  quite  right  that  that  should  be 
considered  fairly  and  fully  by  you,  that  in  that  condition  which  I 
have  suggested,  and  assuming  that  no  difficulty  of  contraction 
was  to  be  got  over,  that  the  administration  into  the  gullet  was  a 
matter  of  some  difficulty — “ delicacy,’*  I think,  is  the  word  used* 
It  might  be  said,  I should  have  supposed,  that  a medical  man 
desiring  to  perform  this  operation  would  do  so  so  as  to  run  no 
risk  to  the  person  to  whom  he  administered  the  chloroform.  But, 
gentlemen,  considerations  of  delicacy  have  no  place  in  the  con- 
sideration of  counsel  in  judging  of  the  probability  of  the  thing 
being  done,  if  you  should,  in  view  of  the  whole  of  the  facts,  after 
carefully  weighing  them,  come  to  the  conclusion  that  the  object 
of  the  person  administering  was  not  that  it  should  be  performed 
with  surgical  delicacy,  but  that  it  should  be  effective  for  the  only 
purpose  which,  according  to  the  criminal  intent,  it  supposes  it 
could  be  effective.  Gentlemen,  we  start  from  this  fact:  death 
caused  by  the  introduction  into  the  stomach  of  an  irritant  poison. 
How  did  it  get  there  ^ is  the  sole  question  in  that  case.  It  is  not 
suggested,  and  could  not  be  suggested  in  any  view  of  the  case, 
and  my  learned  friend  saw  the  difficulty  of  arguing  it  upon  that 
suggestion,  that  it  could  have  got  there  accidentally.  Then  it  is 
reduced  to  the  two  points  of  whether  the  man  did  it  himself  with 
a suicidal  intent,  or  whether  some  one  else  did  it  with  criminal 
intent.  If  some  one  else  did  it  with  a criminal  intent,  that  some 
one  else  can  be  no  one  but  the  prisoner  at  the  bar.  Now,  did  he 
do  it  with  suicidal  intent?  Everything  seems  against  such  a 
theory.  He  was  prosperous  in  business.  He  had  apparently 
known  no  illness  until  10th  December.  By  25th  December  he  had 
practically  regained  his  health,  and  was  in  exceptionally  good 
spirits,  and  on  Slst  December  ho  was  also  in  good  spirits,  and, 
if  that  statement  in  the  cab  is  to  bo  relied  upon,  he  was  on  good 
terms  with  himself,  and  on  gooti  terms  with  his  wife,  while  his 
arrangements  of  that  night,  and  his  arrangements  for  the  next 
morning,  and  his  contemplated  arrangements  in  reference  to  his 
leaving  town  for  a change  of  air,  all  point — ^you  must  say  whether 
they  do  not  conclusively  point — ^to  a man  who  then  felt  the  enjoy- 
ment of  life,  and  you  nmst  say  whether  these  facts  do  not  con- 
clusively negative  the  probability — I would  almost  say  the  possi- 
bility—of  a sudden  idea  of  interfering  with  his  own  life.  One  can 
mderstand,  indeed,  if  some  appalling  misfortune  had  comeuponhim, 
if  some  extraordinary  revelation  of  horror  had  been  made  to  him, 
that,  in  sudden  disgust  of  life,  ho  might  resort  to  the  weak  and 
criminal  resource  of  ending  it  ij  hie  own  hand.  But  is  there  any 
thing  of  that  kind  here?  Again  we  have  only  the  statement  which  the 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Th«  Attorney^General 

prisoner  made  on  26th  January  to  Dr.  Leach.  What  is  that  state- 
ment? That  having,  through  the  instrumentality  of  Mr.  Dyson, 
procured  this  large  quantity  of  chloroform  upon  28th  December, 
die  does  nothing  with  it.  She  mentions  its  possession  to  no  one. 
She  says  nothing  about  it  to  Dr.  Leach.  She  says  nothing  about  it 
to  her  husband,  but  on  31st  December  she  says  she  could  not 
have  a secret  from  Edwin ; she  tells  Edwin  why  she  had  got  it.  She 
tells  him  the  purpose  for  which  she  intended  to  use  it,  namely,  to 
resist  the  embraces  of  her  husband;  and  she  says  to  him,  It  is 
an  offence  to  my  womanhood;  nay,  it  is  an  injury  to  Mr.  Dyson, 
to  whom  you  have  made  me  over." 

Mr.  CiiAUKE — She  does  not  say  that  exactly. 

The  Attorney-General — do  not  pretend  to  use  the  exact 
words,  but  it  is  the  substance  which  I am  seeking  to  convey.  I do 
not  care  for  the  exact  expression — “ You  have  given  me  over  to 
Mr-  Dyson;  it  is  not  fair  that  you,  my  living  husband  ” — as  to 
whom,  looking  at  the  ordinary  duration  of  human  life,  it  is  fair 
to  say  that  he  might  have  looked  forward  to  twenty  or  thirty  years 
of  life — " it  is  not  fair  that  you  should  approach  me;  should  you 
live  to  be  seventy  years  of  age,  during  the  whole  of  that  interven- 
ing period  you  are  to  be  debarred  all  exercise  in  my  regard,  the 
exercise  of  which  it  is  my  wifely  duty  to  submit  to.^’  Does  your 
common  sense — can  your  common  sense — accept  that  suggestion? 
But  what  follows  upon  that?  Is  there  expostulation?  Is  there 
angry  remonstrance?  No  suggestion  of  the  kind;  but  the  husband 
turns  upon  his  pillow,  is  sullen,  and  sulks,  or  appears  to  sulk; 
and  it  is  suggested  that  ehe  leaves  the  room,  and  she  comes  back, 
and  notices  him  breathing;  she  composes  herself  to  sleep  in  the 
chair  at  the  foot  of  his  bed,  with  her  left  hand  and  arm  upon  his 
clothes.  The  suggestion  is  that,  in  that  short  interval  of  absence 
from  the  room,  he  had  done  the  act  which  had  for  its  result  to 
deprive  him  of  his  life.  Can  that  be  accepted  as  the  explanation? 
Let  me  follow  this  out  a little  more  closely.  What  does  it  suppose? 
What  does  it  necessarily  involve?  If  he  takes  the  bottle,  and  out 
of  the  bottle  directly  he  takes  a fatal  dose,  is  it  to  be  supposed  he 
had  sufficient  consciousness  and  self-control  to  have  repressed  in 
that  awful  moment  a cry  of  anguish  and  despair  ? Is  he  supposed 
to  have  had  sufficient  control  to  have  re-stoppered  the  bottle  and 
put  it  back  upon  the  mantelpiece?  Or  is  it  supposed — ^whioh  I 
understood  to  be  rather  my  friend^s  suggestion — ^that  in  the  very 
brief  interval  of  absence  of  hie  wife,  he  stretches  from  the  bed,  or 
gets  from  the  bed,  and  takes  the  bottle,  and  takes  a wineglass,  fills 
the  wineglass  with  a necessary  quantity,  re-stoppers  the  bottle, 
puts  the  bo^e  back  upon  the  mantelpiece,  gets  back  into  bed, 
takes  the  wineglaesful  of  chloroform,  and  puts  the  wineglass,  I 
know  not  where?  Is  that  possible?  Is  it  probable?  Well,  but  we 
are  only  at  the  very  beginning  of  the  difficulty  in  testing  this 
360 


Closing  Speech  for  the  Prosecution. 

The  Attoncy-Geiieral 

theory.  Is  it  conceivable  that  if  he  had  availed  himself,  as  it 
is  the  suggestion,  of  her  absence  from  the  room  for  the  space  of 
what  he  could  not  count  upon  being  more  than  a few  minutes 

Mr.  Clarke — Why  not? 

The  Attorney-General — My  learned  friend  a^  me  why  notl 
I am  dealing  with  the  theory  which  is  put  forward — ^which  I under- 
stood to  be  the  theory — ^that  she  had  temporarily  left  the  room 
for  the  purpose  of  preparing  herself  for  rest  for  the  night. 

Mr.  Clarke — She  absolutely  went  into  the  other  room  to  wash 
and  change  her  dress  for  the  night,  as  was  usual. 

The  Attorney-General — I assumed  that  to  be  my  learned 
friend's  theory,  and  was  doing  so,  and  supposed  he  could  not  count 
upon  her  absence  from  the  room  beyond  a few  minutes — I care  not 
whether  it  was  three,  or  five,  or  ten,  or  fifteen — for  this 
purpose  it  matters  not.  She  then  is  supposed  to  have  come  back. 
And  recollect,  this  theory  falls  to  pieces  and  crumbles  up  on 
examination,  unless  you  are  also  prepared  to  believe  that  when  she 
comes  back — the  man  having  taken  the  fatal  dose ; she  has  mean- 
while heard  no  sign,  no  utterance  of  pain  or  distress— that  when 
• she  comes  back  she  finds  him  apparently  tranquilly  sleeping  in  his 
bed  in  such  a condition  that  she,  the  anxious,  the  affectionate  wife, 
is  able  to  compose  herself  at  the  foot  of  the  bed,  and  go  to  sleep. 

It  is  my  duty,  and  it  is  not  a pleasant  one,  to  put  these  facts 
strongly  before  you.  Again  I say,  we  are  only  at  the  beginning 
of  this  difiSoulty  in  testing  this  theory.  The  theory  is  that  he 
has,  in  one  or  other  of  the  ways  which  I have  mentioned,  admin- 
istered to  himself  this  poison.  The  theory  involves  the  presence  of 
that  bottle  of  chloroform,  accordizig  to  the  suggestion  made,  upon 
the  mantelshelf.  I will  pursue  this  story  in  order  to  test  it  with 
reference  to  that  point.  What  became  of  the  battle  of  chloroform* 

I do  not  stop  to  dwell  upon— th^  are  too  insignificant,  in  view  of 
the  wider  considerations  which  rush  upon  one's  mind — ^the  sug- 
gestions of  change  of  dress,  which  may  be  extensive  as  my  learned 
friend  says,  as  I do  not  stop  to  dwell  upon  the  statement  of  Doggett 
or  of  others.  The  fire  had  been  carefully  attended  to,  which  is 
too  insignificant  also  to  dwell  upon— but  before  the  servant  is 
called,  before  the  house  is  roused,  before  doctor  comes,  that 
bottle  of  chloroform  has  been  removed.  By  whom*  When*  Why! 
You,  gentlemen,  will  gravely  ask  yourselves  these  questions.  For 
this  at  least  is  clear,  that  when  the  doctor  comes  and  finds  the 
patient  whom  he  had  left  the  day  before  practically  in  good  health, 
when  he  comes  and  finds  him  dead,  and  when  he  sees  nothmg  to 
aoownt  for  his  death  upon  the  surface  of  things,  he,  as  he  smars^ 
made  an  eccamination  to  see  whether  there  was  anything  in  the 
wan  which  oould_  in  any  way  afford  a due  to  the  cause  of  death. 
Ha  xMde  an  exmination,  of  course,  much  more  eocsot,  as  you  woirid 
iCi^pect  a medioal  man  in  such  circumstances  would  do,  than  Doggdh  ^ 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 

The  Attoxner-GeiMvel 

did.  Whatever  may  be  said  of  Dr.  Leach's  evideoace,  this  seems 
to  be  clear ; that  he  swore — and  you  will  probably  think  him  re- 
liable— ^that  he  searched  the  room  upon  that  occasion,  the  mantel- 
shelf, and  the  stand,  and  the  other  parts  of  the  room,  and  he  swears 
there  was  no  bottle  of  ohlorofoi^m  there. 

Gentlemen,  it  may  be  possibly  suggested  that,  if  this  lady  had 
indeed  done  this  criminal  thing,  she  would  have  left  the  bottle  of 
chloroform,  and  probably  have  put  it  in  close  proximity  to  the 
deceased  in  order  to  suggest  the  possibility  of  his  having  used  it. 

If  it  had  been  so  left,  other  suggestions,  I think,  of  a cogent  kind 
might  be  made.  But  if  you  have  had  any  experience  of,  or  in 
your  observation  in  life  have  watched  the  history  of  crime,  you 
will  find  that  it  constantly  occurs,  as  if  by  the  operation  of  a 
mysterious  Providence,  that  plans  of  a criminal  character,  carried 
out  with  firmness,  and  apparently  thought  out  to  results  intended 
to  shield  from  the  consequences  of  guilt,  have  failed  because  of  some 
short-sighted  omission  which  the  criminal  has  made.  But,  again, 
we  are  at  the  beginning  of  grave  difficulties  in  consideration  of 
this  theory.  When  Dr.  Leach  comes,  he  puts  to  her  pointedly 
and  strongly,  not  then  only,  but  on  subsequent  days : could  he  have 
taken  poison?  Was  there  anything  he  could  have  taken?  She 
says,  **  No,'’  and  it  is  not,  gentlemen,  until  26th  January  that  to 
Dr.  Leach  she  gives  the  detailed  and  circumstantial  account  which 
you  are  asked  to  accept,  and  in  which  she  explains  the  possession 
of  chloroform  upon  her  part.  By  themselves,  if  you  have  to  take 
account  of  these  single  things,  each  one  by  itself,  indeed,  the 
demand  for  the  chloroform,  and  the  reasons,  the  untrue  reasons, 
given  for  wanting  it,  each  one  by  itself  is  not  very  cogent;  but 
when  you  have  circumstance  after  circumstance  gathering  accumu- 
lative force  as  they  are  massed  together,  and  when  you  support 
them  by  the  fact — ^the  admitted  fact,  I may  say — of  a death  from 
an  unnatural  cause,  and  that  unnatural  cause  the  presence  of 
chloroform  evidenced  in  excessive  doses  in  the  man’s  stomach ; and 
when  the  circumstances  of  the  case  negative,  as  we  say,  a.  priori^ 
the  probability  of  this  man  contemplating  suicide  in  the  circum- 
stances in  which  he  was,  with  years  of  life  and  prosperity  before 
him — ^when  those  circumstances  negative  the  probability  of  his  con- 
templating the  suicidal  act  of  interfering  with  his  own  life — ^when 
you  have  all  those  circumstances  leading  up  to,  and  when  the 
suggestion  is  made  of  suicide,  when  the  suggestion  is  made  of  the 
mme  of  suicide,  and  the  circumstances  of  suicide  do  not  bear  the 
test  of  critical  examination  in  all  its  phases,  then  you  must  ask 
ycKurselveB ; are  these  circumstances  reasonably  consistent  with  ^ 
wnecenoe  on  the  part  of  the  person  who  alone,  if  it  was  administered'^ 
*j%,Wybody  else,  was,  or  could  be,  the  person  who  administered  it?’ 

let  me  reDaind  you,  as  I took  the  liberty  of  doing  at  the 
ibis  clsas  ^ case  you  cannot  expect  demonstration^  . 

' 'M''' 


Closing  Speech  for  the  Prosecution. 

The  Atiemey  General 

Crimes  of  this  kind  are  not  performed  in  the  light  of  day.  The 
steps  leading  to  the  consummation  of  guilt  are  not  perpetrated  step 
by  step  under  the  eyes  of  living  witnesses.  It  would  be  deplorable 
indeed  if,  when  direct  evidence  or  proof  to  demonstration  is  not 
forthcoming,  juries  were  to  shrink  from  doing  their  duty  in  fixing 
guilt  where  guilt  lies  if,  in  their  opinion,  with  reasonable  cogency 
and  certainty,  the  conclusion  is  forced  upon  their  minds  that  guilt 
does  lie  upon  the  person  against  whom  the  crime  is  charged. 

Gentlemen,  a little  more.  It  will  be  said : oh,  but  if  this  lady 
was  on  these  terms  of  afiection  towards  her  husband,  if  she  was  the 
devoted  wife  which  the  evidence  suggests  she  was,  what  possible 
motive  can  she  have  had  ? Gentlemen,  this  is  a matter  which  again 
you  are  the  judges  of.  Short  of  the  suggestion  of  criminal  guilt 
as  between  her  and  Dyson,  short  of  the  charge  of  actual  unfaithful- 
ness to  her  husband,  is  there  no  evidence  pointing  to  the  proba- 
bility of  what  was  the  actual  state  of  feeling  between  Mr.  Dyson 
and  her?  That  she  had  become  interested  in  Dyson  is  manifest; 
that  she  was  a woman  of  stronger  will  and  firmer  purpose  than 
Dyson  is,  I think,  manifest;  for  while  he,  in  the  face  of  this  death, 
was  appalled,  and  when  it  was  suggested  that  chloroform  was  the 
cause  of  death,  he  saw  the  risk  that  he  ran,  and  the  culpable  part 
that  he  had  played,  although  unwittingly,  and  he  wishes  to,  and, 
in  fact,  he  does  confess,  to  Mrs.  Matthews  his  part  in  it,  and  after- 
wards before  the  coroner.  She,  you  will  remember,  makes  a 
statement  to  him  showing  that  she  at  least  was  resolute  :**  If  you 
don’t  incriminate  me,  I won’t  incriminate  you ; ” or,  I believe  the 
converse  is  the  way  it  was  put : I won’t  incriminate  you  if  you 
don't  incriminate  yourself  ” ; she  was  firm  to  the  purpose.  He 
was  not  conscious  of  having  been  a party  to  any  possible  criminal 
use  of  this  chloroform,  but  she  knew  the  injurious  efiect  of  the  fact 
that  he  had  procured  it  for  her,  and  procured  it  from  three  diiSerent 
chemists;  and  on  the  very  day  of  her  husband’s  death,  in  addition 
to  the  cheque,  she  presents  him  with  her  husband’s  watch,  and  says 
that  Edwin  told  her  to  give  it  to  him.  When  did  he  tell  heri 
Under  what  circumstances  did  he  tell  her?  What  shadow  of  evi- 
d^oe  is  there  to  suggest  that,  at  any  time  before  31st  December, 
this  man  ^d  contemplated  any^ing  but  a life  of  ordinary  duration, 
such  as  his  age  and  circumstances  would  suggest  as  probable!  It 
is  true,  if  you  are  to  believe  some  of  the  witnesses,  she  had  suggested 
seething  of  the  very  kind.  She  had  suggested  an  internal 
affliction— parotysms  of  pain ; and  Mrs.  Matthews  overheard  a con- 
versation in  which  Dyson  had  charged  her  with  having  stated  to 
him  that  Edwin  would  die  sooner,  or  would  die  earlier. 

^ Mr.  Clabss— That  be  would  not  live  long  **  was  the  expres- 
sion. ^ 

The  ATTOBBST-GaBsiBiJi — I am  much  obliged  to  my  learned 
friend : that  Edwin  would  not  live  long— meaning  his  condition. 

368 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


The  AttoRMF-General 


Do  not  the  facts  point  to  some  such  relation  between  Dyson  and 
her  as  that  which  I have  suggested  to  you?  One  cannot  but  see, 
looking  to  his  physical  condition,  the  state  of  his  gums,  the  state  of 
his  teeth,  the  offensively  foetid  breath  which  is  spoken  of,  that  her 
husband  may  have  become  personally  distasteful  to  her ; that  she 
had  begun  to  see  in  Dyson  a man  of  superior  education,  although 
apparently  of  no  physical  attractions ; a man  with  whom  her  hus- 
band unfavourably  compared ; may  she  not  have  felt — did  she  not 

feel  then  this  feeling  growing  upon  her?  And  when  she  knew 

I am  not  now  suggesting  motive — ^that  the  will  had  been  made  in  the 
September  previously  by  which  she  was  benefited,  that  the  will  was 
free  from  the  restriction  which  was  supposed  to  have  existed 
in  the  earlier  will,  namely,  that  she  did  not  receive  the  benefit 
merely  during  her  widowhood,  but  was  absolutely  the  beneficiary 
under  the  second  will — in  this  condition  of  things  the  evil  comes 
into  her  mind  to  avail  herself  of  this  illness,  and  of  the  presence 
there  of  a medical  man,  who  arrived  on  10th  December,  and  who 
was  a stranger  to  her,  and  a stranger  to  him,  and  as  to  whom 
I think  one  may  safely  say  he  would  hardly  be  described  as  a 
strong-headed  man : this  chain  of  circumstances  occurred  to  her 
as  one  in  which  she  might  take  advantage  of  the  opportunity  of 
ridding  herself  of  a husband  who  had  become  distasteful  to  her, 
and  for  whom  she  had  ceased  to  care,  that  she  might  clear  the 
way  to  a union  with  the  man  for  whom  she  had  of  late  conceived 
admiration  and  apparently  aSection. 

But,  gentlemen,  it  is  no  part  of  the  necessity  of  the  case  to 
establish  the  motive,  although  I admit  the  importance  of  it.  The 
quertion  of  motive  undoubtedly  is  important,  or  the  absence  of 
motive  undoubtedly  is  important;  but  if  the  facts  of  the  case 
lead  you  to  the  conclusion,  step  by  step,  that  you  must  reject  the 
other  theories  of  the  mode  in  which  this  chloroform  was  ad- 


ministered, and  if  the  logic  of  the  facts  drives  you  to  the  con- 
clusion with  practically  irresistible  force  that  it  must  have  been 
administered  with  criminal  intent  by  some  one,  then  the  fact 
that  you  will  not  be  able  to  satisfy  yourselves  about  the  strenrth  or 
eron  about  the  character  of  the  motive  cannot,  I am  afraid,  re- 
lieve you  from  the  responsibility  which  rests  upon  you  of  giving 
effect  by  your  verdict  to  the  view  which  you  take  of  the  criminal 
responsibility  of  the  person  charged, 

Yery  s^rly  after  this  death  there  was  a suggestion  of  chloro- 
itorm — thiiA  as  early  as,  or  earlier  than,  the  6th ; the  exact  date 
not  wterial.  But  she  takes  away  the  chloroform.  She  makes 
.#TOy  with  it.  I want  to  ask  you  again,  how  is  that  consistent  with 
thought;  how  is  it  consistent  with  innocent  act  in  the 
aWWtet.  ;,,’Abojve  all,  and  this  idea  I wish  to  emphmse,  or  raiher 
emphiasiBe — above  all,  if  she,  for  she  must  have  knewn, 
Ikeory  of  suicide,  whidr  is  suggested  so  f oaroiHy 


closing  Speech  for  the  Prosecution. 

The  Attorney-General 

and  BO  ably  by  my  learned  friend,  tras  the  explanation  of  the 
cause,  how  came  it  that  not  even  in  that  intimate  communication 
to  Dr.  Leach,  which  Dr.  Leach  so  sympathetically  received,  is 
there  a suggestion  on  her  part  as  to  how  the  thing  could  occur! 
If  this  was  present  to  her  as  the  mode  in  which  the  thing  did 
occur,  how  comes  it  that  she  takes  such  pains  apparently  to  remove 
from  the  room  that  which  would  have  needed  some  explanation, 
and  to  remove  from  the  house  at  a later  date  that  which,  so  far 
from  being  proof  of  her  ^ilt,  would  have  built  up  the  story  which 
would  account  for  her  innocence!  All  these  are  circumstances, 
gentlemen,  with  which  you  must  deal.  I have  done  my  duty, 
with  the  assistance  of  my  learned  friends,  in  putting  the  case 
before  you,  and  in  endeavouring  to  urge  upon  your  attention  the 
points  which  seem  to  be  worthy  of  that  attention. 

My  learned  friend  Mr.  Clarke  was  good  enor^h  to  say  that  I 
opened  this  case  fairly  and  moderately.  Gentlemen,  I said  then, 
and  I repeat  now,  that  it  is  not,  and  never  ought  to  be,  in  a 
criminal  case,  a struggle,  a personal  struggle,  for  a verdict — ^to 
that  1 subscribe ; but  1 do  not  subscribe  to  this — ^that  the  prosecut- 
ing counsel  discharge  their  duty  unless  they  fully  and  strongly, 
but  always  fairly,  put  before  the  jury  all  the  matters  which  in 
their  judgment,  and  according  to  their  experience,  ought  to  in- 
form the  mind  of  the  tribunal  which  will  ultimately  have  to  decide 
the  question.  Gentlemen,  that  done,  our  task  and  our  responsi- 
bility end. 

My  learned  friend  has  said  that  the  spirit  of  justice  in  the 
jury-box  will  be  the  friend  and  the  protector  of  the  prisoner  at 
the  bar.  Let  me  say  the  spirit  of  justice,  and  whose  friend  it  is 
to  be  proved  to  be,  depend  upon  the  antecedent  question  which  is 
not  yet  determined — is  there  ^ilt  here,  or  is  there  innocence  here! 
The  spirit  of  justice,  if  there  be  guilt,  cannot  be  invoked  to  con- 
jure up  doubte  or  to  protect  a criminal.  Even  as  justice  is  blind, 
so  ought  justice  to  be  deaf  to  appeals,  to  prejudice,  or  to  passion. 
Justice  is  open  to  the  impression  of  the  truth.  The  truth  is  the 
point  to  which  your  attention  is  to  be  drawn,  and  upon  which  it 
is  to  be  fixed.  The  law  requires  that  you  should  give— and  it 
rightly  requires  that  you  should  give— the  benefit  of  any  fair  and 
reasonable  doubt  which,  upon  the  facts,  remains  in  your  minds. 

I ask  you  to  give  the  benefit  of  that  doubt,  if  that  doubt  does  remain, 
but  it  must  be  a doubt  which  would  operate  upon  your  minds  ih 
the  ordinary  important  affairs  of  life,  and  it  is  not  to  be  a doubt 
whi<h  you  may  or  murt  conjure  up  for  the  sake  of  having  a doubt. 
It  must  be  a doubt  which  presents  itself  to  your  minds  as  reasoning 
men  anxious  to  disdharge  your  duly  betw^  the  prisoner  and  the 
piiblio— the  Crown,  whom  we  represent— a doubt  which  you  canmyt' 
owwome.  Appty  your  minds,  I pray  you,  gentlemta,  in  that 
spins;  consider  and  weigh  the  facts  of  the  earn  in  ihat  t^irit; 


Adelaide  Bartlett, 


Hm  AUtfinoy-GeDwal 

and  if  70U  come  to  the  conclusion  that  still  a doubt  of  the 
nature  that  I have  mentioned  remains,  in  God’s  name  give  this 
-woman  the  benefit  of  that  doubt.  But  if,  after  you  have  heard 
my  lord,  and  you  have  retired  from  that  box,  and  find  yourselves 
face  to  face  with  the  responsibility  of  the  duty  that  devolves  upon 
you,  and  the  conviction  is  borne  in  upon  your  mind  that  you 
cannot  receive  this  theory  of  suicide;  if  the  conviction  remains 
in  your  mind,  although  you  may  not  be  able  to  state  with  accu- 
racy to  your  own  satisfaction  the  exact  methods  or  means  by  which 
it  is  accomplished,  that  guilt  lies  at  this  woman’s  door,  then  I ask 
you,  by  the  duty  you  owe  to  your  oaths,  and  to  the  country  which 
you  represent,  not  to  shrink  from  the  responsibility  which  in  that 
event  will  be  cast  upon  you. 

Mr.  Clabkb — ^Before  your  lordship  begins,  a communication 
has  been  made  to  me  by  Annie  Walker,  or  from  Annie  Walker,  who 
was  called  as  a witness.  We  have,  of  course,  had  no  communication 
with  her.  I don’t  know,  whether  your  lordship,  before  beginning 
to  sum  up,  would  ask  Annie  Walker  one  question  -with  regard  to 
anything  she  knew  as  to  the  single  act — ^your  lordship  will  know 
what  I mean ; she  was  attending  at  the  confinement — if  your  lord- 
^ip  thinks  it  right  to  ask  the  question  as  to  whether,  at  that  time, 
she  became  aware  of  that  matter.  I say  no  more. 

Mr,  Weight — ^Whatever  course  your  lordship  thinks  right 
and  fair  to  be  taken  in  the  matter — do  not  mind  what  the 
point  is  or  what  the  question  is — anything  that  can  elucidate  the 
truth. 

Mr.  JusTioH  Wills — It  is  very  late,  but  I think  one  should 
never  shut  out  anything  that  may  be  material.  Let  Annie  Walker 
step  up. 

Mrs.  Anhxe  Walebe,  recalled,  examined  by  Mr.  Glabeb — ^At 
the  time  you  nursed  Mrs.  Bartle^  in  her  confinement,  did  you 
become  aware  from  anything  she  said  to  you  with  regard  to  its 
having  been  the  result  of  a single  act? — Tes,  sir. 

By  Mr.  Justiob  Wills — What  was  it? — ^That  it  happened 
only  once— on  .a  Sunday  afternoon. 

She  said  sol — ^Both  of  them;  that  there  was  always  some 
preventive  used. 

You  say  you  had  that  from  both  of  them? — ^Both  of  them. 


Charge  to  the  Jury. 

Mr.  Justiob  Wills — Gentlemen  of  the  jury,  before  1 address 
hS^elf  to.the  complicated  facte  of  this  difficult  case,  I should  like, 
'im'  raljiijs ^grounds,  to  say  one  word  about  a matter  to  which  a good 
G|^^<^rence  has  been  made  in  the  addressee  both  of  the  lear^ 


Charge  to  the  Jury. 

Mr  Ju$ric€  wall 

counsel  for  the  defence  and  of  the  learned  Attorney-General,  and 
that  is  as  to  the  exercise  by  the  Attorney-General  of  his  undoubted 
right  of  reply  in  this  case.  I refer  to  that  which  has  but  a small 
bearing  upon  the  result,  because  I am  always  anxious  that  no 
erroneous  impression  should  go  forth  as  to  the  spirit  in  which 
justice  is  administered  in  this  country.  A rule  has  existed  for 
a very  great  number  of  years  back — cannot  tell  you  when  exactly 
it  arose,  but  it  has  been  for  generations  the  established  practice, 
that  where  the  Attorney-General  or  the  Solicitor-General,  repre- 
senting the  Crown  is  personally  present,  conducting  the  business 
of  the  country  on  behalf  of  the  Grown,  the  Attorney-General  or 
Solicitor-General  or  the  counsel  associated  with  him  may  exercise 
a right  which  belongs  to  no  one  else,  namely,  of  claiming  a reply, 
although  no  evidence  be  given  on  behalf  of  the  prisoner.  It  is,  as 
has  been  said,  in  a certain  sense  an  anomaly,  but  a 
great  many  things  in  our  legal  system  are  more  or  less 
tinctured  with  anomaly ; and  the  fact  that  it  exists  at 
the  present  day  must  be  taken,  I think,  as  an  evidence 
that  it  has  been  found  to  work  well,  and  that  on  grounds  of  public 
advantage  it  is  desirable  to  retain  it,  or  else  it  would  very  soon 
be  abolished.  Probably,  there  was  a danger  of  the  right  being 
strained  too  far,  because  at  no  very  distant  period  it  was  the 
habit  of  counsel  who  were  instructed  by  the  Treasury,  although  the 
Attorney-General  or  Solicitor-General  might  not  have  been  present, 
to  claim,  and  exercise,  this  right.  I have  exercised  it  myself  when 
I was  at  the  bar  under  these  circumstances.  And  it  was  felt  that 
there  might  be  a danger  of  that  practice  degenerating  into  an 
abuse  when  the  Treasury  had  taken  upon  itself  so  important  a 
part  of  the  criminal  work  of  the  country  as  it  has  done  of  late 
years  by  replacing  the  public  prosecutor.  1 myself  was  present 
at  a council  of  the  judges  at  which  it  was  determined  that  for  the 
future  the  right  should  be  claimed  and  exercised  only  by  tibie 
direct  representatives  of  the  Crown — ^that  is,  in  cases  in  which 
the  Attorney-General  or  Solicitor-General  is  or  has  been  person- 
ally present  conducting  the  case  on  the  part  of  the  Grown.  Under 
these  circumstances  it  was  felt  that  there  should  be  no  attempt  to 
tamper  with  the  right  whicE  has  existed  for  so  long,  when  exercised 
by  or  under  the  sanction  of  the  hipest  legal  officers  of  the  Grown, 
under  sanctions  and  circumstances  such  as  make  it  certain  that  it 
will  not  be  abused.  At  times  it  may  be  exercised,  and  ought  to 
be  exercised,  in  the  public  interests,  and  the  learned  Attorney- 
General  in  this  case  has  no  more  right,  as  representing  the  Grown, 
to  make  a present  of  that  prerogative,  which  is  vested  in  him  for 
no  personal  purpose  or  private  ends,  but  simply  for  the  public 
advantage,  than  I should  Eave  to  dispense  with  the  marka>< 
of  outward  respect  which  are  paid  to  judges,  many  of  by  a 
man  of  .simple  habits  and  careless  so  far  as  he  is  persontldly  con- 

367 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Mr  Jnaliee  Wills 

cerned  about  such  matte's,  might  very  Veil  be  f olrgptten-' or  over- 
looked. Such  things  are  vested  in  officers  of  justice  fot  public 
purposes.  Those  to  whom  they  are  entrusted  must  keep  un diminished 
the  power  and  authority  of  the  office  ih&j  exercise,  and  hand  them 
down  unimpaired  by  any  acts  of  their  own.  I'  have  thought  it 
right  to  say  thus  much,  because  it  is  eminently  undesirable  that  it 
should  be  supposed  that  in  matters  of  this  kind  the  law  is  harsh 
or  unreasonable,  or  that  due  consideration  has  not  been  given  by 
those  who  are  concerned  in  the  administration  of  justice  to  the 
exercise,  and  to  the  limitations  in  the  exercise,  of  a prerogative 
of  this  kind. 

Before  1 refer  more  in  detail  to  the  facts  of  this  case  let  me 
also  make  one  comment  upon  the  course  which  the  Crown  have 
pursued  here  in  presenting  no  evidence  against  Mr.  Dyson,  and 
offering  him  here  as  a witness  instead  of  treating  him  as  a prisoner 
on  his  trial.  1 think,  gentlemen,  that  the  interests  of  the  prisoner 
now  under  trial,  at  all  events,  have  not  suSered  by  that  courlil. 
The  advisers  of  the  Grown,  having  the  best  means  of  judging, 
and  having  very  often  in  matters  of  this  kind  the  means  of  exer- 
cising a judgment  on  more  or  less  reliable  materials  beyond  those 
which  come  before  the  Court,  approach  such  a question  with  the 
deepest  sense  of  duty  and  responsibility.  The  matter  is  in  the 
hands,  in  this  case,  of  the  highest  representative  of  the  learning 
and  the  knowledge  and  the  judgment  of  the  bar ; and  the  advisers 
of  the  Crown,  approaching  it  undoubtedly  in  a spirit  of  unflin^- 
ing  justice,  and  nothing  else,  have  come  to  the  conclusion  that  it 
was  not  proper  to  present  the  case  of  Mr.  Dyson  as  one  deserving 
investigation  before  you,  and,  they  having  done  so,  this  case  must 
be  conducted — as  far  as  any  observations  which  I have  to  ofier 
upon  it  are  concerned — upon  the  principle  that  Mr.  Dyson  is 
innocent.  No  one  who  has  been  present  throughout  this  investiga- 
tion can  doubt  that,  if  Mr.  Dyson  had  stood  in  that  dock,  hs 
would  have  had  a good  deal  to  get  rid  of,  and  a good  deal  to  get 
rid  of  which,  had  it  been  given  in  evidence — and,  in  my  ju^- 
ment,  it  must  have  been  given  in  evidence — against  this  prisoner, 
would  have  told  with  more  or  less  fatal  efiect  against  her  as  wdl 
as  against  him.  1 refer  to  the  oiroumstances  of  uncommon  sus- 
pioion  under  which  he  made  the  purchase  of  the  chloroform.  Now 
all  that  is  gone  as  against  the  prisoner  at  the  bar,  and  she  is 
relieved  from  the  stress  of  considerations  which,  if  you  had  been 
told  to  neglect,  you  would  have  been  incapable  of  neglecting,  and 
which,  in  my  opinion,  must  have  been  before  you  even  if  the  case 
had  proceeded  against  this  prisoner  alone  without  Mr.  Dyson 
by  her  side  in  the  dock.  Qentlemen,  I need  not  tell 

tb^tt^fore  this  case  came  into  Court  I had  wdl  oonsidered 
^ ^ ^ conclusion  that  the  cixcupar^ 

the  purchase  of  the  MordkaiQ  ^ him  could  not 


Mr.  Justice  Wills. 


Mr  Juitice  Will* 


Charge  to  the  Jury. 

have  been  excluded  even  in  the  consideration  of  the  case  against 
this  prisoner;  and  if  Mr,  Dyson  had  not  been  relieved  from  sus- 
picion by  the  action  of  the  Crown,  there  would  have  been  a state 
of  circumstances  given  in  evidence  that,  as  it  turns  out,  ought 
not  to  weigh  against  her,  but  which,  though  we  had  talked  about 
them  and  attempted  to  explain  them  away  till  midnight,  you 
would  never  have  been  able  to  discard,  which,  without  the  em- 
phatic and  absolute  acquittal  of  Mr.  Dyson  by  those  best  able  to 
form  a judgment  upon  his  share  in  the  transaction,  must  have 
affected  i^e  whole  atmosphere  of  this  case.  And,  inasmuch  as  this 
case  must  now  be  looked  at,  from  beginning  to  end,  from  the  point 
of  view  that  he  is  innocent  of  any  malpractice  tending  to  the  death 
of  this  unfortunate  man — inasmuch  as  his  entire  innocence  is  to 
be  accepted,  not  merely  as  an  intellectual  exercise,  but  as  the  fact 
which  is  to  dictate  the  attitude  of  mind  in  which  we  approach 
the  case,  1 cannot  help  thinking  that,  so  far  from  the  course  which 
the  Crown  have  pursued  in  this  matter  having  been  of  any  dis- 
advantage to  the  prisoner  now  on  her  trial,  it  has  been  an  immense 
gain  to  her.  It  has  had  this  further  advantage,  that  Mr.  Dyson 
has  been  subjected  to  cross-examination,  that  Mr.  Dyson  has  been 
seen  in  the  witness-box,  and  that  we — ^that  is  to  say,  you  and  I 
whose  arduous  task  it  is  now  to  approach  the  investigation  of  this 
difficult  and,  in  some  sense,  mysterious  case — are  not  fettered 
by  any  difficulty  which  necessarily  and  inevitably  stood  in  the 
way  of  the  learned  counsel  for  the  prisoner  in  dealing  with  Mr. 
Dyson^s  evidence;  and  we  may  take  so  much  of  it  as  we  feel  it 
safe  to  rely  upon,  and  we  may  reject  so  much  as  we  should  not 
choose  to  act  upon  in  the  serious  concerns  of  our  own  lives.  To 
what  extent  that  limitation  ought  to  go  I shall  have  the  oppor- 
tunity of  observing  hereafter ; but  I do  feel  anxious  to  give  this 
preliminary  expression  of  my  opinion  with  regard  to  a matter 
as  to  which,  upon  the  first  day  of  this  trial,  my  opinion  was 
more  or  less  invited,  but  about  which  necessarily  I forbore  to 
express  an  opinion  until  the  whole  course  of  the  case  should  have 
been  run.  I am  now  in  a far  better  position  than  1 could  then 
be  to  form  a judgment  as  to  the  effect  of  such  a step  upon  the 
course  of  justice  and  the  fate  of  the  person  who  has  such  supreme 
inte^sts  at  stake  in  this  matter.  1 have  the  satisfaction  of  feel- 
i^jgj^at  the  step  which  has  been  taken,  and  which,  as  I pointed 
out  then,  was  within  the  undoubted  competence  of  the  Crown,  has 
not  only  conduced  to  the  ends  of  justice,  but  has  been  of  great 
advantage  to  the  prisoner  at  the  bar. 

Now,  gentlemen,  the  history  of  these  people  whose  lives  we 
have  more  or  less  to  consider,  and  the  death  of  one  of  whom  forms 
the  immediate  subject  of  our  inquiry,  begins  with  the  year  1875, 
when  at  the  age  of  between  nineteen  and  twenty  this  woman  was 
married  to  Mr.  Bartlett.  She  was  a Frenchwoman,  or  a foreigner 
iB  369 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Mr  Jaatio«  Wills 

at  all  events,  and  she  seems  to  have  been  imperfectly  educated,  for 
after  her  marriage,  although  at  the  age  of  twenty,  which  is  an  age 
at  which  the  formal  instruction  of  women  has  generally  ceased, 
she  was  sent  to  school,  first  in  England,  and  then  in  Belgium, 
and  for  two  or  three  years  she  saw  her  husband  but  occasionally, 
when  he  went  over  to  visit  her,  or  when  her  holidays  gave  her  the 
leisure  of  joining  and  associating  with  him. 

In  1878  they  were  living  at  Station  Road,  Herne  Hill,  for  a 
considerable  time,  and  there  the  father,  upon  the  death  of  his 
wife,  went  to  join  them.  He  had  not  been  long  with  them  before 
they  quarrelled,  and  a deep-seated  quarrel  no  one  can  doubt  took 
place  then,  which  has  left  its  traces  in  considerable  animosity,  I 
think  I am  right  in  saying,  on  both  sides.  Towards  the  close  of 
last  December  the  prisoner  wrote  to  him  in  language  which  un- 
mistakably stamps  her  feelings  towards  him.  She  wished  him  to 
know  that  she  had  neither  forgiven  nor  forgotten  the  past.  He 
certainly  has,  and  had,  no  goodwill  towards  her,  because,  with- 
out going  further  than  is  necessary  into  matters  of  this  kind 
which  have  but  a remote  bearing  on  this  case,  there  is  some- 
thing that  calls  to  one’s  lips  unbidden  the  name  of  Judas  in  the 
kiss  with  which  he  parted  from  his  daughter-in-law  on  1st  January 
— ^when  he  was  undoubtedly  entertaining  suspicions  that  she  had 
taken  away  the  life  of  his  son.  But  fortunately,  as  it  seems  to 
me,  very  little  indeed  depends  upon  the  evidence  of  the  senior  Bart- 
lett, and  with  the  sole  observation  which  Mr.  Clarke  made  yester- 
day, and  to  the  benefit  of  which  his  client  is  certainly  entitled — 
that  from  the  hour  of  his  appearance  on  the  scene  after  his  son’s 
death,  she  must  be  regarded  as  having  lived  under  the  observation 
of  keen  and  suspicious  eyes — ^with  that  remark  I really  think  I 
may  dismiss  him  from  the  scene,  and  shall  have  no  occasion  further 
to  refer  to  him.  I do  not  pause  to  inquire  even  into  the  merits 
of  the  dispute  of  1878,  save  to  say  this,  that  I view  with  the 
natural  instinct  of  a trained  lawyer — and  that  is  synonymous  with 
saying  with  the  instincts  of  a man  trained  to  try  and  get  at  the 
truth — view  with  the  natural  instincts  of  a lawyer  the  statements 
of  a man  who  says,  I put  my  hand  to  a docmnent  which  I now 
say  was  false,”  and  I prefer  to  accept  the  document  rather  than 
the  statement  of  its  falsehood. 

In  1878  or  1879  Mr.  Bartlett  would  seem  to  have  had  a li^e 
discomfort  with  his  teeth.  It  is  possible  that  may  have  a bearing 
upon  the  matters  connected  with  his  later  illness.  The  father  said 
they  were  all  running  into  one  another,  which,  I suppose,  means 
this,  that  there  was  some  carious  and  unhealthy  inflammation. 
This  led  to  their  being  sawn  off — a most  exceptional  treatment,  I 
should  suppose — and  from  that  time  he  seems  to  have  used  false 
teeth.  In  1880  he  insured  his  life,  and  was  then  in  excellent 
health,  and  was  accepted  as  a first-class  life  by  the  insurance  office. 

370 


Charge  to  the  Jury. 

Mr  JutHee  WiUs 

In  1881  a child  was  born — ^begotten  under  circumstances  certainly 
remarkable,  and  as  to  which  the  evidence  we  have  heard  to-day 
is,  to  my  mind,  of  very  considerable  importance  in  trying,  to  ascer- 
tain the  truth  in  this  case.  I will  not  conceal  from  you,  gentlemen, 
that  at  a very  early  period  of  my  own  study  of  this  case — for,  of 
course,  1 had  to  study  it  through  the  depositions,  before  I came  into 
this  Court — I was  struck  by  a fact  which  is  scarcely  mentioned  in 
these  depositions,  and  of  which,  but  for  a memorandum  accom- 
panying the  exhibits  which  were  laid  before  the  coroner,  I should 
have  known  nothing — ^possibly  you  would  have  known  nothing — 
that  is,  that,  after  this  man’s  death,  French  letters  were  found 
in  his  pockets  j and  I thought  that  before  this  trial  was  over  it 
would  turn  to  have  an  important  bearing  upon  the  case.  It  is 
an  unpleasant  subject.  The  case  is  full  of  unpleasant  subjects. 
There  is  another  unpleasant  subject  which  cannot  be  dismissed 
either,  because,  unless  we  understand  who  and  what  these  people 
were,  and  unless  we  divest  them  and  their  doings  of  false  and 
meretricious  romance,  we  shall  have  no  chance  of  exercising  an 
unbiassed  judgment.  There  was  a very  unpleasant  book  that 
formed  one  of  the  articles  of  his  domestic  furniture.  Wiatever 
shame  may  attend  the  possession  and  the  reading  of  such  books 
should  not  fall  too  heavily  upon  the  wife.  One  can  scarcely  &ink 
that  in  any  decent  household,  and  with  any  decent  husband,  such 
books  would  be  put  before  the  wife;  and,  if  this  was  part  of  his 
daily  food,  it  is  no  wonder  she  should  partake  of  it.  Apparently 
there  are  people  who  can  read  these  books  and  see  no  shame  in  them. 
Annie  Walker,  who  saw  it,  seems  a respectable  woman,  and  she 
says  there  is  not  a word  immoral  or  improper  in  the  Wk  from 
the  beginning  to  the  end.  Gentlemen,  it  has  been  my  unpleasant 
duty  to  look  at  this  book.  1 entertain  myself  an  entirely  different 
opinion,  and  there  is  one  passage,  notably,  which  instructs  the 
ladies  and  gentlemen  of  our  land,  to  whom  this  book’s  outpouring 
of  impuri*^  is  supposed  to  be  addressed,  in  the  last  invented  means 
of  procuring  abortion;  and  yet  we  are  invited  to  look  upon  this 
book  as  an  effusion  of  purity,  and  an  honest  attempt  to  help  people 
in  the  conduct  of  their  lives.  If  I thought  that  the  strictures  I 
am  compelled  to  make  on  this  book  would  tell  materially  against 
thjg^^Plfbman  in  the  dock,  1 should  say  much  less  about  it,  but  I 
cinnot,  sitting  here,  have  such  garbage  passed  under  my  eyes 
and  then  allow  it  to  go  forth  that  an  English  judge  concurs  in 
the  view  that  it  is  a specimen  of  pure  and  healthy  literature.  It 
is  one  of  ^ose  books,  in  my  judgment,  which,  under  the  garb 
of  ostentatious  purity,  obtains  entrance,  probably,  into  many  a 
housAold  from  which  it  would  be  otherwise  certain  to  be  banished. 
It  scatters  its  poison  and  does  its  mischief.  The  women  of  the 
present  day  are  used  to  strange  things — things  which  would  have 

371 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Mr  Jttitice  Wills 

startled  us  in  the  time  of  my  boyhood;  and  it  is  such  reading 
as  this  that  helps  to  unsesc  them,  and  to  bring  them  to  a place 
like  this  day  after  day  to  listen  willingly  to  details  which,  even 
to  men  of  mature  life,  like  yourselves  and  myself,  and  to  men  like 
myself  unwillingly  steeped  in  the  experience  of  criminal  Courts 
and  in  knowledge  which  untainted  men  would  gladly  dispense 
with,  are  distasteful  and  disgusting. 

If  you  care  to  verify  what  I say,  I have  put  down  upon  a piece 
of  paper  references  to  passages  met  with  in  my  inspection  of  this 
book,  which,  in  my  judgment,  not  only  justify  me  in  expressing 
myself  with  regard  to  it  in  language  such  as  this,  but  compel  me 
to  do  so.  To  my  thinking,  it  should  excite  a feeling  of  pity  for 
the  unhappy  woman,  made  in  early  life  the  companion  of  a man 
who  could  throw  such  literature  in  her  way,  and  encourage  her 
to  read  it.  She  must  have  got  rid  of  much  of  a woman’s  natural 
instincts  before  she  could  lend  it  to  her  friend  Mr.  Matthews — ^to 
a man.  It  excites  a pity  that  I can  scarcely  venture  to  indulge 
in,  because  we  have  sterner  matters  here  to  deal  with  than  pity, 
and  one  must  reject  all  influences  and  all  thoughts  which  could 
tend  to  disturb  the  judgment  or  to  ruffle  the  cal^  of  intellectual 
inquiry.  Oddly  enough,  when  the  copy  was  handed  up  to  me, 
it  opened  of  itself  at  the  passage  to  which  Mr.  Clarke  referred. 
It  is  true  that  the  passage,  which  at  the  first  moment  I thought  was 
of  the  usual  character,  recommends  abstinence  as  the  only  means 
of  preventing  the  natural  results  of  married  life.  I thought, 
gentlemen,  though  I should  not  have  said  so  but  for  what  happened 
this  morning — 1 thought  it  would  be  strange  if,  whatever  the 
suggestion  was,  the  desired  result  should  be  brought  about  in  that 
fa2iion  ended  there.  One  has  learnt  to-day  what  is  the  natural 
and  to  be  expected  consequences  of  indulgence  in  literature  of  that 
kind. 

Now,  gentlemen,  in  1886  these  people,  who,  with  all  the  vulgar 
facts  now  known,  which  make  it  impossible  to  Ixold  up  this  man  as 
more  than  a Joseph,  and  to  treat  him  as  the  hero  of  an  absurd 
romance,  and  capable  of  an  almost  superhuman  self-restraint,  still 
were  living,  after  their  fashion,  happily  and  contented  together — 
there  is  one  unbroken  chain  of  evidence  that  they  were  happy 
together — and  betwieen  whom,  except  upon  one  occasion, '^^h 
regard  to  the  father,  no  quarrel  seems  to  have  come — ^had  the  greit 
misfortune  to  make  the  acquaintance  of  the  Rev.  George  Dyson. 
1 say,  the  misfortune — and  I am  justified  in  saying  so — because, 
even  upon  the  theory  which  was  so  eloquently  put  before  you  yes- 
terday by  Mr.  Clarke  of  the  last  moments  of  this  unhappy  man* 
it  was  the  shadow  of  the  Rev.  George  Dyson  that  had  fallen  on  his 
path.  But  for  that  acquaintance,  they  would  have  continued 
probably  to  this  hour  to  be  living  happily  and  comfortably  together. 

372 


Mr  Juitiee  Wills 


Charge  to  the  Jury. 


And  whatever  you  may  think — and  I earnestly  press  upon  you, 
with  your  whole  minds  and  wills,  to  approach  this  case  with  the 
conviction,  and  to  act  upon  that  conviction  throughout,  that  Mr. 
Dyson  is  guiltless  of  any  complicity  in  murder  or  designs  of  murder 
— ^whatever  you  may  think  of  his  innocence  in  this  respect,  it  is 
not  a pleasant  spectacle  that  of  a Christian  minister  entering  into 
this  unwholesome  discussion  about  the  two  wives,  one  for  com- 
panionship and  one  for  service — ^joining  in  it  apparently  with 
little  touch  of  those  sentiments  which  you  would  naturally  expect 
such  matters  to  arouse  in  the  breast  of  a Christian  minister — 
gradually  becoming  the  intimate  friend  of  both  husband  and  wife; 
according  to  his  own  account,  before  there  had  been  a shadow  of 
a justification  for  it  or  a hint  by  the  husband  that  it  was  welcome, 
addressing  to  the  wife  the  words  of  unhallowed  and  unchristian 
admiration;  steadily  taking  advantage  of  the  husband’s  weakness, 
increasing  the  frequency  of  his  visits,  and  kissing,  according  to 
himself,  in  the  presence,  and  according  to  himself  also,  in  the 
absence  of  the  husband,  the  wife ; under  the  guise  of  giving  lessons 
(as  to  which,  however,  there  is  scarcely  a trace  of  corroborative 
evidence),  passing  hour  after  hour — ^twice,  three  times,  or  four 
times  a week — ^with  the  woman ; letting  her  sit  at  his  knee  on  the 
ground  and  with  her  head  reclining  on  his  lap,  and  justifying  all 
this  to  himself  by  the  miserable  pretext  that  he  was  listening  to  the 
maudlin  nonsense  of  the  husband,  and  accepting  his  invitation  to 
succeed  him  when  he  should  be  no  more.  Gentlemen,  if  such  talk 
did  take  place  in  the  presence  of  the  Bev.  George  Dyson,  the  Bev. 
George  Dyson  should  have  put  his  foot  down  upon  it  and  stamped 
it  out.  You  cannot  doubt — and  I grieve  to  have  to  point  it  out 
to  you,  because  it  is  one  of  the  material  circumstances  in  this  case 
that  can  never  be  thrown  out  of  it  from  beginning  to  end — ^you 
cannot  doubt,  because  you  have  it  on  the  statement  of  the  wife  as 
well  as  on  the  statement  of  the  Bev.  George  Dyson,  and  they  both 
agree  to  this — that  they  got  to  that  state  of  intimacy  when  in  some 
fashion  or  other  the  possible  death  of  the  husband  and  the  possi- 
bility of  Dyson  succeeding  him  were  matters  of  familiar  discussion. 
When  a young  wife  and  a younger  male  friend  get  to  discussing, 
wh^er  in  the  presence  of  the  husband  or  out  of  his  presence,  the 
B^^ability  of  his  decease  within  a measurable  time,  and  the  possi- 
oility  of  the  friend  succeeding  to  that  husband’s  place,  according 
to  all  ordinal^  experience  of  human  life  that  husband’s  life  is  not 
one  that  an  insurance  office  would  like  to  take  at  any  premium. 

I cannot  forbear  to  make  these  observations.  They  arise  upon 
the  case,  and  they  ought  to  be  made,  and  it  is  part  of  my  duty — 
its  painful  nature  no  one  feels  more  keenly  than  1 do — but  I cannot 
discharge  the  duty  which  I am  put  here  to  discharge,  and  fail  to 
point  that  out  to  you.  Whatever  may  become  of  the  case  by  your 
verdict,  no  human  being  can  say  that  the  actors  in  such  a drama 

373 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Mr  Jfulice  Wfllt 

as  this,  when  the  very  thing  had  occurred  which  had  been  the 
subject  of  discussion  between  them,  and  had  occurred  under  very 
suspicious  circumstances — ^no  human  being  can  say  that  either  of 
them  has  any  cause  of  complaint  if  grievous  suspicions  are  enter- 
tained that  he  or  she,  or  both  of  them,  has  had  a hand  in  it.  And 
as  far  as  those  suspicions  are  concerned,  one  must  not  be  too  hard 
upon  the  father,  because  sometimes  there  is  an  instinct  as  to  things 
of  this  kind,  and  sometimes  people  who  would  be  puzzled  to  give 
an  account  of  their  reasons  are  not  entirely  without  justification  in 
their  suspicions. 

Now,  gentlemen,  on  3rd  September,  1885,  the  late  Mr.  Bart- 
lett made  his  will,  and  by  that  will  he  left  all  his  property  to  his 
wife  absolutely.  The  will  was  a natural  and  a proper  one,  and, 
in  my  judgment,  a much  better  one  than  the  one  which  he  had 
made  before,  because  I agree  entirely  with  one  passage,  as  I do 
with  many  others,  in  the  remarkable  display  of  forensic  eloquence 
and  power  to  which  we  listened  yesterday,  and  which  was  as  dis- 
tinguished for  the  fairness  with  which  the  subjects  were  dealt  with, 
and  the  evidence  treated,  as  for  its  power  and  ability — I agree  with 
Mr.  Clarke  that,  where  a man  who  has  a young  wife  and  has  no 
children,  and  has  no  particular  reason  for  leaving  his  property 
away  from  her,  makes  her  enjoyment  of  life  or  even  her  means  of 
subsistence  dependent  upon  the  condition  that  she  should  remain 
a widow  for  ever,  it  is  a cruel  will.  I agree  with  Mr.  Clarke  that 
the  will  which  he  made  in  1886  was  a much  better  one  than  its 
predecessor ; and  I think  that  no  shadow  of  distrust  ought  to  rest 
upon  her,  because,  in  the  course  of  1886,  or  whenever  it  was  that 
Annie  Walker  was  visiting,  she  commented,  in  the  presence  of  her 
husband,  upon  the  harshness  of  such  a will,  and  remonstrated,  or 
said  something  by  way  of  remonstrance  against  it.  I think  the 
later  will  was  a wise,  a ^ood,  and  a proper  will  in  every  respect, 
and  it  wae^  a natural  thing  to  name  as  executor  of  that  will  a 
gentleman  in  whose  ministrations  he  professed  to  have  found,  and 
1 dare  say  with  perfect  genuineness  said  that  he  had  found,  great 
comfort  both  to  himself  and  his  wife.  I cannot  go  further.  I 
cannot  see  that  in  the  fact  of  his  making  Mr.  Dyson  his  executor 
there  is  any  trace  of  a sug^tion  that  he  thought  that  he  hiK|gelf 
was  not  likely  long  to  survive  the  making  of  tiiat  will ; I can&M^ 
understand  that.  I made  my  will  when  I was  a young  man,  and 
I should  have  been  surprised  if,  because  I selected  my  executor,  it 
was  to  be  suggested  that  I thought  he  was  likely  necessarily  to  out- 
live myself,  or  that  there  was  anything  more  in  it  than  an  indica- 
tion of  the  confidence  reposed  by  the  writer  of  the  will  in  the  person 
so  named. 

WeU,  they  go  to  Dover,  and  they  spend  a month  at  Dover, 
and  during  '^at  month  at  Dover  Mr.  Bartlett  must  have  very 
severely  taxed  his  physical  energy.  He  seems  to  have  been  a man, 
374 


Charge  to  the  Jury, 

Mr  JusHm  WUb 

if  you  accept  the  father’s  statement — and  I do  not  see  any  par- 
ticular reason  for  doubting  it—who  was  engrossed  in  business.  He 
had  been  very  successful.  Shop  after  shop  had  been  added  to  the 
list  of  his  acquisitions;  such  a man  would  naturally  take  a keen 
interest  in  business,  and  he  emphasised  it  by  putting  a strain  upon 
his  physical  powers  under  which  it  was  not  unnatural  that  they 
should  break  down.  You  hear  how  he  used  to  start  at  three  o’clock 
in  the  morning,  take  the  boat-train,  and  come  back  at  nine  or  ten 
at  night.  Flesh  and  blood  won’t  stand  that.  In  the  course  of 
that  month  at  Dover  Mr.  Dyson  visited  them;  and,  according  to 
Mr.  D^on,  Bartlett  visited  him  at  Putney.  With  regard  to 
everything  that  Mr.  Dyson  has  said,  both  about  the  extent  of  his 
own  relations  with  Mrs.  Bartlett  and  about  the  extent  of  the  know- 
ledge of  the  husband  of  how  far  those  relations  had  gone  or  were 
lik^y  to  go,  I must  put  it  to  you,  as  men  of  the  world,  as  men  of 
experience,  and  as  men  exercising  sound  judgment,  whether  you 
can  place  more  than  a very  slender  faith  in  Mr.  Dyson’s  statement. 
Mr.  Dyson  had  to  make  the  best  for  himself  of  his  relations. — 
which  from  any  point  of  view,  as  described  by  himself,  were  dis- 
creditable to  him,  discreditable  to  Mr.  Bartlett,  discreditable  to 
Mrs.  Bartlett — and  a large  part  of  his  statements,  although  they 
came  to  us  to-day  in  the  witness-box  out  of  his  mouth,  are  nothing 
but  repetitions  of  statements  to  which  he  had  already  committed 
himself  in  his  evidence  before  the  coroner.  At  the  time  he  gave 
that  evidence,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  Rev.  G^rge  Dyson 
entertained  very  serious  fears  that  his  own  life  was  in  danger ; and 
I should  think  there  can  be  very  little  doubt  on  the  part  of  any- 
body who  has  seen  him  here,  that  there  is  one  person  in  this  world 
that  the  Rev.  G^rge  Dyson  was  determined  should  suffer  as  little 
as  possible  by  this  history — ^that  is,  the  Rev.  George  Dyson  himself. 
And  therefore  you  cannot  give  yourselves  over  with  unlimited  con- 
fidence to  statements  which  he  has  made  of  any  kind;  and  wherever 
you  find  that  they  touch  upon  things  which  aflEect  himself,  I should 
think  you  would  say  you  would  have  to  exercise  great  reserve  in 
accepting  them. 

Now,  he  tells  a story  as  to  which  I do  not  know  what  you  may 
say  about  this  part  of  it.  I confess  to  my  mind  it  presents  some 
fejUl^es  of  almost  revolting  improbability.  He  says  Mr.  Bartlett 
«ne  down  to  see  him  at  Putney.  I told  him  I was  growing  too 
fond  of  his  wife.”  I do  not  mean  that  ” too  fond  ” was  his 
expression ; but  I am  translating  what  he  said  into  something  like 
plain  and  intelligible  language — I told  him  I was  getting  too 
fond  of  his  wife.”  ^ A young  unmarried  man  thrown  in  the  fashion 
in  which  he  was  into  the  company  of  a young  married  woman 
would  be  likely  enough  to  be  getting  too  fond  of  her-  He  said  to 
the  husband,  It  distracts  me;  I cannot  attend  to  my  duties;  do 
you  not  think  it  had  better  cease!  He  also  told  him,  as  he  says, 

375 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Mr  Justice  Wills 

that  he  had  addressed  to  his  wife  words  which  she  should  not  have 
heard  from  her  minister.  The  Rev.  G^rge  Dyson  would  have  you 
iDelieve  that,  after  that  explicit  statement,  Mr.  Bartlett  invited  him 
to  continue  his  intimacy  with  both  of  them.  If  there  is  anything 
in  the  atmospWe  of  this  case  which  ought  to  make  one  part  with 
the  ordinary  faculties  which  God  has  given  us,  and  by  which  alone 
we  can  hope  to  test  the  truth  of  stories  which  are  placed  before  us, 
by  all  means  accept  that  statement.  Am  1 putting  it  too  strongly 
when  I say  you  must  part  with  a good  many  of  them  before  you 
can  accept  it? 

It  is  said  that  two  letters  have  passed  which  indicate  that 
something  of  this  kind  had  taken  place.  Gentlemen,  you  have 
heard  them  read  this  morning.  Are  they  of  that  extravagant 
character?  They  do  use  strong  terms,  and  terms  which  are  not 
usual — at  least  ^ey  are  not  usual  among  educated  people  brought 
up  in  the  ways  of  speech  to  which  1 am  accustomed.  One  diffi- 
culty 1 feel  in  dealing  with  this  case,  and  a difficulty  which  never 
must  be  absent  from  your  minds,  is  that  the  ways  and  thoughts 
of  these  people  are  very  different  from  ours.  I have  passed  a 
large  part  of  my  professional  life  in  seeing  quarrels  and  litiga- 
tions— and  those  are  the  occasions  upon  which  unvarnished 
human  nature  crops  up  to  the  surface — in  a district  in  which  a 
great  deal  of  these  more  emotional  forms  of  religious  belief  and 
action  exists  j and  I am  more  prepared  perhaps  than  many  persons 
would  be  for  the  odd  mixture  which  we  have  here  of  religion  and 
coarseness — ^the  things  told  to  Annie  Walker  about  the  sexual  rela- 
tions between  the  parties,  and  the  fervent  religious  exultation 
roused  by  Mr.  Dyson's  services.  Still,  it  is  difficult  to  put  oneself 
quite  in  the  position  of  these  people;  and  one  alwaye  runs  a great 
risk  if  one  judges  from  one's  own  standpoint  other  people  whose 
ways  and  thoughts  are  quite  difierent.  Tou  must  beware  of  that 
danger.  But,  after  all,  can  you  find  in  these  letters  anything 
of  the  extraordinary  nature  which  Mr.  Clarke  claims  for  them? 
**  Dear  George  " (you  know  the  intimacy  had  gone  some  distance, 
and  it  looks  ae  if  that  was  the  first  time  he  was  addressed  as 
George  "), — “ Permit  me  to  say  I feel  great  pleasure  in  thus 
addressing  you  for  the  first  time."  It  is  in  evidence  that  they 
called  him  " Georgius  Rex,"  and  looked  up  to  him,  and  were 
of  his  friendship.  They  felt  him,  it  is  evident,  to  be  a little  abovb 
them  in  education  and  social  standing,  notwithstanding  his  want 
of  means.  " Permit  me  to  say  I feel  great  pleasure  in  thus 
addressing  you  for  the  first  time.  To  me  it  is  a privilege  to  think 
that  I am  allowed  to  feel  towards  you  as  a brother,  and  hope  our 
friendship  may  ripen  as  time  goes  on,  without  anything  to  mar 
its  future  brightness."  There  is  absolutely  nothing  there,  except 
a tendency  to  a little  over-sentimentality — some  people,  perhaps, 
might  be  inclined  to  say  it  was  getting  towards  maudlin — that  is 

376 


Mr  Justice  Willi 


Charge  to  the  Jury. 


the  extent  of  it.  Now  we  come  to  a little  more:  “ Would  that  I 
could  find  words  to  express  my  thankfulness  to  you  for  the  very 
loving  letter  you  sent  Adelaide  to-day.  It  would  have  done  any- 
body good  to  see  her  overflowing  with  joy  as  she  read  it  whilst 
walking  along  the  street,  and  afterwards,  as  she  read  it  to  me, 
I felt  my  heart  going  out  to  you.  I long  to  tell  you  how  proud 
I felt  at  the  thought  1 should  soon  be  able  to  clasp  the  hand  of 
the  man  who,  from  his  heart,  could  pen  such  noble  thoughts.  Who 
can  help  loving  youl  ** 

Mr.  Dyson  gives  his  explanation  of  those  expressions.  It  comes, 
indeed,  from  Mr.  Dyson;  you  will  receive  it  with  all  qualification 
and  all  suspicion,  but,  after  all  is  said  and  done,  does  it,  or  does 
it  not,  in  your  judgment,  adequately  explain  this  language?  Mr. 
Dyson  says,  He  had  talked  to  me  about  his  wife,  and  he  said  that 
she  had  benefited  by  my  ministrations,  and  he  showed  me  one  of 
her  highly  devotional  letters,  and  he  seemed  as  if  he  would  be 
glad  if  I could  bring  her  back  into  the  same  line  of  thought  and 
devotion,  and  so  on.  It  was  a letter  of  that  character  1 wrote  to 
her.’*  Now,  which  is  the  more  probable — ^that  that  was  so,  or 
that  this  was  a letter  which  was  founded  upon  the  desire  of  the 
husband  that  Dyson  should  look  on  his  wife  in  a manner  that  no 
husband  except  Mr.  Bartlett  ever  could  be  content  with?  You 
must  judge  for  yourselves.  I do  not  mean  to  detract  from  the 
powerful  and  able  observations  which  Mr.  Clarke  made  to  you; 
they  must  be  considered  by  you  along  with,  and  side  by  side  with, 
these  observations  of  mine;  those  observations  would  present  a 
different  view.  I felt  that  I must  say  to  you  two  words,  * Thank 
you,'  and  my  desire  to  do  so  is  my  excuse  for  troubling  you  with 
this.^  Looking  towards  the  future  with  joyfulness."  I can  see 
nothing  very  suggestive — nothing  very  exceptional.  Here  is  a 
man  who  says,  " I am  allowed  to  address  you  for  the  first  time 
by  your  Christian  name,  on  terms  of  close  intimacy;  I hope 
nothing  will  mar  our  future  or  prevent  its  being  delightful.  I 
hope  nothing  will  come  between  us,  and  1 look  forward  to  the 
future  with  joy."  I dare  say  a good  many  of  us,  if  writing  the 
same  thought,  would  say  " with  pleasure,"  but  does  that  shade  of 
dii^ence  of  expression,  especially  when  used  by  a person  who  was 
Q^l^inly  familiar  with  a mode  of  life  and  a mode  of  expression 
Cn  which  strong  and  fervent  language  is  frequent,  imply  any- 
thing so  very  extraordinary?  I confess,  whatever  that  letter  might 
be  taken  to  mean  standing  by  itself,  when  I come  to  view  Hr. 
Dyson's  answer  to  it  I find  it  difdcult  to  see  in  the  correspondence 
anything  much  above  the  common  prose  level.  Is  it  possible  that 
this  really  stamps  the  commencement  of  a new  phase  of  life,  in 
which  this  woman  had  been  in  some  mysterious  way  consecrated 
as  the  object  of  his  sp^ial  personal  interest  in  a sense  and  under 
conditions  probably  without  a precedent  in  human  experience? 

377 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Mr  Jnsdc*  WIHb 

Here  it  is — “ Thank  you  very  much  for  the  brotherly  letter  you 
sent  me  yesterday.  I am  sure  I respond  from  my  heart  to  your 
■wish  that  our  friendship  may  ripen  with  the  lapse  of  time,  and 
I do  so  with  confidence,  for  I feel  that  our  friendship  is  founded 
on  a firm,  abiding  basis — ^trust  and  esteem.”  It  is  not  ” you  and 
I have  some  mysterious  relationship  to  the  same  lady  ” ; that  is  not 
the  centre  of  interest — ^the  centre  of  common  interest  is  trust  and 
esteem.  ” I have,  from  a boy,  been  ever  longing  for  the  confi- 
dence and  trust  of  others.  1 have  never  been  so  perfectly  happy 
as  when  in  possession  of  this.  It  is  in  this  respect,  among  many 
others,  that  you  have  shown  yourself  a true  friend.  You  have 
thanked  me,  and  now  I thank  you;  yet  I ought  to  confess  that  I 
read  your  warm  and  generous  letter  with  a kind  of  half-fear — a 
fear  lest  you  should  ever  be  disappointed  in  me,  and  find  me  a 
far  more  prosy,  matter-of-fact  creature  than  you  expect.”  What 
is  there  there?  ” You  expect  too  much  of  me;  you  look  forward 
to  our  future  intercourse.  I am  afraid  you  make  too  much  of 
me.  I am  a mere  matter-of-fact  person.”  He  goes  on — “ Thank 
you,  moreover,  for  the  telegram ; it  was  very  considerate  to  send 
it.  1 am  looking  forward  vriih  much  pleasure  to  next  week. 
Thus  far  I have  been  able  to  stave  oS  any  work,  and  trust  to  be 
able  to  keep  it  clear.  Dear  old  Dover.  It  will  ever  possess  a 
pleasant  memory  for  me  in  my  mind,  and  a warm  place  in  my 
heart.”  I don’t  know  how  it  strikes  you,  but  is  there  any- 
thing about  a mystic  union — such  as  nobody  ever  heard  of  before 
— between  two  persons,  one  unmarried  and  one  married,  with 
the  consent,  sanction,  and  approval  of  the  husband  ? 

We  come  now  to  Glaverton  Street,  and  there,  according  to 
Mr.  Dyson,  the  probable  or  possible  death  of  Bartlett  formed 
the  subject  of  conversation  between  the  prisoner  and  himself. 
Again  I say,  receive  what  he  says  with  becoming  caution,  not  to 
say  mistrust.  But,  except  for  mere  accident  of  time  and  place, 
she  is  at  one  with  him,  ^ause  she  told  Mrs.  Matthews  at  a later 
period  that  Mr.  Dyson  would  not  believe  her  that  Edwin  was 
likely  to  die  soon,  or  not  to  live  long — ^the  exact  phraseology  is  un- 
important. Mr.  Dyson  says  that  this  topic  formed  the  subject  of 
conversation  soon  after  they  went  to  Glaverton  Street,  that  it  was 
referred  to  from  time  to  time,  and  he  saye,  I could  no1^^|gv 
exactly  when  it  was ; all  I can  say  is,  at  my  first  visit  to  GlavertoBv 
Street  it  was  referred  to,  and  referred  to  more  than  once  after- 
wards.” If  this  were  true,  Mr.  Dyson’s  account  of  what  foU 
lowed  sounds  probable  enough.  Mr.  Dyson  says,  ” I could  not 
understand  it,  and  I asked  her  what  was  her  reason  for  supposing 
that  Edwin  would  die  soon,  and  then  I was  told  this  story  about 
the  internal  complaint,  about  which  he  was  so  sensitive  that  it 
should  not  be  mentioned  to  him,  and  for  which  he  had  seen  I)r. 
Leach;  this  gradually  led  up  to  a series  of  conversations  which 

m 


Mr  Jaitic*  WiUi 


Charge  to  the  Jury. 

culminated  some  time  or  other  in  the  mention  of  chloroform — 
chloroform  to  be  used  when  he  was  violent  or  in  a paroxysm.” 
If  you  believe  that3  it  is  a serious  circumstance  in  this  case, 
because  the  story  is  all  moonshine— and  it  seems  to  me  very  diffi- 
cult to  doubt,  seeing  what  Mrs.  Matthews  afterwards  overheard, 
and  what  Mrs.  Bartlett  afterwards  said  to  Mrs.  Matthews,  that  for 
some  reason  or  other  the  subject  of  Edwin’s  possible  decease  was 
talked  of.  And  1 mean  his  decease  at  a not  very  remote  period, 
because,  of  course,  if  it  was  talked  of  in  any  other  sense,  there  is 
nothing  in  it  at  all.  If  you  only  talk  of  your  death  as  a thing 
which  may  happen,  and  of  which  nobody  can  say  whether  it  will 
be  to-night  or  twenty  years  hence,  there  is  nothing  remarkable 
about  it.  But  that  does  not  seem  to  have  been  at  all  the  character 
of  the  conversation.  And  one  thing  1 have  watched,  from  the  be- 
ginning to  the  end  of  this  case,  with  anxious  care,  I assure  you,  and 
^at  has  been  to  see  whether  any  sort  of  reasonable  foundation  had 
been  established  for  the  notion  that  Edwin’s  life  was  not  likely  to 
be  lasting.  You  have  attended  io  this  case  with  as  much  care, 
1 am  sure,  and  under  as  much  sense  of  responsibility,  as  myself. 
My  responsibility  is  great  from  any  point  of  view,  and  I feel  it 
the  more  because  it  is,  in  my  opinion,  no  part  of  a judge’s  duty 
to  make  his  summing-up  a wholly  colourless  thing.  It  is  not  my 
theory  of  judicial  responsibility,  and  not  one  on  which  I propose 
to  act  in  this  case.  I feel  ;^ou  have  the  right  to  call  on  me  to  give 
you  the  help  of  a trained  mind,  and  of  the  experience  which  years, 
many  years,  spent  in  investigating  difficult  questions  of  fact  of 
one  kind  and  another  cannot  have  failed  to  give. 

Now,  gentlemen,  what  foundation  is  there  for  this?  One 
must  go  into  this  with  minuteness  and  some  care.  Baxter  had 
known  him  for  thirteen  years,  and  had  never  known  a case  of 
serious  illness. 

Mr.  Clarkd — ^I  hope  your  lordship  will  not  think  I am  im- 
properly interrupting.  I will  remind  your  lordship  that  no  evi- 
dence was  given,  except  by  Dyson,  that  Mrs,  Bartlett  ever  said  he 
was  likely  to  die  soon.  Mrs,  Matthews  says  she  overheard  the 
statement  made  by 

Mr.  Jtjstiob  Wills — ^After  that  How  did  you  come  to  tell 
D^n  such  a lie?  ” and  Mrs.  Bartlett  said  Dyson  ” would  not 
li^eve  what  I had  told  him,  that  Edwin  was  likely  to  die  soon.” 

Mr.  CLABKiK-Your  lordship  has  got  into  one  note  the  answer 
to  two  questions.  She  said  he  did  not  believe  her  when  ^e  told 
him  the  truth.  Then  the  witness  was  asked  what  was  the  truth, 
and  she  said,  Her  husband  was  going  to  die  soon,^’  and  your 
lordship  immediately  put  this  question  in  these  words,  Had  any- 
thing passed  between  you  and  her  to  indicate  what  you  were 
talking  about?  ” and  the  witness  answered,  “ No.” 

Mr.  JusTiOB  Wills — ^I  am  very  mudi  obliged  to  you,  Mr. 

379 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Mr  Jatliee  WiUt 

Clarke,  and  I hope  if  you  think  I am  going  wrong  you  will  tell 
me;  I know  you  will  not  interrupt  unnecessarily.  But,  gentle- 
men, I will  give  it  you;  “ On  the  llth  of  January  I had  a con- 
versation with  her.  I asked  her  why  she  had  told  Mr.  Dyson  all 
those  lies.  I had  not  told  her  what  Dyson  had  said.'*  You  know 
pretty  well  what  Dyson  had  told  Mrs.  Matthews.  We  are  left  to 
guess;  we  do  not  know  exactly,  but  you  may  guess  very  nearly 
what  it  must  have  been  from  what  followed.  ‘‘  She  said  he  had 
bothered  her  so ; he  did  not  believe  her  when  she  told  him  the 
truth — ^that  Edwin  was  going  to  die  soon,  and  she  said  he  did 
think  so  latterly.”  Now,  gentlemen,  if  you  think  there  is  any 
doubt  of  that,  of  course  you  will  not  accept  it  on  the  evidence  of 
Dyson  alone,  because  Dyson,  as  1 told  you,  had  got  a story  to 
tell  before  the  coroner,  and  Dyson  was  very  determined,  whatever 
happened,  that  he  should  run  no  unnecessary  risk,  and  I should 
think  he  was  perfectly  careless  how  much  he  put  on  this  woman, 
and  how  little  he  left  on  his  own  shoulders-  Now,  this  conversa- 
tion with  Mrs.  Matthews  that  I have  read  was  on  llth  January. 
1 will  read  it  again  to  hx  it  on  your  mind : I asked  her  why  she 
told  Mr.  Dyson  all  those  lies.”  We  know  what  that  relates  to;  it 
relates  to  ^is,  that  Dyson  had  told  her  at  Dr.  Leaches  when,  on 
6th  January,  they  were  waiting  for  her  while  she  was  in 

Mr.  Clabkb — There  is  no  such  evidence,  my  lord. 

Mr.  Justice  Wills — Do  listen  to  me.  Mrs.  Matthews  had  had 
a conversation  with  Dyson,  Dr.  Leach  had  gone  in  with  Mrs. 
Bartlett;  Dyson  and  Mrs.  Matthews  were  left  outside,  they  were 
left  in  the  waiting-room,  and  Mrs,  Matthews  said,  “ We  were  in 
there  together,  and  we  had  a conversation,”  and  then  it  must  have 
been  he  told  her  something,  1 am  not  saying  what,  because  we 
can  only  guess  what  it  was,  but  Dyson  says  he  mentioned  chloro- 
form on  that  occasion.  Mrs.  Matthews  must  have  heard  something, 
because  she  said,  **  Why  did  you  tell  him  all  tibose  lies?”  Now, 
we  know  both  of  them  knew  that  some  lies  had  been  told.  She 
said  he  had  bothered  her  so,  he  did  not  believe  her  when  she  told 
him  the  truth,  namely,  that  Edwin  was  going  to  die  soon,  and 
so  she  told  him  a lie.  I said  I did  not  know  that  Edwin  thought 
he  was  going  to  die  soon;  she  said  he  did  think  so  latterly;  she 
said  she  had  had  the  chloroform  to  soothe  Edwin,  but  she  SiM 
never  used  it.”  If  you  think  that  that  does  not  point  in  the 
direction  of  confirmation  of  Dyson's  story,  of  course,  you  will 
reject  Dyson's  story,  because  you  will  never  think  of  accepting 
his  uncorroborated  evidence  on  a point  on  which  it  is  of  vital 
consequence  to  him  to  exculpate  himself  and  as  to  which  he  cares 
nothing  how  much  difficulty  and  danger  he  throws  on  another 
person.  If  you  doubt  that  a conversation  of  this  kind  had  taken 
place,  of  course  it  must  be  discarded  as  an  element  in  the  case. 

380 


Mr  Justice  WUla 


Charge  to  the  Jury. 


That  is  for  you  to  judge.  You  have  heard  the  evidence;  it  is 
for  you  to  judge  whether  the  right  complexion  has  been  put  on 
it  or  not. 

Baxter  said  he  never  knew  this  man  except  as  a strong  man; 
that  he  had  one  illness  before  of  a very  trivial  character,  and 
that  was  all  he  had  known  of  him  in  the  way  of  illness  during 
the  thirteen  years  he  had  been  acquainted  with  him.  This  illness 
does  not  seem  to  have  been  of  a very  serious  oharaotei- — it  was  a 
very  disagreeable  one,  no  doubt;  the  man  overstrained  himself, 
and  overworked  himself.  He  had  taken  those  extravagant  journeys 
from  Dover,  day  after  day  and  week  after  week,  and  done  himself 
injury  by  it,  and  he  broke  down,  and  there  were  symptoms  of 
mercurial  poisoning.  It  is  quite  possible,  when  you  find  the  way 
in  which  this  man  went  about  with  French  letters  in  his  pocket, 
that  that  mercurial  poisoning,  and  that  necrosis  of  the  jaw,  may 
have  a very  different  explanation  from  that  of  Dr.  Leach.  In- 
deed, to  me  it  seems  an  extravagant  notion  of  his  that  the  disease 
of  the  bone  of  the  jaw  could  be  due  to  an  oversized  blue  pill 
picked  out  of  a sample  box,  and  it  is  possible  that  he  was  a man 
suffering  from  syphilis.  The  course  of  that  illness  certainly  did 
not  point  to  approaching  death,  and,  although  he  was  sleepless, 
wretched,  morbid,  hypochondriacal,  presenting  the  symptoms  of  a 
nervous  breakdown,  the  illness  had  run  its  course;  and  as  to  that 
there  is  a strange  concurrence  of  testimony.  The  doctor  tells  him 
on  the  19th  he  had  nothing  to  do  except  to  go  out.  Dr.  Leach 
told  him  he  should  discontinue  attendance,  and  that  it  was  a ridi- 
culous idea  about  his  dying  soon.  It  is  very  likely  that  a man 
of  that  kind  would  say,  as  Dyson  said  he  said  to  him,  ‘‘  Can  a 
man  feel  so  ill  as  this  and  recover?”  Very  likely  he  talked  of 
his  death,  but  not  as  a man  does  who  is,  or  feels  himself,  in  real 
danger.  Dr-  Leach  said,  ” I always  ridiculed  the  idea,”  and  the 
last  three  or  four  days  of  his  life  it  is  scarcely  possible  he  can  have 
supposed  that  there  was  any  danger  of  any  sort  or  kind  to  his  life. 
According  to  Mrs.  Matthews,  Mrs.  Bartlett  told  her  that  Edwin  did 
think  latterly  that  he  was  going  to  die.  But  he  does  not  seem 
to  have  thought  so  on  the  last  day  of  his  existence.  Anything 
more  unlike  the  conduct  of  a dying  man  it  is  impossible  to  con- 
ceive. On  31st  December  he  ate  heartily  of  jugged  hare,  so  heartily 
Bartlett  tells  Mrs.  Doggett  that  she  thought  he  would  eat 
<<hr66  dinners.  He  went  and  had  a tooth  out,  and^  then  that 
evening  he  was  better  than  usual,  and  he  expressed  himself  in  a 
way  which  certainly  did  not  look  like  the  thought  of  a man  to 
whom  early  death  was  present.  He  ordered  a large  haddock  for 
breakfast  in  the  morning,  and  told  the  servant — ^the  last  thing  he 
said  to  her — ^that  the  very  thoughts  of  it  would  make  him  get  up 
an  hour  earlier  that  he  might  enjoy  his  breakfast.  And  on  the 
28th  he  told  his  father,  and  on  another  day  close  to  the  day  of 

381 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Mr  Jvutioe  Will* 

his  death  he  told  Dyson,  that  he  was  going  to  Bournemouth  shortly, 
and  it  seems  that  Dr.  Leach  had  promised  to  take  him  down  to 
Bournemouth,  and  place  him  there  under  the  care  of  a doctor. 

Now,  gentlemen,  assume,  if  you  will,  that  this  talk  of  Edwin's 
dying  was  very  late  in  his  illness,  and  not,  as  Dyson  says,  soon 
after  they  went  to  Glaverton  Street.  Surely  the  passage  I have  read 
from  Mrs.  Matthews'  evidence  shows  that  some  such  conversation 
did  take  place  between  Dyson  and  her,  and  shows  that  Dyson  was 
reluctant  to  believe  that  he  was  ill  to  the  death,  and  shows  that 
she  was  urging  him  to  believe  it,  and  told  him  some  lie  or  other 
in  order  to  account  for  the  fact  that  she  represented  her  husband 
as  likely  to  die.  Dyson  says  the  particular  lie  was  that  he  had 
an  internal  complaint,  and  that  Dr.  Nichols  said  he  would  not 
live  another  twelve  months.  But  I would  rather  not  rest  on 
anything  Dyson  has  said  unless  corroborated  by  other  people,  and 
if  I had  to  form  an  opinion  of  this  case  I would  not  form  it  on 
uncorroborated  statements  of  Dyson,  and  I would  reject  them 
unless  there  was  a violent  probability  in  their  favour. 

We  come  now  to  the  most  critical  time  in  the  whole  history. 
I have  stated  to  you  one  side  of  the  question  up  to  that  night. 
Let  me  now  put  before  you  the  other,  and  it  is  one  I dwell  on 
with  much  more  pleasure,  and  one  I know  that  has  not  been  absent 
from  your  minds  in  considering  this  question,  for  it  is  one  of  the 
strongest  circumstances  in  favour  of  the  prisoner,  and  one  to  the 
full  benefit  of  which  she  is  well  entitled.  Every  piece  of  evidence 
we  have  throughout  the  case  points  to  the  conduct  of  a devoted 
wife,  and  1 must  say  everything  given  in  evidence  seems  to  me  per- 
fectly natural.  I can  detect  no  trace  of  anything  that  does  not  look 
like  the  natural,  spontaneous  flow  of  afiection  and  of  unusual 
devotion.  During  the  three  weeks  preceding  this  critical  time, 
she  had  scarcely  had  her  clothes  ofi;  and  a most  unpleasant  illness 
it  must  have  been.  You  have  heard  the  sort  of  state  he  was  in — 
his  wretched  hypochondriacal  melancholy;  and  if  any  of  you  have 
had  any  experience  of  that  kind,  you  will  know  the  tax  there 
must  be  on  any  one  attending  upon  such  a man.  He  had  all  the 
irritability  and  all  the  mom  disturbance  which  attend  such  a 
condition.  Perhaps,  gentlemen,  I have  had  unusual  opportunities 
of  knowing  myself  what  that  means,  because  it  was  my  unhappy 
fate  at  one  period  of  my  life  for  twelve  months  together  never  Jio 
have  one  tolerable  night's  rest;  and  I know,  as  no  human  bein^^ 
who  has  not  gone  through  it  can  know,  the  misery  of  that  state 
of  thin^  and  the  discomfort  the  patient  must  bring  on  all  those 
about  him.  But  she  seems  to  have  been  entirely  true  to  her  trust 
and  her  duty.  She  performed  the  most  disagreeable  duties, 
keeping  the  s^n's  stools  and  urine  for  the  doctor  to  see,  and  doing 
everything  with  patience  and  devotion.  That  must  never  be  lost 
sight  of  in  this  case,  and  that  oug^t  to  stand  her  in  the  fullest 


Charge  to  the  Jury. 

Mr  Jivtiee  WiUs 

stead.  I have  been  myself  unable,  as  I say,  to  see  any  trace  of 
an^hing  like  acting  in  the  matter;  and  I can  see  no  trace,  no 
legitimate  trace,  of  anything  which  should  tend  towards  suspicion, 
either  in  the  possession  of  books  about  poisoning,  or  conversations 
about  poison — a class  of  evidence  which  it  is  very  rarely  that  a case 
of  this  kind  wants.  And  if  I put  the  truth  faithfully  before 
you  as  to  the  circumstances  which  have  told  against  her,  and  have 
helped  to  bring  her  to  this  pass,  where  dreadful  suspicion  has 
fallen  on  her,  and  naturally  fallen  on  her,  it  is  equally  my  duty, 
and  far  more  my  pleasure,  to  point  out  those  circumstances  which, 
as  I say,  must  never  be  lost  sight  of,  and  as  to  which  I hope  you  will 
not  attach  the  less  importance,  because  necessarily  they  take  me 
less  time  to  deal  with,  and  therefore,  in  one  sense,  are  passed 
off  more  lightly,  than  the  opposing  considerations.  Certainly  I 
have  no  disposition  to  extenuate  their  importance  or  take  away 
from  the  great  force  that  they  ought  to  have  when  you  consider 
the  difficult  question  you  have  to  answer.  She  was  perfectly 
devoted.,  perfectly  affectionate,  perfectly  natural  in  her  conduct. 
Extending  as  the  evidence  on  this  point  does  over  a great  number 
of  years,  and  coming  from  many  different  sources,  it  is  entitled 
to  the  greatest  weight.  Gentlemen,  I have  summed  u]p  this  part 
of  the  case  in  a few  words,  but  I hope  in  words  which  will  be 
thought  even  by  those  representing  the  prisoner  adequate  to  the 
occasion. 

That  being  the  state  of  things,  we  come  to  the  night  of  Slat 
December,  There  is  absolutely  nothing,  in  my  judgment,  either 
in  the  few  words  spoken  about  chloroform  (which  came  in  very 
naturally  after  the  operation  he  had  undergone),  or  in  the  trivial 
directions  given  for  the  night,  which  affords  ground  for  suspicion. 
Ten  o'clock  comes.  She  and  her  husband  were  left  alone,  and 
all  we  know  about  what  passed  there  in  the  interval  between  ten 
and  four  is  from  herself,  and  she  has  said  that  up  to  twelve  o'clock 
she  was  awake,  and  some  time  after  twelve  she  says  she  went  to 
sleep.  At  four  o’clock  in  the  morning  she  awoke,  and  then  this 
man  had  been  dead  two  or  three  hours.  Now,  what  he  died  of 
seems  to  me  to  be  no  mystery;  and  although  the  medical  evidence 
occupied  a long  time — ^necessarily  a long  time — and  was  a most 
important  part  of  this  investigation,  yet  all  of  it  that  is  worthy 
of  ^consideration  may  be  really  summarised  in  half  a dozen  sen- 
^nces,^  or  very  little  more.  There  is  cogent  evidence  that  this 
man  died  from  swallowing  chloroform.  How  much  we  cannot  tell; 
all  we  know  is,  it  was  a fatal  dose.  There  is,  as  it  seems  to  me, 
and  I shall  point  out  by-and-by  that  is  a fact  that  helps  her,  not 
that  tells  against  her — there  is,  in  my  judgment,  strong  evidence 
that  that  chloroform,  that  fatal  dose,  was  at  some  time  or  other 
in  the  glass  which  was  afterwards  found  on  the  mantelpiece,  and 
it  seems  to  me  very  difficult  to  escape  from  the  conclusion,  which- 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Mr  Juitiee  Willi 

€Ter  way  it  makes,  that  the  chloroform  which  caused  the  man’s 
death  somehow  found  its  way  into  the  glass,  and  somehow  from  the 
glass  into  his  stomach.  There  is  also  strong  reason  to  think, 
from  the  medical  testimony,  that  the  chloroform,  although  it  may 
have  been  swallowed  when  he  was  not  recumbent,  worked  its  serious 
and  fatal  eftect  while  he  was  lying  down.  How  much,  or  how  little, 
he  swallowed  we  cannot  tell,  and  no  human  being  can  ever  know. 
The  statistics  are  not  sufficiently  extensive,  the  knowledge  on  the 
subject  is  not  sufficiently  accurate,  and  how  much  or  how  little 
will  constitute  a fatal  dose  is  a matter  on  which  we  can  only 
speculate.  It  seems  that,  under  circumstances  the  precise  nature 
of  which  is  unascertained,  a much  smaller  dose  will  do 
it  than  the  writers  have  recorded  in  most  instances,  and 
very  likely  a smaller  dose  might  do  it  than  is  recorded 
in  any  instance.  As  far  as  1 remember,  the  smallest 
recorded  dose  which  is  supposed  to  have  killed  a person  is  either  2 
ounces  or  one  ounce  and  a half.  That  was  the  American  case — 
the  case  of  a person  who  died — a very  remarkable  case,  because, 
if  that  case  had  not  happened,  death  from  so  small  a dose  would 
have  been  supposed  to  be  almost  impossible.  That  was  the  case 
of  a young  man  who  took  chloroform — committed  suicide;  he  was 
insensible  in  three  minutes,  and  died  in  an  hour;  and  one  can 
understand,  I think,  that  very  large  doses  are  apt  to  defeat  their 
own  ends  if  taken  with  suicidal  intent,  because  they  make  the 
patient  sick,  and  then  the  stuS  is  got  rid  of.  Much  more  than  that 
as  to  the  cause  of  death  the  evidence  does  not  tell  us,  except  this, 
that,  if  you  are  to  act  on  the  original  theory  of  the  prosecution, 
another  difficulty  arises.  ^ I suppose  that,  notwithstanding  the 
slight  discussion  which  the  'Attorney-General  started  this  morning 
as  to  some  other  probability,  you  will  refuse  to  take  (as  I should 
refuse)  into  your  own  mind  at  the  last  hour  any  but  the  supposi- 
tion on  which  this  battle  has  been  fought,  if  I may  use  an  expression 
which  might  to  some  minds  convey  the  notion  of  a spirit  very 
difierent  from  that  in  which  this  case  has  been  conducted.  1 do 
not  suppose  you  will  consent  to  approach  this  subject  as  against 
the  prisoner  from  any  other  hypothesis  than  that  originally  put 
forward,  that  to  which  all  the  medical  evidence  was  dii'ected,  and 
on  which  alone  the  examination  and  cross-examination  of  the 
medical  witnesses  who  have  thrown  all  the  light  they  can  on  ^he 
subject  has  been  conducted,  and  therefore  1 say  nothing  mofc 
about  that  suggestion  which  fell  from  the  learned  Attorney-General 
this  morning,  except  that  I ask  you,  in  the  name  of  justice,  to 
refuse,  as  I do,  to  have  anything  to  do  with  it  at  the  last  hour  of 
the  investigation.  This  much  more,  then,  we  have,  gentlemen — 
and  it  is  the  sum  of  all  the  evidence  as  to  partial  insensibility 
and  the  swallowing  of  chloroform  by  a person  in  that  state— -the 
attempt  would  be  surrounded  by  so  many  difficulties,  and  open  to 


charge  to  the  Jury. 

Mr  Juitiee  Wills 

SO  many  chances  of  failure,  that  no  skilled  man  would  venture 
upon  it  unless  he  were  a madman.  But  I am  bound  also  to  say 
this,  that  the  observation  would  have  far  greater  weight  if  we  were 
dealing  with  the  case  of  a person  possessed  of  minute  and  technical 
knowledge,  and  aware  of  its  difficulties.  Everybody  knows  that 
Fools  rush  in  where  angels  fear  to  tread, and  the  ignorant  and 
presumptuous  will  sometimes  attempt  that  which  no  human  being 
who  understood  the  conditions  of  the  problem  would  think  of 
trying,  and  will  sometimes  blunder  into  success.  But,  if  she  did 
succeed  in  that  fashion,  it  is  not  too  much  to  say  it  was  a most 
extraordinary  piece — I was  going  to  say  of  good,  but  I had  better 
say — of  cruel  fortune,  because  the  conditions  and  chances  are  all 
against  it.  And  that  really  seems  to  me  about  all  we  can  learn 
from  the  medical  testimony  as  to  this  part  of  the  case.  The  fact 
undoubtedly  has  an  important  bearing  on  the  case,  though  not  so 
important  as  if  we  were  dealing  with  the  case  of  a Lamson  or  a 
Palmer.  I could  not  help  thinking,  when  the  learned  Attorney- 
General  mentioned  them,  that  the  parallel  was  not  a fair  one, 
because  they  were  people  who  had  studied  these  things  and  were 
fully  aware  of  everything  done,  said,  and  written  wiSi  regard  to 
the  occult  poisons  they  used;  and  it  occurred  to  me  at  the  time 
that,  when  the  proper  occasion  came,  I must  call  your  attention  to 
that  diSerence,  and  not  allow  you  to  pursue  that  parallel  in  the 
case  of  this  prisoner,  because  it  would  a most  disastrous  parallel 
for  her.  On  the  other  hand,  it  constantly  happens  that  facts  cut 
both  ways,  and  so  here  the  very  ignorance  of  the  prisoner  in  this 
matter  diminishes,  but  does  not  t£^e  away  altogether,  the  strength 
of  the  observation  that,  if  this  be  a case  of  murder,  an  experiment 
has  been  successfully  attempted  which  not  one  of  those  eminent 
physiologists  and  chloroformists  called  before  you  (if  you  can 
imagine  that  the  foul  fiend  had  put  it  into  their  hearto  to  commit 
murder)  would  have  dreamed  of  attempting,  because  they  would 
know  that  the  chances  of  failure  (not  chances  of  detection  merely, 
but  chances  of  actual  failure)  were  so  preponderating.  There 
seems  to  be  a double  difficulty.  In  the  first  place,  no  living  adult 
person  has  yet  been  experimented  upon  to  whom  chloroform  has 
been  successfully  administered  so  as  to  produce  anaesthesia  during 
sleep ; in  the  second  place,  if  that  difficulty  be  overcome,  the  chances 
that  the  power  of  swallowing  would  be  gone. 

These  eminent  medical  men,  however,  tell  us  that  they  believe, 
nevertheless,  in  the  possibility  of  such  administration,  and  that 
extended  experience  will  justify  tiieir  belief ; but  up  to  the  present 
time  a boy  of  fifteen  or  sixteen  is  the  oldest  person  to  whom  chloro- 
form has  been  administered  during  sleep,  although  it  has  been 
tried,  as  Dr.  Tidy  has  told  you,  under  circumstances  of  excep- 
tional facility.  It  is  only  in  a few  cases  of  boys  under  sixteen 
years  of  age  that  the  attempt  has  been  successful.  And,  supposing 
lo  385 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Mr  Juitiee  Wills 

that  initial  difficulty  got  over,  there  is  a great  difficulty  in 
choosing  the  right  moment  for  the  rest  of  the  operation,  for  the 
interyal  is  very  short  during  which  alone  it  is  possible.  The  right 
moment  must  be  hit,  or  else  the  anaesthesia  will  bo  carried  so  far 
that  the  power  of  using  the  muscles  which  must  bo  used  in  swallow- 
ing will  be  gone.  And  therefore  it  must  be  by  a lucky  concatena- 
tion of  circumstances,  all  contributing  to  one  end,  that  this  thing 
must  be  done  if  it  is  to  be  done  at  all,  and  that  is  one  of  the  great 
difficulties — and  a very  formidable  one — in  the  way  of  the  theory 
of  murder. 

The  learned  Attorney-General  said,  rightly,  in  my  judgment, 
that  no  hypothesis  can  be  put  that  is  not  attended  with  difficulties 
so  great  that,  if  it  stood  by  itself  and  apart  from  surrounding 
circumstances,  one  would  say  it  could  hardly  be  true;  and  yet  we 
know  that  Bartlett's  death  was  caused  by  swallowing  liquid  chloro- 
form, and  therefore  it  must  have  been  caused  by  chloroform  either 
criminally  administered  to  him  or  not  criminally  administered  to 
him.  There  is  no  escaping  from  this  dilemma.  If  you  take  the 
evidence  on  either  head  alone,  you  would  say  the  thing  could  not 
be  done.  Tet  it  has  been  done,  and  one  of  the  two  impossible 
theories  must  be  right.  You,  therefore,  will  have  to  choose  between 
the  two  theories,  unless,  indeed,  you  are  really  unable  to  do  so. 
If,  not  merely  avoiding  a disagreeable  conclusion  because  it  costs 
effort,  but  honestly  and  after  every  effort  to  arrive  at  a definite 
conclusion,  you  are  compelled  in  the  end  to  say,  We  cannot 
decide  this  question,"  then  the  case  for  the  Crown  is  not  made  out. 

I must  trouble  you  with  some  further  remarks  as  to  perhaps 
the  material  element  of  this  case,  and  one  which  undoubtedly,  in 
my  opinion,  presses  more  strongly  than  almost  any  other  against 
the  prisoner,  and  that  is  the  history  of  that  chloroform  bottle. 
Let  me  say  this  before  I approach  it,  that,  putting  for  a moment 
out  of  sight  the  theory  of  criminal  administration  and  admitting 
the  possibility  of  non-criminal  administration,  a possibility  has 
occurred  to  me  which  I confess  I am  surprised  has  not  occurred  to 
others  also.  It  may  be  that  it  has  been  prompted  and  brought 
home  to  me  by  that  experience  of  my  own  life  to  which  I referred  a 
few  minutes  ago,  and  which  is  one  of  the  sources  of  accumulated 
experience  which  is  for  what  it  is  worth  at  your  service  just  as  much 
as  any  other  piece  of  information  which  I have  gathered  in  my 
life.  1 know  what  none  of  these  gentlemen  probably  do  know.*^ 
And  we  are  now  dealing  merely  with  a speculation,  dealing  with 
that  which  is  within  the  knowledge  of  no  one,  for  on  the  theory  of 
non-criminal  administration  the  prisoner  knows  no  more  about  it 
than  any  one  else.  Her  conduct  afterwards,  and  her  conduct 
before,  may  or  may  not  be  each  as  to  urge  you  powerfully  to  think 
that  it  was  criminal ; but,  assiuning  that  it  was  non-criminal,  she 
can  throw  no  light  on  it,  and  therefore  we  are  in  the  r^ion  of 


Mr  Justice  WiUs 


Charge  to  the  Jury. 

speculation,  where  my  speculation  is  as  good  as  my  friend  Mr. 
Clarke's,  or  Dr.  Leach's,  or  anybody  else's,  and  I know  what  pos- 
sibly nol^dy  else  concerned  in  this  trial  knows  as  I do — ^the  craving 
for  that  which  will  secure  sleep  which  people  who  are  eufiering 
from  sleeplessness  undergo ; and  I know  the  uncommon  strength  of 
mind,  will,  and  resolution  which  it  takes  to  resist  that  impulse. 
Fortunately  for  myself,  I soon  became  aware  that  one  had  better 
undergo  any  misery  than  resort  to  the  fatal  practice  of  taking 
narcotics,  but  it  takes  a very  strong-minded  man  to  come  to  that 
decision,  and  to  act  upon  it,  because  the  sufierings  of  that  state  of 
mind  are  greater  than  any  person  who  has  not  gone  through  such 
an  experience  can  imagine. 

Now,  assume  for  a moment,  and  before  coming  to  the  very 
serious  question  how  that  bottle  of  chloroform  could  have  got  within 
his  reach,  that  it  could  have  got  innocently  within  hie  reach,  and 
that  he  knew  it  was  there.  We  have  heard  that  morphia  had  been 
injected,  and  that  morphia  had  failed.  He  had  tried  chloral 
hydrate,  and  what  I should  venture,  notwithstanding  Dr.  Leach’s 
opposite  opinion,  to  say  would  be  a pretty  stiff  dose.  He  had  tried 
cblorodyne.  Those  things  had  all  failed.  It  does  strike  me  as 
a thing  not  only  possible,  but  scarcely  improbable,  that  a restless 
man,  eager  and  anxious  for  sleep,  and  with  that  craving  for  the 
means  of  procuring  sleep  which  seizses  on  the  sleepless — it  does 
strike  me  as  possible  that  he  might  get  hold  of  the  bottle  and  pour 
some  into  a glass  and  drink  it.  It  does  strike  me  as  possible  that 
a man  doing  that  in  the  dark  might  not  be  very  nice  about  the 
quantity,  and  might  pour  more  in  than  he  intended  to  pour. 
Now,  assuming — 1 hope  I have  not  gone  out  of  the  way  to  make  this 
suggestion,  but  it  seems  to  me  that,  assuming  the  possibility  of 
non-criminal  administration,  we  have  a more  reasonable  explana- 
tion than  that  of  suicide  which  the  learned  counsel  was  instructed 
to  present  to  you;  and  I make  this  suggestion  the  more  readily,  and 
the  more  do  I feel  it  my  duty  to  make  it,  because  it  will  be  my 
bounden  duty  to  point  out  1^-and-by  how  almost  absolutely  absurd 
to  me  seems  the  notion  of  suicide  under  the  eircumstances  suggested 
in  the  defence  of  the  learned  counsel.  Of  course,  if  the  explana- 
tion, whether  of  the  one  kind  or  the  other,  rested  upon  anything 
t}).at  had  come  from  her  mouth,  and  as  to  which  she  had,  or  ought 
7to  have  had,  the  means  of  knowledge,  it  would  be  against  her  if 
she  had  failed  and  it  were  proposeed  to  substitute  something  else 
for  her  explanation.  But,  seeing  that  we  are  dealing  now  with 
what  is  pure  speculation,  her  speculation,  supposing  she  is  not  a 
guilty  woman,  is  no  better  or  worse  than  anybody  else’s;  and  Dr. 
Leach's  is  no  better  or  worse  than  anybody  else's;  and  mine  is  no 
better  or  worse  than  anybody  else’s — except  as  in  so  far  to  your 
judgment  and  experience  the  one  or  the  other  may  seem  the  more 
rational  and  the  more  oonsisteiit  with  probability. 


387 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Mr  JuaUce  WUli 

All  this,  however,  leaves  still  behind  the  question  which  I am 
now  going  to  approach — ^to  my  mind,  by  far  the  most  important 
part  of  this  inquiry — and  that  is,  what  is  the  history  of  that  chloro- 
form bottle  1 You  know  Dyson  undoubtedly  procured  the  chloro- 
form in  driblets.  Dyson  had  his  own  motives  for  wishing  to  keep 
that  matter  secret.  I cannot  tell  what  they  were;  I can  only 
speculate.  He  said  he  thought  the  chemist  would  not  believe  that 
the  person  for  whom  he  was  going  to  get  it  would  be  a proper  person 
to  be  entrusted  with  it,  because  she  would  not  be  likely  to  have  the 
proper  medical  knowledge.  It  is  quite  possible  by  that  time  the 
Eev.  George  Dyson  may  have  had  the  thought  of  his  spiritual 
superintendent  before  his  mind,  and  was  conscious  that  things  had 
gone  quite  far  enough  between  himself  and  Mrs.  Bartlett,  and  it 
is  quite  possible  that  he  thought  the  less  he  said  about  Mrs.  Bart- 
lett^s  connection  with  anything  he  was  doing  the  better.  I mean, 
he  may  have  had  this  kind  of  feeling  quite  apart  from  any  notion 
of  his  being  mixed  up  with  any  criminal  use  of  chloroform,  because 
we  must  put  any  notion  of  that  sort  out  of  eight  once  for  all.  We 
are  not  going  to  let  the  Crown  transfer  a man  from  the  dock  to  the 
witness-box  for  the  purpose  of  letting  him  give  evidence,  and  then, 
for  the  purpose  of  making  a case  against  the  prisoner,  to  admit 
the  faintest  suspicion  of  anything  beyond  folly,  though  folly  carried 
to  a perilous  extent,  in  Mr.  Dyson’s  conduct.  But  Dyson  procured 
the  chloroform,  and  he  said  he  handed  it  to  her  on  the  Thames 
Embankment.  Here,  again,  you  know,  I should  be  very  sorry  to 
form  any  conclusion  in  my  own  mind  adverse  to  Mrs.  Bartlett  on 
the  suspicion  that  it  was  really  handed  to  her  on  the  Thames 
Embankment.  1 do  not  see  any  reason  for  believing  it  to  be  true 
because  it  suits  the  Rev.  George  Dyson  to  say  so.  The  Rev.  George 
Dyson  had  to  make  out  the  b»t  case  he  could  for  himself  about  the 
chloroform,  and  he  told  the  etory  not  for  the  first  time  when  he 
came  before  you  in  the  witness-box,  but  he  had  pinned  himself  to 
everything  that  was  essential  in  it  when  he  had  a very  strong 
suspicion  that  there  was  a fatal  entanglement  gathering  round 
himself,  and  wi^ed  at  any  cost  to  extricate  himself  from  its  folds, 
and  I can  see  in  his  conduct  no  trace  of  any  chivalry  which  would 
induce  him  to  sufier  any  possible  chance  against  himself  for  the 
sake  of  not  making  things  worse  against  Mrs.  Bartlett.  He  did 
afiord  the  means  of  testing  that  part  of  his  story,  which  was  an* 
important  one,  because,  if  he  did  give  it  to  her  on  the  Embank- 
ment, it  was  a circumstance  of  undoubted  suspicion,  one  calculated 
to  raise  suspicion  in  everybody’s  mind,  though  a suspicion  which 
we  muust  discard  in  this  case,  because  it  would  be  a suspicion  that 
would  implicate  him  in  a kind  of  criminality  which  we  are  bound 
to  discard.  But  there  was  a means  of  testing  the  truth  of  that 
statement.  He  said  that  a person  named  Hackett  was  at  Bartlett’s 
when  he  was  calling  there,  and  before  he  and  Mrs.  Bartlett  strolled 


Mr  Jnitice  Will* 


Charge  to  the  Jury. 

on  to  the  Embankment,  and  that  he  was  not  there  when  he  came 
back  again.  Hackett  has  not  been  called,  and  this  is  not  a case 
where  anything  that  could  be  got  at  should  be  left  out ; and  I should 
therefore  discard  everything  about  this  part  of  his  story,  except 
the  fact  that  chloroform  in  a bottle  was  handed  to  her — a bottle 
something  like  the  6-ounce  bottle  produced  before  us. 

Now,  if  that  chloroform  were  administered  to  Bartlett  non- 
criminally — and  I use  that  phrase  purposely  in  order  to  include 
every  variety  of  suicide  and  accident,  and  every  other  case  for 
which  the  prisoner  would  not  be  responsible — if  that  were  adminis- 
tered to  him  non-criminally,  it  is  very  difficult  to  deal  with  it  on 
any  other  supposition  than  that  the  bottle  must  have  found  its  way 
to  the  mantelpiece,  as,  indeed,  she  says  it  did,  and  then  from  the 
mantelpiece  to  that  glass  where  the  smell  was  afterwards  peroeived. 
A‘  very  strong  fact  in  her  favour,  to  my  mind — I say  it  at  once, 
but  I will  recur  to  it  afterwards — ^is  that  there  had  been  no  attempt 
to  clean  out  that  glass.  It  is  a fact  which  strikes  my  own  mind 
as  one  of  considerable  weight,  and  one  that  ought  not  to  be  lost 
sight  of.  Assume,  therefore — I am  still  keeping  to  the  theory  of 
non-criminal  administration — ^that  the  bottle  must  have  been,  as 
she  says  it  was,  on  the  chimneypiece  in  the  course  of  the  evening 
before  she  settled  o£E  to  sleep,  and  that  he  took  the  chloroform.  I 
see  no  difficulty  if  it  were  so  taken — accidentally,  so  far  as  she  was 
concerned — in  supposing  that  he  could  have  so  far  lifted  himsdf 
up  as  to  have  taken  it  without  disturbing  her,  whether  he  was  bent 
on  suicide,  or  bent,  more  probably  as  it  seems  to  me,  on  allaying 
his  restless  craving  for  sleep.  I see  no  difficulty  in  understanding 
that  he  could  raise  himself  up  sufficiently  without  disturbing  the 
sleeper  at  the  foot  of  his  bed.  But,  then,  if  anything  is  proved  in 
this  case,  it  is  proved,  so  far  as  human  proof  can  go,  that  soon  after 
four  o’clock  in  the  morning  that  bottle  was  not  there.  1 put  aside 
as  of  inferior  weight  the  evidence  of  Doggett,  because  his  search 
was  not  exhaustive;  he  missed  the  bottle  of  chlorodyne  which  was 
on  the  other  side  of  the  room ; but  Dr.  Leach  searched  and  did  not 
see  it.  The  glass  which  must  have  been  made  use  of  in  connection 
with  it  was  still  in  its  proper  place,  and  was  found  by  Doggett; 
he  smedt  it;  he  snifEed  at  it;  and  he  gave  that  piece  of  evidence 
which,  I think,  is  an  important  piece  of  evidence  in  her  favour — 
*he  smelt  the  smell  of  paregoric  or  ether.  It  had  brandy  in  it,  no 
doubt,  but  the  smell  was,  beyond  all  doubt,  the  smell  of  the  chloro- 
form— that  smell  lingered  about  it.  It  is  true  that  crime  is 
seldom  armed  at  all  points;  its  designs  generally  break  down  at 
some  place  where  you  least  expect  it;  but  if  that  woman’s  hand 
poured  that  chloroform  out  of  that  glass  into  that  man’s  throat, 
she  must  have  been  strangely  constituted,  according  to  the  instincts 
qf  criminals  in  general,  if  i^e  was  not  possessed  with  the  desire  of 
obliterating  the  traces  of  what  had  been  in  the  glass. 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Mr  Jluatiee  WUli 

And  it  is  not  as  if  there  could  be  any  suggestion  of  a formed 
design  in  her  mind  to  allow  death  by  chloroform  to  be  attributed 
to  accidental  administration.  It  is  clear  that  from  no  point  of 
view  was  that  her  plan,  and  therefore  you  cannot  suggest  this  was 
a clever  Ihought,  that  it  would  be  better  to  let  the  smell  linger 
there  in  order  that  the  notion  might  gather  ground  that  he  had 
taken  it  accidentally.  If  any  such  notion  as  that  had  been  in  her 
mind,  she  would  not  have  lingered  twenty-six  days  before  giving 
vent  to  it.  And  she  never  did  give  vent  to  it,  and  therefore  you 
cannot  get  rid  in  that  way  of  the  fact;  and  it  does  seem  to  me 
strangely  unlike  the  conduct  of  any  criminal  in  any  case  of  which 
I have  had  experience  to  betray  no  anxiety  to  get  rid  of  every  trace 
of  the  actual  method  in  which  administration  had  taken  place. 

That  is  in  her  favour — ^very  much  in  her  favour.  On  the 
other  hand,  you  know  it  is  difldcult  beyond  measure  to  account  for 
the  disappearance  of  that  bottle  if  all  was  right ; if  all  was  wrong, 
one  can  understand  it.  There  were  drawers  in  the  room  behind, 
and  there  was  her  pocket.  We  can  never  know  for  certain  in 
which  of  those  two  places  it  was.  A sort  of  curious  fatuity  seems 
to  have  hung  over  the  case  at  its  earlier  stages.  The  coroner's 
officer — a grown-up  policeman — who  was  sent  there  on  4th  January 
to  aid  in  the  discovery  of  truth,  went  away  from  that  house  without 
taking  the  ordinary  precaution  of  searching  the  drawers,  and 
therefore  we  shall  never  know  for  certain,  because  we  have  nothing 
to  guide  us  but  her  statement,  whether  the  way  in  which  that  bottle 
got  out  of  the  house  was  that  it  was  in  her  pocket  on  1st  January, 
or  that  she  had  put  it  into  the  drawer  on  that  night  or  on  the 
morning  of  1st  January,  and  before  she  called  the  people  up,  and 
left  it  &ere  until  the  seals  were  taken  off  the  room.  Now,  you 
know,  gentlemen,  if  that  man  took  that  poison  non-oriminally,  the 
bottle  must  have  been  on  the  mantelshelf,  and  it  must  have  been  on 
the  mantelshelf  at  a tolerably  late  period  of  the  night.  What  is 
the  fact?  That  about  half-past  four  in  the  morning  that  bottle 
had  disappeared,  and  all  we  know  for  certain  of  it  is  that  it  was 
never  seen  again. 

With  regard  to  Dr.  Leach,  I desire  to  speak  of  his  evidence 
with  every  respect  which  a sense  of  duty  will  allow  me.  I am 
sorry  for  him  to  have  been  placed  in  a position  of  exceptional  diffi- 
culty, and  one  must  make  great  allowance  for  a man  who  is  evi- 
dently possemed  of  a self-consciousness  that  not  even  tiie  solemnity 
of  this  inquiry  could  still  for  a moment,  and  which  undoubtedly 
detracts  from  the  value  of  his  evidence,  because  one  never  knew 
where  facts  ended  and  inferences  began,  and  one  never  knew  when 
one  was  getting  the  unvarnished  efforts  of  memory  or  the  im- 
presmons  of  a not  very  strong-headed  man  painfully  haunted  by 
the  idea  that  he  is  the  central  personage  in  a drama  of  surpassing 
interest.  Tt  is  one  of  the  great  difficulties,  one  of  the  oircum- 


Mr  Jurtice  WUlt 


Charge  to  the  Jury. 


stances  which  has  made  this  investigation  exceptionally  difficult, 
that,  for  reasons  of  a kind  very  different  from  those  which  apply 
to  Dyson,  you  cannot  trust,  without  correcting  it  by  your  own 
judgment,  the  impressions  or  statements  of  Dr.  Leach.  But  1 
have  no  doubt  whatever  that  Dr.  Leach  means  to  tell  the  truths  1 
do  not  suppose  anybody  in  this  Court  thinks  he  means  to  do  other- 
wise j and  without  attributing  to  him  the  genius  of  a detective  in 
a French  novel,  and  without  supposing  that  he  is  gifted  with  any- 
thing beyond  an  average  degree  of  human  intelligence,  surely  his 
instinct  must  have  told  him,  when  that  man  was  lying  dead  before 
him  mysteriously  from  some  cause  that  he  knew  nothing  to  suggest, 
and  when  he  could  find  nothing  to  account  for  the  death — surely 
he  must  have  been  strangely  constituted  if  he  did  not  feel  it  to  be 
one  of  his  first  duties  to  ascertain  with  care  whether  there  was 
anything  close  at  hand,  or  under  the  touch  of  immediate  observa- 
tion, which  could  account  for  this  dreadful  mystery.  And  if  there 
is  one  thing  that  Dr.  Leach  is  clear  about,  it  is  that  he  did  look  for 
bottles;  he  found  the  chlorodyne,  which  had  escaped  the  observation 
of  Mr.  Doggett;  and  if  there  is  one  thing  he  is  clear  about,  it  is 
that  this  bottle  was  not  there. 

What  had  become  of  it  1 The  only  account  we  have  respecting 
it  is  that  given  by  Mrs.  Bartlett  herself  on  26th  January,  when, 
according  to  Dr.  Leach,  she  told  him  that  she  put  it  in  the  drawer 
in  the  other  room  some  hours  later  than  his  visit — she  believed 
about  breakfast  time.  But  where  was  it  in  the  meantime?  Why 
on  earth  should  it  be  gone  from  that  mantelpiece,  and  gone  from 
any  place  where  it  could  be  readily  found?  Now,  gentlemen,  1 
watched  with  more  care  and  more  anxiety  yesterday  the  learned 
counsers  address  on  this  point  than  I did  on  any  other.  He  could 
not  give  any  satisfactory  explanation.  1 should  be  unworthy  to 
sit  here — 1 ^ould  be  useless  for  the  purpose  for  which  I have  been 
appointed,  if  1 did  not  make  this  olWvation  to  you.  1 am  well 
aware  whither  it  points,  and  1 am  well  aware  of  the  momentous 
character  of  this  part  of  the  inquiry,  but  it  is  a question  which 
you  have  to  face;  you  will  have  to  yourselves,  when  you  retire 
to  that  room,  what  happened  to  that  bottle?  I can  give  you  no 
help.  All  we  know  is  that  which  1 have  stated;  to  which  must  be 
added  that  to  Dr.  Leach — I suppose  on  the  occasion  when  she  made 
tBe  statement  that  he  afterwards  reduced  into  writing  in  the  sen- 
sational document  we  have  heard  so  much  of — she  said  it  had  been 
on  the  mantelpiece.  That  is  to  say,  that  it  was  on  the  chimney- 
piece  either  when  he  made  his  search  or  when  he  was  sent  for,  and 
he  says,  1 cannot  tell  which,  but  I can  hardly  think  she  said  it 
was  there  when  1 was  there,  because  she  knew  that  I had  looked  for 
everything.”  ^ 

• Now,  if  it  had  been  moved  from  the  mantelpiece,  or  wherever 
else  it  was  standing,  there  wag  but  one  person  who  could  do  that; 

391 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Mr  Juatice  Will* 

and,  if  so,  you  have  this  most  remarkable  conversation  carried  on 
between  Dr.  Leach  and  that  person,  who  must  have  had  that  chloro- 
form bottle  in  her  possession  at  the  very  time  it  was  taking  place. 

I discussed/'  said  Dr.  Leach,  the  various  alkaloids,  and  I said, 

‘ This  little  bottle  of  chlorodyne,  how  did  he  come  to  have  this?  ' " 
“ Oh,"  she  says,  “ he  washed  his  teeth  with  it  at  night."  " Then 
he  may  have  swallowed  some  of  it."  " He  could  not  have  done 
that,  l^cause  he  only  put  it  on  his  gums."  " Well,  then,"  says 
Dr.  Leach,  “ if  that  is  so,  we  ought  to  find  traces  of  it,  he  must 
have  spat  it  out  " ; and  1 went  and  looked,"  he  said,  using  an 
unnecessary  periphrasis  to  describe  the  chamber-pot,  and  he  did 
not  find  it  there.  Chlorodyne  and  chloroform  are  things  that  smell 
more  or  less  alike,  so  much  alike  that  Dr.  Leach  himself  said  of  the 
chloroform  in  the  stomach,  **  Well,  they  must  have  mistaken 
chlorodyne  for  chloroform."  How  strange,  when  there  was  this 
anxious  discussion  to  ascertain  the  cause  of  death,  how  strange  that 
the  person  who  had  a large  bottle  of  fatal  stufi  closely  resembling 
in  properties  and  smell  the  chlorodyne  under  discussion,  should 
have  said  nothing  about  it.  Of  course,  gentlemen — I may  say  this 
in  anticipation,  though  it  will  come  more  naturally  later — if  you 
can  accept  the  explanation  given  to  Dr.  Leach  on  the  26th,  there 
is  a reason  for  it,  because  if  you  can  accept  that  account  there  are 
certain  principles  of  modesty  and  reserve  and  delicacy  which  might 
very  well  have  prevented  any  woman,  except  under  extreme  neces- 
sity, telling  the  story  which  was  detailed  to  Dr.  Leach.  And,  as  it 
seems  to  me,  a vast  deal  in  this  case  must  depend,  after  all  is  said 
and  done,  on  what  you  think  of  that  story;  because,  admit  its 
possible  truth,  and  it  equally  explains  away  the  false  statements 
said  to  have  been  made  to  Mr.  Dyson  when  he  was  asked  to  procure 
chloroform.  There  would  be  the  same  reason  in  both  cases  for 
suppressing  the  real  purpose  for  which  it  was  obtained,  and  the 
same  reason  for  assigning  some  motive  other  than  the  true  one. 

Well,  now,  on  this  same  1st  of  January  we  come  again  to  a 
circumstance  which  is  much  pleasanter  for  me  to  dwell  upon;  it 
is  undoubtedly  a most  extraordinary  piece  of  conduct  if  this  woman 
was  guilty  of  administering  chloroform  to  this  man.  Who  was 
it  who  pressed  for  the  immediate  post-mortem  examination  ? Tou 
know  there  is  no  doubt  about  this;  it  does  not  depend  on  Dr. 
Leach's  anxiety  to  construct  a drama  which  shall  look  as  if  <t 
came  out  of  a sensational  novel,  or  upon  anything  except  perfectly 
satisfactory  testimony.  Dr.  Leach's  telegrams  to  Dr.  Green  are 
the  most  conclusive  proof  that  die  was  anxious,  and  that  that 
anxiety  was  acted  on,  to  procure  the  immediate  examination  of  the 
body.  Now,  grant  that  she  knew  nothing  about  chloroform,  grant 
that  she  might  know  little  about  its  medical  properties,  there 
are  very  few  men  and  women  so  ignorant  in  this  country  as  pot 
to  know  that  an  immediate  examination  would  increase  the  chances 


Mr  Jartice  Wills 


Charge  to  the  Jury. 


of  detection.  We  are  not  dealing  with  the  case  of  an  ignorant 
or  stupid  person,  but  of  a person  of  considerable  education,  and 
I should  think  of  considerable  intelligence.  Few  guilty  persona 
would  show  an  anxiety  to  precipitate  an  examination  of  that  kind. 
It  is  common  enough,  when  the  thing  is  inevitable,  to  offer  no  difi&- 
culties  and  to  throw  no  obstacles  in  the  way,  because  many  persons 
are  intelligent  enough  to  know  that,  when  it  comes  to  that  point, 
the  best  thing  they  can  do  is  to  act  like  honest  people.  But  it 
would  have  teen  so  easy  to  say,  without  exciting  the  smallest  sus- 
picion, Cannot  you  leave  it  till  to-morrow?  or  say,  “ You  can 
have  it  as  soon  as  you  like  j but  I should  think  the  day  after  to- 
morrow would  do.’*  And  no  human  being  would  have  thought 
of  suspecting  anything  because  that  line  was  taken.  But  there  is 
nothing  of  the  kind ; it  is  her  active  interference  which  precipitates 
the  post-mortem  examination.  And  it  is  a fact  of  extreme 
gravity  and  importance,  to  the  full  benefit  of  which,  in  this  time 
of  di£Biculty,  she  is  entitled,  and  if  words  of  mine  can  add  anything 
to  the  weight  of  the  powerful  observations  made  by  Mr.  Clarke 
yesterday  upon  this  point,  they  shall  not  be  wanting.  I wish  to 
give  my  emphatic  expression  of  cordial  agreement  with  all  that  he 
said  upon  that  subject.  It  was  not  her  fault,  and  it  was  not  her 
doing,  that  that  man’s  body  was  not  opened  and  examined  within 
a very  few  hours  after  his  death  j and  I cannot  persuade  myself 
that,  however  little  she  may  have  known  about  chloroform — it  is 
plain,  if  her  statement  to  Dr.  Leach  is  to  be  taken  as  an  expression 
of  how  much  she  knew,  that  it  was  very  little — ^there  is  any  person 
of  average  intelligence,  of  her  time  of  life,  in  this  country  who 
does  not  know  that  a post-mortem  examination,  in  a case  of  this 
kind,  is  worth  double  or  treble  as  much  if  performed  a few  hours 
after  death  as  it  is  worth  if  delayed  any  considerable  time.  This, 
therefore,  is  a point  of  extreme  importance  in  her  favour. 

The  Court  adjourned  for  a short  time. 

Gentlemen  of  the  jury,  I had  got  to  the  very  important  point 
when  the  post-mortem  was  decided  upon.  The  next  day  the  post- 
mortem took  place,  and  the  post-mortem  disclosed  the  fact  that  tiiere 
were  grounds  for  suspecting  that  chloroform  was  the  cause  of 
death.  Those  grounds  were  communicated  to  Mrs.  Bartlett;  and 
shortly  afterwards  the  resolution  was  announced  to  seal  up  the 
rooms,  and  to  treat  the  place  as  in  the  possession  of  the  ofiG.cers 
of  justice.  And  then  Mrs.  Bartlett  offered  her  keys  to  Dr.  Leach, 
and  told  him  to  look  in  the  drawer  or  drawers  for  her  hat,  and  he 
brought  the  drawer  to  her.  She  has  said  since  that  at  that  time 
the  bottle  of  chloroform  was  in  the  chest  of  drawers.  There  were 
two  drawers;  you  remember  Dr.  Leach  said  so.  In  the  second  of 
thSm  he  did  not  look.  As  I have  pointed  out  before,  of  the  history 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Mr  Jurtiee  Wills 

of  that  bottle  we  have  no  trace.  We  have  no  evidence  except  Mrs. 
Bartlett’s  own  statement.  She  went  away  from  the  house ; she  left 
her  bag  behind  her,  and  everything  else ; and  she  left  with  the  kiss 
of  her  husband’s  father  on  her  cheek — a kiss  which,  I think,  might 
well  have  been  epared,  seeing  that  he  was  at  the  same  moment 
searching  her  pockets,  and  feeling  her  cloak,  to  see  whether  she 
took  anything  away  with  her.  At  all  events,  that  conduct  of  his 
prevents  the  suspicion  of  her  having  taken  anything  away  with 
her  on  that  occasion  which  was  not  already  in  her  pocket.  As  I 
pointed  out,  that  bottle  may  have  been  either  in  the  drawer  or  in 
her  pocket,  and  where  exactly  it  was  no  human  being  can  tell. 

That  night  Mr.  Dyson  took  her  to  Mrs.  Matthews,  and,  accord- 
ing to  Mr.  Dyson,  some  conversation  took  place  on  the  way  about 
the  chloroform;  and  I can  hardly  help  thinking  that  some  con- 
versation of  that  kind  must  have  taken  place,  and  for  this  reason — 
Mr.  Dyson  knew  that  he  had  bought  chloroform,  and  had  handed 
chloroform  to  her,  and  he  knew  that  the  smell  of  chloroform  had 
been  detected  in  the  contents  of  this  man’s  stomach;  and  Mr.  Dyson, 
whatever  he  is,  is  no  fool,  and  he  must  have  put  this  and  that 
together,  and  he  must  have  begun  already  to  feel  uneasy  about  his 
own  share  in  the  transaction.  He  had  his  own  special  reasons  for 
being  uneasy,  for  there  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that  at  that  time 
she  knew  he  had  told  lies  to  procure  the  chloroform ; he  had  talked 
about  the  chloroform,  but  there  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that  she 
knew  how  he  had  procured  it ; therefore  it  was  natural  enough  that 
Mr.  Dyson  should  have  had  with  her  some  such  conversation  as  he 
alleges.  I do  not  dwell  upon  what  he  said,  or  what  he  says  she  said  in 
reply,  because  we  are  more  or  less  getting  evidence  from  a tainted 
source,  from  a man  who,  when  he  gave  his  account,  was  wanting 
to  relieve  himself  from  any  suspicion  in  the  matter.  But  we  do  know 
this — so  great  was  his  uneasiness  that  on  the  Sunday  morning,  as 
he  went  to  his  church,  he  sanctified  the  Sabbath  by  throwing  away 
these  bottles  in  the  place  he  afterwards  pointed  out  to  a police 
constable,  and  where  a bottle  was  found.  There  is  no  doubt  about 
his  telling  the  truth  upon  this  point.  On  the  4th,  Monday  morning, 
he  was  early  at  Dr.  Leach’s,  and  was  inquiring  of  him,  we  do  not 
know  exactly  what,  but  it  was  no  doubt  something  more  about  the 
post-mortem  and  i^e  appearances  of  the  deceased.  He  went  from 
there  to  Mrs.  Matthews,  to  see  Mrs.  Bartlett ; and  there  took  plage 
that  remarkable  scene  which  has  been  alluded  to  more  than  once. 
He  was  engaged  in  conversation  alone  with  Mrs.  Bartlett  when  Mrs. 
Matthews  came  in.  She  found  Mrs.  Bartlett,  the  prisoner,  in  a 
state  of  excitement  and,  as  she  says,  stamping  about  the  floor,  and 
die  had  heard  the  stamping  before  she  had  come  in.  She  asked 
what  it  meant,  and,  after  a considerable  time,  Mrs.  Bartlett  said 
it  was  over  a piece  of  paper  or  a piece  of  poetry  which  Mr.  Dyson 
had  been  troubling  her  about,  Mrs.  Matihews  left  the  room,  but 

394 


charge  to  the  Jury. 

Mr  Juatice  Will* 

she  came  in  again,  and  she  came  in  at  a very  critical  point  in  the 
conversation,  where  Mr.  Dyson  was  saying,  “ But  did  not  you  tell 
me  that  Edwin  was  not  likely  to  live  long?  ” Whereupon  the 
prisoner  said,  “ No,  I did  not.''  And  thereupon  Mr.  Dyson  eaid, 
“ Oh,  my  God  I " and  bowed  his  head  on  the  piano.  Now,  I feel 
a very  strong  conviction  myself  that  we  do  not  know  the  whole  of 
the  story,  and  do  not  know  precisely  what  did  pass  on  that  occasion 
to  lead  up  to  this  exclamation — ^because  I cannot  understand  the 
connection  between  the  denial  on  her  part  that  she  had  told  him 
that  Edwin  was  not  likely  to  live  long,  and  this  expression  of  his, 
Oh,  my  God  1 " We  want  the  key  to  it;  perhaps  it  does  not  suit 
Mr.  Dyson's  purpose  to  give  it  us.  But  it  is  plain  that  at  that  time 
Mr.  Dyson  was  challenging  her  with  having  told  him  that  her 
husband  was  not  likely  to  live  long,  and  that  die  denied  it ; and 
then  Mrs.  Matthews  advised  Mr.  Dyson  to  leave,  and  as  he  left  the 
room  he  said,  I am  a ruined  man  i " I have  no  doubt  that  the 
account  of  that  interview  given  by  Mrs.  Matthews  had  a very 
material  effect  upon  the  decision  that  was  come  to  by  the  Attorney- 
General,  and  the  counsel  associated  with  him,  in  determining  to 
offer  no  evidence  against  Mr.  Dyson,  because  undoubtedly  the 
tenor  of  it  is  greatly  in  his  favour  upon  the  critical  point  which 
they  had  to  consider  in  determining  whether  they  would  proceed 
further  againet  him  or  not. 

He  returned  the  same  evening,  and  on  that  occasion,  according, 
to  himself— and  looking  hero  again  at  a subsequent  part  of  the 
case,  I think  there  is  no  reason  to  doubt  that  he  is  telling  the 
truth — ^he  expressed  his  determination  to  make  a clean  breast  of  it, 
and  to  tell  the  share  that  he  had  had  in  procuring  this  drug.  On 
the  4th  the  coroner's  ofiScer  took  possession  of  &e  bottles  which 
had  been  sealed  up,  including  no  less  than  iJiirty-six  bottles  of  Dr. 
Leach's  stuff  which  this  unhappy  man  had  taken,  and  carried  them 
off  to  the  analyst,  Dr.  Stevenson.  He  there  left  l^e  matter,  making 
no  search,  and  so  depriving  us  of  the  advantage  of  knowing  what 
the  contents  of  the  room  were  at  that  time.  The  next  day  Mr. 
Dyson  and  the  prisoner  do  not  seem  to  have  met,  and  nothing 
seems  to  have  taken  place  of  any  importance. 

On  Wednesday,  the  6th,  Mr,  D^on  went  in  the  morning  with 
some  letters  which  Mr.  Wood  had  given  him  to  take  to  Mrs.  Bartlett 
-Hseme  letters  of  the  deceased's — and  Mrs.  Matthews,  Mrs.  Bartlett, 
and  Mr.  Dyson  went  together  to  Victoria  Station,  and  before  three 
o'clock  in  the  afternoon  they  were  with  Dr.  Leach.  Dr.  Leach  saw 
Mrs.  Bartlett,  and  had  a long  interview  with  her.  Mrs.  Matthews 
says  that  she  and  Mr.  Dyson  were  left  alone  for  about  an  hour.  In 
the  course  of  that  interview  Dr.  Leach  pressed  Mrs.  Bartlett  to 
account  for  the  period  which  elapsed  between  the  time  she  and 
her  hueband  went  to  rest  and  the  time  when  Dr.  Leadi  was  sum- 
moned in  the  morning;  and  Dr,  I^eadh,  who  was  more  full  of  his 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Mr  Justice  Wills 

own  impressions  than  anything  else  which  he  had  to  tell  us  about, 
says  that  he  thought  the  account  satisfactory;  but  he  cannot  tell 
us  one  single  word  of  what  it  was.  1 see  no  reason  to  suppose  that 
it  was  anything  more  than  what  she  had  told  him  before.  Then 
they  went  home ; she  had  had  her  keys  returned  to  her ; the  servant 
says  die  visited  the  rooms ; and  she  herself  told  both  Mrs.  Matthews 
and  Dr.  Leach  that  upon  that  occasion,  on  the  way  home  to  Herne 
Hill,  where  she  was  stopping  with  Mrs.  Matthews,  she  took  advantage 
of  the  opportunity  the  railway  journey  afforded  her  to  pour  out 
the  chloroform  and  get  rid  of  it,  and  that  then  she  threw  the 
bottle  away  into  a pond  on  the  Common,  and,  having  done  that, 
returned  home.  And  that  is  the  whole  of  the  information  we  possess 
as  to  what  became  of  the  bottle.  It  undoubtedly  never  was  seen 
by  any  one  else  after  the  night  when  this  fatal  occurrence  took 
place.  That  same  evening  of  the  6th  Mr.  Dyson  fixed  the  position 
by  announcing  to  Mr.  Matthews  his  intention  of  making  a clean 
breast  of  the  whole  affair  at  the  inquest.  Mr.  Matthews  said,  what 
was  not,  I think,  at  all  unnatural  under  the  circumstances, 
'‘Wait.  The  contents  of  the  stomach  have  gone  to  be  analysed; 
wait  and  see  if  there  is  any  necessity  for  you  to  make  any  further 
disclosure ; see  what  the  cause  of  death  is,  and  hold  your  peace  for 
the  present.’^ 

On  Thursday,  the  7th,  the  inquest  took  place.  Not  very  much 
evidence  was  given  then,  and  it  was  adjourned  for  four  weeks, 
until  4th  February,  to  await  the  result  of  the  analyst’s  examina- 
tion, and  on  that  occasion  Mr.  Dyson  dined  with  the  prisoner  at  a 
confectioner’s,  and,  as  he  says,  they  had  a talk  in  which  he  persisted 
in  his  determination  to  inform  the  coroner  and  the  world 
generally  of  his  share  in  the  purchase  of  this  chloroform.  And  I 
suppose  it  is  probable  that  he  did  so;  what  he  did  agrees  with  what 
he  says,  and  everything  seems  to  bear  it  out.  Friday,  the  8th,  was 
the  day  of  the  funeral,  and  on  Saturday,  the  9th,  in  the  afternoon, 
Mr.  Dyson,  Mrs.  Matthews,  and  Mrs.  Bartlett  went  home  together 
from  Mr.  Matthews’s  business  premises  in  the  city,  and  then  it  was 
that  Mr.  Dyson’s  last  conversation  with  Mrs.  Bartlett  took  place. 
Mr.  Dyson  did  not  like  the  turn  things  were  taking,  and  he  kept 
harping  upon  this  purchase  of  the  chloroform.  As  I pointed  out 
before,  he  had  undoubtedly  special  reasons  of  his  own  for  feeling 
great  anxiety,  because  he  would  have  been  a fool  indeed  if  he  chad 
not  been  conscious  that  the  falsehoods  he  had  told  when  he  was  pro- 
curing the  chloroform  would  be  very  likely  to  tell  with  fatal  effect 
against  him  should  any  serious  case  be  made  out  against  Mrs. 
Bartlett.  And  then  he  said,  “ Suppose  it  was  found  out  that  he 
died  from  the  effects  of  chloroform,  and  suppose  it  was  found  out 
that  I gave  you  the  chloroform?  ” Then  she  eaid,  with  every 
appearance  of  honest  indignation — there  is  no  doubt  about  that — 
" Well,  you  may  as  well  say  at  once,  if  you  mean  it,  that  Fgave 


Mr  Juitice  Will> 


Charge  to  the  Jury. 

him  the  chloroform;  say  so,  if  you  think  so,  and  do  not  mince 
matters.’’  And  then  he  said,  “ I am  not  prepared  to  go  that 
length;  but  supposing  it  were  so — ^putting  it  hypothetically — ^my 
position  would  be  a very  serious  one,  and  I should  be  a ruined 
man,”  Then  they  parted,  and  had  nothing  more  to  do  with  one 
another. 

You  remember,  gentlemen,  that  the  inquest  was  adjourned  till 
4th  February.  On  11th  January  that  conversation  took  place  with 
Mrs.  Matthews  which  I have  already  read  twice  to  you,  where  Mrs. 
Matthevrs  said,  ” Why  did  you  tell  Mr.  Dyson  these  lies?  ” and 
the  prisoner  said,  ” Well,  I could  not  get  him  to  believe  what  was 
the  truth,  namely,  that  Edwin  was  likely  to  die  soon;  and  so  I 
told  him  the  lies.”  Mrs.  Matthews  said,  ” I did  not  know  that 
Edwin  thought  he  was  going  to  die  soon.”  She  said,  “ The  fact 
of  the  matter  is,  he  thought  so  latterly.” 

Then  on  20th  January  the  prisoner  had  a conversation  with 
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Matthews,  in  which  she  told  them  Dr.  Leach  had  told 
her  chloroform  could  not  have  been  inhaled.  He  seeme  always  to 
have  been  arguing  the  matter  out  when  he  met  her  instead  of  con- 
tenting himself  with  facts — ^telling  her  chloroform  could  not  have 
been  given  by  inhalation,  because  of  this,  that,  and  the  other — ^the 
post-mortem  appearances  and  so  forth — and  she  retailed  this  con- 
versation with  Dr.  Leach  to  Mrs.  Matthews. 

The  next  date  we  have  is  26th  January,  when  the  analysia 
had  taken  place,  and  was  substantially  completed.  Something  of 
what  the  chemists  had  to  say  had  leaked  out.  It  had  come  to  Dr. 
Leaches  ears,  and  he  said  to  her,  ” I have  got  some  good  news  for 
you;  it  is  fortunate  that  no  prussic  acid  has  been  discovered, 
because  I must  tell  you  that,  if  it  were  otherwise,  there  are  people 
who  would  seriously  accuse  you  of  having  poisoned  him.”  Very 
likely  he  was  thinking  of  the  father’s  suspicions.  He  added  that 
it  was  not  prussic  acid,  but  chloroform,  that  had  been  discovered ; 
whereupon  she  said,  ” Well,  I wish  it  had  been  anything  else.” 
Then  she  proceeded  to  tell  him  this  eacfcraordinary  story — ^whioh  I 
hardly  need  read  at  length  again,  because  it  must  be  for  ever  'fixed 
in  your  memory — about  the  platonic  union  between  herself  and 
her  husband,  broken  only  by  the  solitary  act  of  coition,  which 
occurred  on  the  Sunday  afternoon,  and  resulted  in  the  child,  which 
at  its  birth.  Between  her  and  Dr.  Leach  we  get  this  story 
about  the  mystic  union — about  her  being  a wife  and  no  wife;  and, 
undoubtedly,  if  yon  believe  that,  you  may  believe  as  a part  of  the 
story  the  alleged  intention  to  wave  the  chloroform  in  the  husband’s 
face  and  so  produce  a cessation  of  his  urgency.  I do  not  know  what 
you  think  of  the  evidence  you  heard  this  morning.  It  is  difiOlcult 
after  that  to  elevate  these  people  into  the  hero  and  heroine  of  an 
exti;aordinary  sensational  romance.  It  looks  much  more  as  if  we 
had  two  persons  to  deal  with  abundantly  vulgar  and  commonplace 

397 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 

Mr  iiutice  Wills 

in  their  habits  and  ways  of  life.  After  that  disclosure,  how  can 
you  for  a moment  follow  in  the  track  of  Dr,  Leach  and  believe 
that  there  was  anything  about  this  man  to  justify  you  in  looking 
upon  him  as  the  extraordinary  creature,  almost  belonging  to  another 
world,  that  Dr.  Leach  talks  about,  or  to  make  it  likely  that  the 
relations  of  this  man  and  this  woman  were  such  as  were  never 
heard  of  before?  When  Dr.  Leach’s  grounds  come  to  be  examined, 
they  turn  out  to  be  none.  Dr.  Leach  is  one  of  those  persons  who 
likes  to  see  a long  way  into  a milestone.  Apparently  he  is  tickled 
with  a story  of  romance  and  sensational  incident,  and  he  says  to 
you,  Oh,  I wish  you  could  see  the  pictures  that  1 have  before 
my  mind’s  eye ! I wish  you  could  see  this  man,  and  see  these  things 
which  1 saw  but  cannot  communicate,  which  made  it  apparent  to 
me  that  he  might  have  had  this  non-sexual  connection  with  the 
wife  he  had  lived  with  and  slept  with  in  the  same  bed  for  so  many 
years!  ” 

Well,  gentlemen,  I do  not  know — may  be  wrong  in  looking 
at  the  things  of  life  from  the  common  points  of  view,  and  one  must 
try  to  avoid  that  error  if  there  really  is  anything  extremely  excep- 
tional in  the  case;  but  when  I read,  two  or  three  weeks  ago,  that 
French  letters  had  been  found  in  this  man’s  possession,  I had  a 
strong  suspicion  that,  before  the  case  was  over,  they  would  throw 
some  light  upon  the  matter.  I little  anticipated  what  it  would 
It  did  occur  to  me  that  this  story  told  to  Dr.  Leach  was  the 
poeticised  version  of  the  use  of  these  French  letters ; further  it  did 
occur  to  me — and  I was  prepared  to  put  it  before  you  as  a thing 
to  be  taken  into  your  consideration — that  the  pocket  of  a man’s 
trousers  was  not  the  place  in  which  he  would  keep  these  articles 
for  domestic  use,  and  that  they  might  point  to  something  else  in 
Mr.  Bartlett’s  habits ; but  what  we  have  heard  to-day,  if  it  is  true — 
and  what  earthly  reason  is  there  to  doubt  its  truth? — showe  ^at  if 
these  things  were  destined  for  external  use,  as  they  very  likely 
may  have  been,  they  were  also  used  at  home.  And  then  what 
becomes  of  this  morbid  romance  about  the  non-sexual  connection, 
and  what  becomes  of  the  man  with  such  exalted  ideas  about  matri- 
mony that  he  thought  the  wife  whom  he  elected  for  his  companion 
too  sacred  to  be  touched?  The  whole  foundation  for  that  baseless 
illusion  is  swept  away  by  the  one  eentence  which  you  heard  in  the 
witness-box  to-day.  I am  sorry  to  say  it,  gentlemen,  but,  unlesD 
do,  how  can  I discharge  the  duty  that  falls  upon  me  of  administer- 
ing even-handed  justice,  careless  as  to  results,  or  at  least  only 
thinking  about  results  in  so  far  as  they  tend  to  make  me  careful 
beyond  measure  of  every  step  in  the  process  by  which  they  are 
arrived  at?  How  can  I let  this  vital  part  of  the  story  pass  without 
this  criticism?  And  if  the  one  little  grain  of  truth  which  is 
generally  to  be  found  in  any  romance,  in  any  story  of  f alsehoo(L  be 
found  in  these  artides  and  in  the  use  habitually  made  of  them 

998 


charge  to  the  Jury. 

Mr  Justice  Wills 

between  husband  and  wife,  what  becomes  of  the  whole  story  of  the 
use  for  which  the  chloroform  was  wanted?  Does  not  it  go  by  the 
board  2 I know  not  how  to  look  at  it  from  any  other  point  of  view, 
and,  if  that  story  be  exploded,  what,  after  all,  are  you  left  to  face? 
Chloroform  procured  for  an  unexplained  and  an  inexplicable  pur- 
pose; death  by  chloroform;  the  bottle  disappearing,  and,  by  the 
statement  of  this  woman  herself,  emptied  and  thrown  away  by  her ; 
and  when  at  last  the  state  of  things  has  been  set  up  which  renders 
it  no  longer  possible  to  keep  silence,  an  explanation  given,  which 
ie  a tissue  of  romance  such  as,  if  the  evidence  of  Annie  Walker  he 
accepted,  could  deceive  no  one  but  the  ecstatic  person  to  whom  it 
was  originally  detailed. 

Gentlemen,  this  is  the  stress  of  the  case  against  Mrs.  Bartlett. 
1 am  anxious  not  to  make  too  much  of  this  disappearance  of  the 
bottle.  The  conduct  of  people  who  once  suppose  that  a state  of  cir- 
cumstances has  arisen,  or  is  going  to  arise,  which  may  place  them 
under  suspicion,  is  apt  to  be  the  same  whether  they  are  guilty  or 
innocent,  because,  when  once  such  a state  of  things  is  set  up,  the 
same  class  of  motives  may  operate  with  the  innocent  as  with  the 
guilty,  and  I am  always  myself  careful  to  point  out  to  a jury — 
careful  to  mark,  in  the  exercise  of  my  own  judgment — ^the  moment 
at  which  that  kind  of  influence  arises,  because  I am  satisfied,  from 
long  experience,  that  the  stress  which  is  put  upon  subsequent 
conduct  is  oftentimes  unduly  great.  And,  therefore,  take  all  that 
has  been  said  and  can  be  said  about  the  disappearance  of  tha 
bottle,  and  about  the  lack  of  satisfactory  explanation,  with  every 
grain  of  allowance  of  that  kind;  but  after  all  you  are  faced  with 
these  facts,  which  there  is  no  getting  out  of— chloroform  handed 
to  her;  chloroform  in  her  possession;  chloroform  killing  the 
man ; the  bottle  of  chloroform  disappearing,  and  no  account  of  it 
save  the  one  we  have  been  discussing.  That  account,  no  doubt,  is 
extremely  material  if  you  can  believe  it,  because  it  would  dispose 
of  every  circumstance  of  suspicion  as  to  the  purchase  of  the  chloro- 
form and  as  to  the  subsequent  silence  about  it ; but  it  is  for  you  to 
say  whether  you  can  possibly,  consistently  with  your  oaths  and  con- 
sistently with  your  consciences,  accept  it,  or  whether  you  must  not 
look  at  it  as  the  expression,  in  adorned  and  imaginative  language, 
of  the  simple  and  vulgar  fact  that  they  had  come  to  the  determina- 
^ti#n  to  have  no  more  children,  and  that  their  intercourse  from  tiiiat 
time  forward  was  upon  that  footing — either  by  the  occupation  of 
separate  beds  as  in  Claverton  Street,  or  by  the  other  means  which 
I will  not  characterise — and  whether,  in  that  event,  the  statement 
made  to  Dr.  Leach  is  anything  more  than  an  amplified  and 
etherealised  version  of  that  vulgar  fact. 

Gentlemen,  if  you  think  you  ought  not  to  believe  it — if,  in  the 
face  of  Almighty  God,  before  whom  we  are  performing  this  solemn 
<3iuty,  you  feel  that  you  cannot  do  so,  you  must  not  flinch  from 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Mr  Jttfttica  Willi 

the  consequences.  Give  to  the  prisoner  the  full  advantage  of 
those  circumstances  of  exceptional  weight  to  which  I have  drawn 
your  attention,  and  which  I will  not  recapitulate — not  because  I 
wish  you  not  to  give  them  their  full  effect,  but  because  I know 
they  are  present  to  your  minds.  Give  her  the  full  benefit  of  all 
such  considerations.  But  remember,  after  all,  we  are  dealing  with 
the  case  of  a married  woman  who  had  fallen  into  a 
perilous  friendship  with  a man  who  was  not  her  hus-i 
band,  whose  husband  could  have  been,  in  the  latter 
portion  of  his  life,  no  attractive  object,  either  mentally  or 
physically,  and  as  to  the  most  important  circumstances  connected 
with  whose  disappearance  from  this  world  the  only  explanation 
you  have  been  enabled  to  get  is  one  which,  as  it  seems  to  me, 
cannot  stand  in  the  presence  of  these  vulgar  facts. 

If  you  think  it  can  stand,  by  all  means  take  a different  view. 

I am  not  the  jury;  you  are  liie  jury.  The  last  thing  that  would 
ever  occur  to  my  mind  would  he  to  feel  a sense  of  embarrassment 
or  annoyance,  or  a shadow  of  regret,  if  you  were  able  to  take  a 
different  view  of  facts  from  that  which  presents  itself  to  my 
mind.  Upon  some  points  I am  sure  we  shall  be  agreed — upon  all 
those  which  I have  pointed  out  as  making  in  this  woman’s  favour 
— such,  for  instance,  as  her  own  conduct  and  the  difiSculty  of  the 
operation  involved  in  the  theory  of  murder.  Strong  they  are,  un- 
doubtedly. Upon  all  these,  I am  sure  you  agree  with  me  in  what 
I have  said-  If  you  think,  as  to  other  matters  upon  which  it 
has  been  my  sacred  duty,  in  the  interests  of  society  and  of  justice, 
to  point  out  considerations  of  a different  aspect,  that  you  ought  to 
differ  from  me,  if  you  think  I have  strained  them,  if  you  think  I 
have  not  made  sufficient  allowance  for  phases  of  life  which  I 
have  not  understood,  if  you  think  that  anywhere  or  in  any  way  I 
have  erred  on  the  aide  of  severity,  the  last  thing  that  would  occur 
to  my  mind  would  be  to  feel  any  tinge  of  regret  that  you  should 
have  done  so.  But  you  must  do  your  duty;  and  if  you  think  that, 
after  all  is  said  and  done,  the  facts  are  too  cogent,  and  that,  when 
you  come  to  balance  the  probabilities  and  the  improbabilities, 
your  minds  are  really  in  no  suspense — in  no  such  doubt  as  would 
induce  you,  in  the  serious  and  grave  transactions  of  your  own  lives, 
to  pause  or  hesitate— then  it  would  be  your  bounden  duty  to  act 
upon  your  convictions,  however  painful  the  consequences  may  Be.^ 
If  your  state  of  mind  should  fall  short  of  that ; if  either  you  can 
concur  in  the  emphatic  appeal  by  the  learned  counsel  for  the  defence 
to  acquit  his  client  because  you  believe  her  innocent,  or  if, 
falling  short  of  that  state  of  mind,  you  still  are  unable,  after 
facing  the  question  like  men,  and  after  looking  at  these  diffi- 
culties from  all  sides,  to  make  up  your  minds,  and  you  remain 
in  a state  of  honest  and  conscientious  doubt,  why,  then,  in  that 
case  also,  the  prisoner  would  be  entitled  to  her  acquittal. 

400 


charge  to  the  Jury. 

Mr  Justice  Wills 

Gentlemen,  my  task  is  done.  I can  add  nothing,  I think,  to 
the  observations  which  I have  felt  it  my  duty  to  lay  before  you 
to  assist  you  in  this  matter.  It  is  not  by  minute  attention  to 
every  triviality  that  a question  of  this  kind  can  be  decided.  One 
must,  after  all,  investigate  this  as  one  should  investigate  every 
other  case,  upon  the  broad  lines  of  the  well-known  prii^iples  of 
human  nature,  upon  the  broad  lines  of  the  common  play  of  human 
passions  and  affection,  and  upon  the  broad  lines  of  manly,  honest, 
good  sense ; and  if  any  other  lines  than  these  be  followed,  whether 
it  be  in  one  direction  or  the  other,  an  irreparable  mischief  will  be 
done  to  society  and  to  the  country  and  the  life  of  which  we  form 
a part. 

I now  dismiss  you  to  your  task.  Should  there  be  any  of  these 
documents  that  you  may  wish  to  consult,  you  will  tell  me,  and  they 
shall  be  handed  to  you.  I imagine  that  the  matters  which  rest 
upon  them  are  so  completely  on  the  fringe  of  this  case,  and  have 
so  infinitely  little  weight  in  comparison  with  the  momentous  ques- 
tions to  which  the  latter  portion  of  my  address  to  you  has  been 
directed,  that  in  all  probability  you  will  scarcely  care  to  see  them. 
They  are  at  your  disposal  if  you  wish  it.  And  now,  gentlemen, 
be  pleased  to  retire  to  perform  your  task  in  this  difficult  and 
anxious  business. 

The  jury  retired  to  consider  their  verdict  at  seven 
minutes  to  three.  They  returned  into  Court  at  five 
minutes  to  four. 

Mr.  JtJSTiOH  Wills — Gentlemen,  you  have  asked  me  two  ques- 
tions on  matters  of  fact,  and  1 thought  it  more  proper  that  my 
answers  should  be  given  in  public. 

The  first  question  you  have  asked  me  is,  what  the  evidence  is 
as  to  the  time  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Doggett  went  to  bed  on  1st  January. 
I should  say,  from  my  recollection,  there  is  no  evidence  of  the 
time  they  went  to  bed  on  the  night  of  the  Slst,  though  the  servant 
went  to  bed  after  midnight.  I shall  be  corrected  if  1 am  wrong, 
but  I think  there  is  no  evidence  of  the  time  when  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
Doggett  went  to  bed. 

The  second  question  is,  whether  Dr.  Leach  searched  one 
drawer  or  two.  "^at  he  specifically  said  was,  that  he  did  not 
search  the  second  drawer,  but  the  first  drawer  he  brought  in  un- 
searched, bodily,  and  then  Mrs.  Bartlett  took  her  hat  out  of  it. 
The  second  drawer  he  did  not  open* 

Mr.  Poland — ^Mr.  and  Mrs.  Doggett  are  here,  my  lord,  if 
you  wish  to  ask  them. 

Mr.  Justice  Wills — can  ask  them  the  question,  certainly. 
Oi^e  of  them  will  do.  Mr.  Doggett,  what  time  did  you  go  to  bed 
on^the  night  of  31st  December  1 
In 


401 


Adelaide  Bartlett. 


Mr  Juitiee  WiU« 

The  Forbmait — Or  the  morning  of  the  Ist? 

Mr.  Doggett — ^Between  twenty-five  minutes  and  half-past 
twelve,  my  lord,  as  near  as  I can  fix  it.  It  was  quite  twenty 
minutes,  and  past — ^twenty-five. 

Mr.  Justice  Wills — ^Those  are  the  answers,  gentlemen.  Do 
you  wish  to  retire  again  7 

The  Foreman — ^Yes,  my  lord. 

The  jury  again  retired  at  ten  minutes  past  four.  They 
returned  into  Court  at  five  o’clock. 

The  Clerk  of  the  Court^ — Gentlemen,  have  you  agreed  upon 
your  verdict? 

The  Foreman — ^We  have. 

The  Clerk  of  the  Court — ^Do  you  find  the  prisoner,  Adelaide 
Bartlett,  guilty  or  not  guilty? 

The  Foreman — We  have  well  considered  the  evidence,  and, 
although  we  think  grave  suspicion  is  attached  to  the  prisoner,  we 
do  not  think  there  is  sufficient  evidence  to  show  how  or  by  whom 
the  chloroform  was  administered. 

The  Clerk  op  the  Court — ^Then  you  say  that  the  prisoner  is 
not  guilty,  gentlemen? 

The  Foreman — ^Not  guilty. 

At  the  announcement  of  the  verdict  there  was  immense 

cheering  in  the  Court  and  outside. 

¥ 

Mr.  Justice  Wills — ^This  conduct  is  an  outrage.  A Court  of 
justice  is  not  to  be  turned  into  a theatre  by  such  indecent  exhibi- 
tions. Gentlemen,  it  only  remains  for  me  to  express  my  grateful 
sense  of  the  undivided  attention  which  you  have  given  to  this 
case,  and  the  ^eerfulneas  with  which  you  have  submitted  to  in- 
evitable privation  and  the  disturbance  of  your  usual  habits  and 
family  intercourse. 

I hope  we  shall  not  be  insulted  again  by  an  exhibition  of  the 
chara^r  just  witnessed,  which  is  disgraceful  to  those  who  take 
part  in  it,  and  who  forget  that  the  occasion  is  the  most  solemn 
upon  which  men  can  be  called  on  to  perform  a public  dxity.  I 
may  add  that  it  is  permitted  to  me  to  give  practical  effect  to  mf 
sense  of  the  recognition  due  to  your  services  by  directing  that, 
for  five  years  to  come,  each  one  of  you  shall  be  free  from  the 
obligation  jygrvin^  again- 


lIia)E  AND  PRINTED  IN  GREAT  BRITAIN 
BT 

WILLIAM  BODGE  AND  COBIPANY,  LIMITED 
EDINBURGH  AND  GLASGOW 


