Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2023 


https://archive.org/details/trialofmadeleineOO00jess 


Ls 
i 5 d me 
oy ya 
} Ds ey 7 7 
> Non hai 


+ 
t A y 
. ij I 
i tw oe 
AS “So 8 ee 
» —~ = 
= 
— 
Vien 
= : 
be 
be pe, 
hee —~ 
= 
- 4 
y 
« 
. 
\ 
n 
‘ — = 
ee 
ah 
_—— 
~ “ 
— 
~ So ine ae 
eee a 
‘ : —- 
_ 
‘ = 
; ie . 
= — 
me 
. 
z = ts 
. 
‘’ 
* 
maiSont] 
=~ 
4 bes 7 
ay 
. 


Wotable British Trials 


Madeleine Smith 


Motable British Trials Series 


General Editor—JAMES H. HODGE 


Trial Date of Trial 
MARY QUEEN oF SCOTS (1536) . 
Guy FAWKES (1605-6) 
KING CHARLES I nee 
THE BLOODY ASSIZES (1686, 
CapTaIn KIDD Lo 
JAOK SHEPPARD 1724 
CAPTAIN PORTEOUS 1736) 
THE ANNESLEY CASE (1743) 
LORD LovaT (1747) 
MARY BLANDY (1752) 
JAMES STEWART 1752 
EUGENE ARAM 1759 
KATHARINE NAIRN 1765) 
THE DOUGLAS CAUSE (1761-1769) 
DUOHESS OF KINGSTON 1776, 
DEACON BRODIE (1783 
“ BOUNTY’? MUTINEERS (1792) 
ABRAHAM THORNTON erst 
HENRY FAUNTLEROY 1824) 
THURTELL AND HUNT (1824) 
BURKE AND HARE ee 
J, B. RusH 1849. 
WILLIAM PALMER hen 
MADELEINE SMITH (1858, 
Dr. SMETHURST (1859) 
Mrs. M‘LACHLAN (1862) 
FRANZ MULLER 1864) 
Dr. PRITOWARD 1865) 
THE WAINWRIGHTS 1875) 
THE STAUNTONS (1877 
E. M. CHANTRELLE (1878) 
KATE WEBSTER 1879 
Ciry oF GLASGOW BANK 1879 
CHARLES PEACE 1879 
DR. LAMSON 1882) 
ADELAIDE BARTLETT 1886 
Mrs. MAYBRICK 1889, 
J. W. LAURIE (eer 
THE BACCARAT CASE 1891 
NEILL CREAM (1892, 
A. J. MONSON 1893, 
OSCAR WILDE 1895 
W. GARDINER (PEASENHALL) 1908 
G. CHAPMAN 1903 
§. H. DougaL (1908) 
ADOLF BECK Nee 
RoBERT WooD (1907 
OSCAR SLATER (1909-1928) 
H. H. CRIPPEN 1910, 
J. A. DIOKMAN 1910, 
STEINIE MORRISON 1911 
THE SEDDONS 1912 
GEORGE JOSEPH SMITH 1915, 
SiR ROGER CASEMENT 1 
HAROLD GREENWOOD ee 
FIELD AND GRAY 1920) 
BYWATERS AND THOMPSON (1922) 
RONALD TRUE 1992) 
H. R. ARMSTRONG 1922) 
J. P. VAQUIER He 
J. D. MERRETT 1927 
BROWNE AND KENNEDY 1928) 
Dr. KNOWLES 1928) 
SIDNEY H. Fox 1980) 
A. A. ROUSE 1981) 
THE ROYAL MAIL CAsE ed 
RATTENBURY AND STONER 193h) 
Buok RUXTON 1936 
WILLIAM JOYCE 1945. 
LEY AND SMITH (1947). 


Editor 
A. Francis Steuart 
Donald Carswell 
J.@. Muddiman 
J. G. Muddiman 
Graham Brooks 
Horace Bleackley 
William Rouchead 
Andrew Lang? 
David N. Mackay 
William Roughead 
David N. Mackay 
Eric R. Watson 
William Roughead 
A. Francis Steuart 
Lewis Melville 
William Roughead 
Owen Rutter 
Sir John Hall, Bt. 
Horace Bleackley, 
Eric R. Watson 
William Roughead 
W. Teignmouth Shore 
Eric R. Watson 
F. Tennyson Jesse 


. A. Parry 
William Roughead 
H. B. Irving 
William Roughead 
H. B. Irving) 
J. B. Atiay 
A. Duncan Smith. 
Elliott O’ Donnell 
William Wallace 
W. Teignmonth Shore 
H. L. Adam 
Sir John Hall, Bt. 
H. B. Irving 
William Roughead 
W. Teignmouth Shore 
W. Teignmouth Shore 
J. W. More 
H. Montgomery Hyde 
William Henderson 
H.-L. Adam 
F. Tennyson Jesse 
Eric R. Watson 
Basil Hogarth 
William Roughead 
Filson Young 
8. 0. Rowan-Hamilton 
H. Fletcher Moulton 
Filson Young 
Eric R. Watson 
George H. Knott 
Winifred Duke 
Winifred Duke 
Filson Young 
Donald Carswell 
Filson Young 
R. H. Blundell 
William Roughead 
W. Teignmouth Shore 
Albert Lieck 
F. Tennyson Jesse 
Helena Normanton 
Collin Brooks 
F. Tennyson Jesse 
Prof. H. Wilson 
J. W. Hall 

F. Tennyson Jesse 


Further Volumes in. Preparation. 


RSS 
*\ 
YN 
\ 


. 
AK 


Madeleine Smith. 


Trial of 


Madeleine Smith 


NEW EDITION 


\ 


EDITED BY 


F, ‘Tennyson Jesse 


Author of “ Murder and its Motives,” &c. 


bes 


LONDON EDINBURGH GLASGOW 
WILLIAM HODGE AND COMPANY, LIMITED 


First Edition (edited by A. Duncan Smith) 


In Notable Scottish Trials Series, October, 1905 
Reprinted Do. do., December, 1905 
Reprinted Do. do., February, 1914 


Reprinted in Notable British Trials Series, March, 1921 


New Edition (edited by F. Tennyson Jesse) 


In Notable British Trials Series, April, 1927 
Reprinted 1948 


MADE AND PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN 
BY 
WILLIAM HODGE AND COMPANY LTD. 
GLASGOW AND EDINBURGH 
PHOTO-LITHO BY BOOKPLATES P.L. LTD. 


TO 
MARGARET JAMES 

AND 

H. SOMERS JAMES, BaARRISTER-AT-LAW 

THIS VOLUME 
Is 
AFFECTIONATELY DEDICATED 

BY 


THE EDITOR 


PREFACE. 


Ir has been my fortunate lot to edit this new edition of the 
trial of Madeleine Smith after all the hard work was already 
done. Mr. Duncan Smith, to whom we are all indebted for 
the first admirable edition of the trial, has so completely 
reduced the chaos of contemporary records to order that mine 
has been only the pleasant case of writing an introduction 
without having to labour over the sifting and arranging of 
evidence and speeches. Therefore, to Mr. Duncan Smith, 
and through him, to all those who assisted him in his task, 
my grateful thanks are here rendered. 

I am also indebted to Messrs. Blackwood & Sons and 
Messrs. W. & R. Chambers for their courtesy in allowing me 
to reprint in this volume the articles dealing with arsenic, to 
which reference is made by Madeleine Smith in her letters. 

I take this opportunity of rendering my thanks to 
Professor John Glaister, who took me through Madeleine 
Smith’s house in Blythswood Square, and whose comments 


were invaluable. 


F. TENNYSON JESSE. 


CONTENTS. 


PAGE 
Introduction, - 3 : ‘ 3 ; Z 1 
Leading Dates in the Madeleine Smith case, - ~ - - : - - 39 
Tue TrRIAL— 
Frest Day—Torspay, 30TH June, 1857, 
The Indictment, : - 4i 
Inventory of Papers, Documenta, te., referred to in 1 the Indictment, - 43 
Names of Witnesses, - an = 47 
Objection to the Beorancy, : - : : = A Z 2 - 49 
List of the Jury, - - . - - . - - : oes) 
Evidence for the Prosecution. 
Archibald Smith, - - - 60 | Peter Pollock, - - - - 658 
George Gray, - - 560]! Mrs. Jane Bayne, - - 69 
Mrs Ann Duthie or Jeukine - 51 | Charles Neil utherfoord, - 659 
James Heggie, - - - 68 | William Fairfoul, - 659 
John Stewart, - : - 68 | Thomas Ross, - - 60 
Catherine Robertadn, - = - 68! William A. Slevenson, - 60 
Seconp Dayv—WepnNEsDAY, lst JuLy, 1857. 
Ewidence for the Prosecution (continued ). 
William A. Stevenson ireeetied), 65 | Dr. Robert Christison, - - 85 
Dr. Hugh Thomson, - 68 | Amadee Thuau, - Ol 
Dr. James Steven, - : - 74 | Auguste Vauvert de Mean, - 93 
Dr. Frederick Penny, 76 | 
Tumrp Day—Tuurspay, 2np JuLy, 1857. 
Evidence. for the Prosecution (continued ). 
Charles O’Neill, - - - - 98) John Currie, - : : - 109 
The Prisoner’s Declaration, - 99, : William Campsie, - - ~ 109 
Mary Jane Buchanan, - 101,106 | Robert Oliphant, - - 110, 116 
Mrs. Augusta Guibileior pWialedt; 103 | William Harper Minnoch, - 110 
William Murray, - - 104 | Mrs, Margaret Houston or 
George Yeaman, : - - 105; Clark, - - 112 
James Stewart, - - - J06 | Thomas "Fleming Kennedy, - 118 
George Murdoch, . . - 106 | John Murray, - - 117 
James Dickie, - - 107 | Bernard M‘ ticshlin, - - 120 
George Carruthers Hatiacioa, 108 | William Wilson,  - - - 121 


ms CONTENTS. 


PAGE 
Fourtu Day—FRIpAy, 3Rp JULy, 1857. 
Proceedings in the Scotch Thistle newspaper case, - . - | 124, 143 
Evidence for the Prosecution (continued ). 
William Hart, - - 125 | Mrs. Christina Hageart or tee 
Peter Taylor Young, : ae yi kenzie, - 131 
Andrew Murray, jun., 5 - 128 | Charlotte M‘ Lean, - - - 135 
Alexander Soutar Hunter, - 128 | Duncan Mackenzie, - - - 136 
Rowland Hill ELE - 128 | James Galloway, - : - 136 
George M‘Call, - - 128 | Mary Tweedle, - - - veal 
Robert Monteith, : - - 128 | Thomas Kavan,- - - - 137 
Robert Sinclair, : : - 128 | William Young, 137 
Janet M‘Dougall,  - - - 128 | Rowland Hill” "Macdonald (re- 
Catherine M‘Donald : - 129 called), - - 137 
Robert Telfer Corbett, — - - 129 | Mrs. JaneScott Perry, or Towers, 137 
Dr. Penny (recalled), - - 130 | James Towers, - - : 138 
Mary Arthur Perry, - - - 139 
Firrn Day—Saturpay, 4TH JouLy, 1857. 
Evidence for the Prosecution (continued ). 
Dr. Robert Christison (recalled). —- : : 2 “ 5 meres 
Reading of the Letters, - : - - 147 
Debate as to Admissibility of L’Angelier’s 8 Pocket: Book, - - - 147 
Sixta Day—Monpay, 6TH JuLy, 1857. 
Judgment in the Admissibility of L’Angelier’s Pocket-Book, - 2 - 151 
Evidence for the Prosecution (concluded ). 
Janet Anderson, - 20 ogee - ; : 3 : f , - 155 
Evidence for the Defence. 
Robert Baker, - 2 156 | Robert Baird, - = x = Gy: 
William Pringle Laird, - - 157 | Elizabeth Wallace, - - - 167 
William Pringle, - - - 158 | Lieut.-Col. Robert Fraser, - 168 
Andrew Watson Smith, - - 158 | Dr. Charles Adam, - - - 168 
William Anderson, - - 159 | Dr. James Dickson, - - 170 
William M‘Dougal Ogilvie, - 160 | Jane Kirk,- - : Zeal 
David Hill, - - 161 | Robert Morrison, — - - 72 
Edward Vokes Mackay, = - 162 | George Simpson, = 4 - 172 
Janet B. Christie, - - - 163 | Dr. Robert Paterson, 5 hy} 
Alexander Miller, : 2 - 163 | John Fleming, - : A = let 
Agnes M‘Millan, — - - - 165 | Robert Townsend, - - - 174 
James Girdwood, 2 3 - 165 | chee Smith, - s . > 174 
John Robertson, - - - 165 Dr. James Adam Lawrie, - - 175 
Peter Guthrie, - - 165 is Douglas Mechean, - ae a lviel 
William D’Esterre Roberts, - 166 Hugh Hart, - 178 
Charles Baird, - - 166 
SEventH Day—Tuxspay, 7TH JuLy, 1857. 
The Lord Advocate’s Address to the Jury, —- : 2 ‘ : - 179 
Eienta Day—Wepnespay, 87TH JULY, 1857. 
The Dean of Faculty’s Address to the Jury, - - - : - 983 


The Lord Justice-Clerk’s Charge to the Jury, - - - : : - 274 


CONTENTS. xi 


PAGE 
Ninta Day—Tuurspay, 9TH JuLy, 1857. 
mee sie Cpa Clerk’s —— to = dury icoemaed), ae ; = 
APPENDICES. 

I. The Madeleine Smith Letters, - : - 3 2 E - 305 
II. The Poison-Eaters (Chambers’ Journal), - : : : - 391 
The Narcotics we indulge in (Blackwood’s Magazine), - - - 395 
Poison-Eaters (Chambers’ Journal), - = = . - 398 
The Arsenic-Eating Question (Chambers’ Jolernal), - : - 402 
Ill. A Brief Account of the Life of L’Angelier, - - ars 404 

IV. Summary of Baty Points mig se out of the Trial of Madeleine 
Smith, - : 405 
V. Copy of Pocket-Book Memoranda uy ict. - - : - 406 
VI. On Fly-leaf at end of Pocket-Book,  - - : : = - 408 
VII. Regulations at Trial of Madeleine Smith, - - - 408 
VIII. Phrenological Indications of the Character of Madeleine Smith, - 409 
IX. Account of the Judges and Counsel in the Trial, - - - = 409 

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS. 

Madeleine Smith, - - - - - - - - - Frontispiece 
House in Blythswood Square, i ae ld - - - - facing page 16 
Pierre Emile L’Angelier, -  - Ai ae ea » 82 
Sketch made in Court, - : - : - - - - “n 48 
Plan of Blythswood Square House, - ; eos - Oe 
The Lord Advocate (James Moncreiff,) - - - - ye eed 
The Dean of Faculty (John Inglis), - - - - - »» 240 
The Lord Justice-Clerk (Rt. Hon. John Hope), - - » 288 
Madeleine Smith’s Letter of 21st March, - : - - » 390 


Specimen of Handwriting of Emile L’Angelier,  - - - » 406 


MADELEINE SMITH. 


INTRODUCTION. 


On Thursday, the 9th of July, 1857, the trial of Madeleine 
Smith for the murder of her lover, Pierre Emile L’Angelier, 
by the administration of arsenic, ended in the verdict of 
** Not Proven,’’ and she left the High Court of Justiciary in 
Edinburgh, by a side door, a free woman. 

Only twenty-one years of age, handsome, with a bright, 
hard, defiant beauty, a beauty unabashed by an experience 
that might well have ravaged it, she passed into obscurity 
from obscurity. For, in spite of the fierce light that had 
beaten upon her and her doings, in spite of the way in 
which her past life had been examined and ‘pored over, it 
remained mysterious then, and does so to this day. No 
unguarded word slipped through Madeleine’s lips, and 
L’Angelier’s were sealed for ever when their two names 
became the centre of heated arguments throughout Great 
Britain. Little glimpses of her after-life have been caught 
from time to time. It is known that she married four years 
later a young artist in London, and that she was interested 
in contemporary problems, and had become a Socialist. It 
‘has been stated that she eventually went to live in the United 
States of America; but her life since the trial is her own; 
it is those months which lie between April, 1855, and June, 
1857, which present a riddle that has never lost its fascina- 
tion. 

In April, 1855, the Smiths, who were a highly respected 
and extremely conventional family, were living in India 
Street, Glasgow. They had a country house called Rowaleyn 
at Row, on the Clyde, where they spent the summer months. 
Mr. Smith was a prosperous architect, a man of position 
and some wealth, who ‘‘ kept his carriage.’’ Madeleine, the 
eldest of the family, possessed beauty, vivacity, and an ad- 

A a : I 


Madeleine Smith. 


venturous spirit. She was a capable creature, and on her 
return from her genteel English boarding school she took the 
cares of housekeeping and management off her mother’s 
shoulders. Such a girl was one who might be expected to 
make a good marriage, and Pierre Emile L’Angelier, a native 
of Jersey and a clerk at ten shillings a week in the employ 
of Huggins & Co. in Glasgow, was so hopelessly ineligible 
that even an introduction to Madeleine seemed beyond the 
bounds of possibility. | Nevertheless, he was so struck by the 
sight of Madeleine that he determined to know her, and he 
succeeded in getting introduced to Madeleine in Sauchiehall 
Street by a mutual friend, a youth called Robert Baird. 
Madeleine’s sister Bessie, two years younger than herself, was 
with Madeleine when the meeting took place, and it was to 
Bessie that L’Angelier confided his first note for Madeleine. 
The acquaintance, begun thus clandestinely, continued in the 
same manner, but it was discovered by Mr. Smith. Made- 
leine’s father forbade any further correspondence or meetings, 
and Madeleine wrote telling L’Angelier that everything 
between them had better be over. 

L’Angelier, however, was not going to let the girl go so 
easily. He was determined to marry her, and not as the 
penniless cast-off daughter of an enraged parent, but as the 
bride of an accepted and welcomed son-in-law. A friend of 
his, a sentimental elderly maiden lady, called Mary Perry, 
had already been the confidante of the pair; she delivered 
letters and messages, and the lovers used to meet at her house. 
At the same time that Madeleine wrote to L’Angelier bidding 
him farewell, she wrote to Miss Perry, explaining the necessity 
of her action. But the sentimental Miss Perry threw all 
her weight on L’Angelier’s side, and the meetings and corre- 
spondence began again. L’Angelier used to be admitted by 
Madeleine into the house in India Street after the rest of the 
family were asleep, and in the spring of 1856 he was meeting 
Madeleine at Rowaleyn after dark, and she had become his 
mistress. 

In the winter of that year the Smith family moved from 
India Street to No. 7 Blythswood Square, and at this house 
also L’Angelier was received by Madeleine after dark. But 


the fierce fire of her passion was short-lived, and already it 
2 i 


Introduction. 


was nearly burnt out. She was tiring of him, and a more 
eligible suitor, though a much older one, a Mr. William 
Minnoch, began to court her ; he was a friend of Mr. Smith’s, 
and lived next door to No. 7 Blythswood Square. Madeleine 
again broke off all connection with L’Angelier, and asked 
him to return her letters. This he refused to do, and 
threatened to blackmail her by showing them to her father. 
Madeleine implored for mercy, but he was relentless. She 
then apparently took him back into her favour and wrote him 
letters as passionate as before, begging him to come and see 
her. 

Once in February and twice in March L’Angelier was 
taken extremely ill with internal pains and vomiting, and 
the third attack of this malady proved fatal. He died in 
his lodgings on the morning of the 23rd of March, having 
returned thither in the small hours of the morning in a state 
of acute illness. This sudden death struck his employers 
and friends as peculiar, and a post-mortem examination was 
held, which left no doubt that he had died from a large dose 
of arsenic, of which 82 grains were found in the stomach 
alone. Madeleine’s letters were found in his room and at 
his place. of business, with the inevitable result—she was 
arrested and stood her trial, accused of having administered 
poison to him on three occasions, the third time with fatal 
results. 

All Great Britain was agitated over the trial, which lasted 
for nine days, and there were three points of view held by 
three different schools of thought. There were strong pro- 
Madeleineites who contested that she was innocent and that 
L’Angelier had committed suicide; equally strong anti- 
Madeleineites, convinced that murder had been committed and 
by her, and that she should pay the penalty; and a third 
school, in which probably most students of the case have 
found themselves ever since, which declared in effect ‘‘ prob- 
ably she did it, but anyhow he deserved it.’”” Certainly very 
vital evidence necessary to prove her guilt was lacking. That 
evidence can never be forthcoming now, and so the riddle 
must remain for ever unsolved, but the great fascination of 
it still exists, and it is possible by examining and weighing 
not only all the evidence brought forward in the Court of 

3 


Madeleine Smith. 


law, but also documents which were not admitted as evidence, 
and by a careful study of Madeleine’s own letters, to arrive 
at some ‘slight knowledge of the various characters involved 
and the circumstances in which they lived, so that a living 
presentment of this tragic human drama can grow up in our 
minds te-day. 

_ As is general with Scotsmen to this day, and was almost 
invariably so in the early ’fiftie, Mr. Smith was very much 
the head of the household. ‘‘ Papa,’’ as Madeleine calls 
him, emerges from her letters as the very figure of the 
awful and august Victorian father. Even Madeleine 
about whose courage and determination there can be no 
question, feared his anger. ‘‘ Mama,’’ though a more 
shadowy figure, presents herself as the true type of Victorian 
mother—mild in comparison with ‘‘ Papa,’’ yet inflexible 
in her very subservience to him. Both took to their beds 
when the disaster overwhelmed the house in Blythswood 
Square, and neither sat in the courtroom during the trial to 
encourage by look or smile the daughter who had so disgraced 
them. 

Madeleine was the eldest child. Next to her in age was 
her sister Bessie, then came her-brother Jack, and there were 
two much younger children, James and Janet. It is possible 
from Madeleine’s letters to gain some notion of what these 
brothers and sisters were like, or, rather, what Madeleine 
thought they were like. 

Madeleine and Bessie were not good friends, and it seems 
probable that the younger girl was jealous of Madeleine’s 
stronger personality. The sisters made the acquaintance of 
Emile L’Angelier at the same time, and Madeleine in her 
first letter to the young man says—‘‘ Bessie desires me to 
remember her to you.’’ But in her next letter she writes as 
follows :—‘‘ We are to be in town to-morrow, Wednesday. 
Bessie said I was not to let you know, but I must tell you 
why. Well, some friend was kind enough to tell Papa that 
you were in the habit of walking with us. Papa was very 
angry with me for walking with a Gentleman unknown to 
him. I told him he had been introduced, and I saw no harm 
in it. Bessie joins with Papa and blames me for the whole 


affair. She does not know I am writing you, so don’t men- 
4 


Introduction. 


tion it. We are to call at our old quarters in the Square 
on Wednesday about a quarter past twelve o’clock, so if you 
could be in Mr. M‘Call’s Lodgings—see us come out of Mrs. 
Ramsay’s—come after us—say you are astonished to see us 
in Town without letting you know—and we shall see how 
Bessie acts. She says she is not going to write you.” 
Perhaps Bessie was tired of always playing second fiddle to 
Madeleine, who seems to have attracted most of the young 
men they met. Writing to L’Angelier of their projected 
marriage, Madeleine observes ‘‘ We shall be the envy of 
many—of B. I know.’’ When Bessie had a new pink bonnet, 
Madeleine chooses a fawn one, as she knows that Emile would 
consider pink vulgar. In one of her passionate love-letters, 
when it still seems possible to her that they may be able to 
marry, she says—‘‘ Bessie had an invitation to go to Edin- 
burgh Castle next week. The Major knew I would not go, 
so did not invite me. I do not think she will go. Papa 
won’t allow her by herself and I won’t go, so I think she will 
have to stay at home—which is much better, don’t you think 
so?’’ Whether Bessie thought so is, of course, quite another 
matter. 

Jack appears at first to be rather a friend of Madeleine’s. 
‘“*On Sunday I was gt church, and in the afternoon Jack 
and I had a walk of four miles. Now when I can walk four 
with a brother, I could walk eight with my own beloved 
hushand and not be fatigued.’’ There is even at one time 
talk of her confiding in Jack and getting him to help her. 
‘*T shall try to speak to Jack on Sunday,’’ she writes, and 
L’Angelier urges her thus—‘‘ Do speak to your brother. 
Open your heart to him and try to win his friendship. Tell 
him if he loves you, to take your part.’’ There is no indi- 
cation that Madeleine ever confided in her brother, and it 
seems very unlikely with her secretive temperament that she 
did so. It is not long before she is writing quite coldly 
about him to her lover. ‘‘ Jack is not near so nice as he 
was,’’ she complains, and—‘‘ he has got a very fast look, 
Jack, of late. He is not improving, and James is just a 
very bad little fellow and swears and goes on at a great rate.”’ 
Nevertheless, in spite of Jack’s real or fancied deterioration, 
he was the only member of the family who met her after her 

5 


Madeleine Smith. 


acquittal, when he conducted her to the Smith’s country house 
at Rowaleyn, where the rest of the family were stonily await- 
ing her. As to Janet, the little girl frequently was a great 
nuisance to her sister, whose room she shared. ‘‘I did, 
my love, so pity you standing in the cold last night,’’ writes 
Madeleine, ‘‘ but I could not get Janet to sleep, little stupid 
thing.’?  ‘‘ Janet is a good girl,’’ she writes at another 
time, ‘‘ but she is not very affectionate.’’ Now Madeleine 
herself was undoubtedly very affectionate. People whom she 
loved were all that was perfect, at least for a short period. 
Any friend of L’Angelier’s she considered must be perfection. 
Of some acquaintance of L’Angelier’s she writes—‘‘ I like 
Miss Williams’ letter. I think she is very nice, and I like 
her ere I have seen her.’?’ And of Miss Perry, of whom so 
much more was to be heard later, Madeleine writes—‘‘ I am 
sorry I said anything about Mary. It was not kind of me. 
She is your kind and true friend. It was very bad of me, 
but I was vexed. She said she would not write to me. 
True love, do not say a word to her about my writing in an 
unkind way. No, sweet love, say nothing to her about it. She 
is your friend and that is enough. She shall be mine some day 
soon.’’ All Madeleine’s likes and dislikes are apparently 
subject to fluctuations. In a burst of candour she says to 
Emile—‘‘ I have come to the conclusion that you don’t know 
me. If you were with me long you would know me better— 
it is only those I love that I am indifferent to—even my dog— 
which I love—sometimes I hate him for no reason—it is only 
a fancy which I cannot help. With strangers it is different.’’ 
Letter after letter she poured out to L’Angelier, and it 
is in some of the letters in which she is dissimulating most 
that we get the truest glimpses of her nature. For the 
strange thing about Madeleine Smith is that, in spite of all 
the doubt that must for ever obscure certain of her actions, 
the girl herself stands revealed with a clarity that puts her 
nature almost beyond argument. Madeleine had intense 
vitality. A modern education might, almost undoubtedly 
would, have saved her. Games, or a career, or both, would 
have occupied that restless mind and body. Her powers of 
will, not all turned back upon scheming and deception, could 


have carried her far. Even when all was over, when, with 
6 


Introduction. 


her life given back to her, but with nothing but shame and 
obloquy her portion, her nerve did not fail her. With 
intense langour and difficulty most women would have crawled 
back to any pleasure in life. Not so Madeleine. She takes 
her invincible spirit, her hard brightness, with her into the 
bosom of that family, every member of which must have 
wished she had never been born. Even her beauty was un- 
ternished, that beauty which was of a bright darkness. She 
had a fair rosy skin, dark eyes, and hair of polished 
ebony that swept down beside her temples. Thus she ap- 
peared to the staring public in the courthouse, a little 
fashionable scoop bonnet set right at the back of her head, 
disengaging that clear-cut profile which had something of the 
eagle about its defiant contours. 

Madeleine Smith was born before her time. -: She had all 
the profound physical passion with which the northern woman 
so often makes her southern sister seem insipid; and this 
passion, of the essence of her being, was a thing supposed at 
that particular date not to exist in a ‘‘ nice’’ woman. 
Nowadays Madeleine would have had various outlets for the 
violence of her personality. She could have become a busi- 
ness woman, or gone on the stage, or lived in a bachelor flat 
and had love affairs, without the end of the world having 
resulted. In the ’fifties none of these solutions was avail- 
able. In those days there was nothing for her to do but to 
get engaged, a very tame state of affairs for a character like 
hers, unless she could add to it a set of strange circumstances 
to give it interest. These circumstances she found in 
L’Angelier, for whom beyond a doubt she felt for some time 
@ passion that was entirely sensual, of all forms of love the 
one which lays itself open the most to violent reaction. 
Desire, fulfilment, satiety, and disgust—these were the four 
phases through which Madeleine passed, and the last phase 
was foredoomed from the first moment. 

She first met L’Angelier in April of 1855, and what love 
there was in the affair lasted only until the autumn of 1856, 
though outward expressions of it continue in her letters until 
the end of January, 1857, when even simulated ardours wane 
perceptibly. Already for some time back she had been 


encouraging the attentions of another man whom she wished 
7 


Madeleine Smith. 


to accept. Madeleine had been educated at a genteel board- 
ing school at Clapton, near London. She was fond of music 
and fond of reading, fond of dancing, fond of pleasure, and 
fond of exerting consciously the power of her own personality. 
To pen a creature such as this ‘in the respectable fastnesses of 
a Glasgow house, where her life consisted of a round of 
decorous visits paid with her mother and sister, and of dinner 
parties given by her father’s merchant acquaintances, was to 
court disaster. It was all right for a Bessie or a Janet, 
but it was disastrous for such as Madeleine. 

Hers was a nature which had to have adventure. In the 
late war she would have been an admirable member of society. 
She would have driven an ambulance, had sentimental little 
affairs with wounded officers, been thoroughly competent and 
completely occupied. Had she been a medieval Italian she 
might have been a successful intriguer and removed people 
who inconvenienced her from her path, and seduced those 
whom she wished to seduce without any loss of social standing. 
As it was, she was born in that period of the world’s history 
which was the most hopeless for a nature such as hers. 
Strength, determination, passion, ruthlessness were a bad 
foundation to be overlaid with the Victorian sentimentality 
which was also hers in full measure, and which living when 
she did she could hardly have avoided. It was her only 
outlet, and she sentimentalised to the full. L’Angelier 
appeared to her a most romantic figure; he was practically 
a foreigner, he was poor, he was handsome, and above all, 
he was endowed with a great flow of words. He had been 
immensely taken with her from afar, and had urged a mutual 
acquaintance to bring about an introduction. This was a 
good beginning to make with any woman, and L’Angelier 
added to the irresistible appeal of the state of his feelings a 
charm of person new in her experience. Instead of the 
northern restraint and self-control, of the dour manliness to 
_ which she was accustomed, he possessed a small but pleasing 
person with a pretty face and curling hair, and white hands 
with the art of love-making at the tips of their fingers. But 
as was the case with Madeleine herself, if the outside were 
soft and pleasing to the eye, there was relentless force con- 


cealed beneath. Pierre Emile L’Angelier had no notion of 
8 


Introduction. 


burdening himself with the cast-off daughter of a rich man. 
It seems that Madeleine, at the height of her love, was quite 
prepared to face poverty with a smile, but L’Angelier always 
refused. Parental approval was essential to his ambitious 
nature. 

He was ten years older than Madeleine, and between the 
period when she met him and an earlier period when he had 
been employed by Dickson & Co., seed merchants, he lived 
in Paris, and as a member of the National Guard had been 
through some exciting times in the revolution of 1848—another 
touch of the romantic which pleased her. Like Madeleine, 
he was primed with all the traditions of that generation as 
regards the nice conduct of love affairs. He had already 
adored a lady in Fife, and flattered himself that he had a 
broken heart, talked largely of suicide, but never committed 
it. He would boast of his successes with women and threaten 
to blow out his brains in almost the same breath, and, like 
most profligates, had an almost priggish standard for other 
people, particularly for any woman whom he might be 
debauching at the time. 

And here in this very priggishness of his we find the 
characteristic which above all others seems to have enslaved 
Madeleine. Like many passionate girls, before they have 
attained sufficient knowledge of human nature to enable them 
to acquire balance, she was an unconscious Masochist. She 
saw herself in the position of L’Angelier’s slave. To that her 
letters bear indubitable testimony. This sordid little 
Abelard, playing the schoolmaster, this sensation-loving 
Heloise, aetermined to be mastered into submission, were 
playing a game which he, with his greater experience, must 
have known was one which would land them in self-disgust, 
but which she found too alluring to be resisted. In her very 
first letter to L’Angelier, Madeleine writes—‘‘] am trying 
to break myself of all my very bad habits. It is you I have 
to thank for this, which I do sincerely from my heart.’’ 
There are many passages in her letters which tell the same 
tale—‘‘ If ever again I show temper, which I hope to God I 
won’t, don’t mind it. . . . I ought never in any way 
to vex or annoy you.”’ ‘‘I often think that I must be very, 


very stupid in your eyes. You must be disappointed in me. 
9 


Madeleine Smith. 


I wonder you like me in the least.”? ‘‘ How I have reproached 
myself all the week for writing you such unkind letters. 
Will you, darling Emile, pardon me for them . . . how 
I look forward to our happy union. It cannot but be happy. 
We shall love each other so, and, believe me, it shall be quite 
different. I shall be beside you, so if I do anything wrong 
and you check me I shall never, never do it again. I shall 
be all you could wish. You shall love me and I shall obey 
you.” ‘TI shall never cause you unhappiness again. I 
was cold and unloving, but it shall never be repeated. No, 
I am now a wife—a wife in every sense of the word, and it is 
my duty to conduct myself as such. Yes, I shall behave now 
more to your mind.’”? ‘‘ I do love you, fondly, truly. You 
will not leave me, your wife, with no guide, no friend, no 
protector, with no one to love me, no one to care for me, 
no one to tell me my faults.’”? ‘‘ Now, Emile, I shall keep 
all the promises I have made you. I shall love and obey you. 
It is my duty as your wife to do so. I shall do all you want 
me.’’ And writing to Mary Perry, the sentimental go- 
between of the pair, she gives away the relationship 
between her and L’Angelier with—‘‘ As yet I fear I have 
done little to please him, but he has forgiven me all my 
faults.’’ L’Angelier played up to this aspect of himself as 
master. He would boast to a friend of his—‘‘ I shall forbid 
Madeleine to do such a thing ’’; and early in the relation- 
ship, when she made her first effort to try and break away 
from him he wrote—‘‘ Madeleine, you have truly acted wrong. 

I leave your conscience to speak for itself.”? But 
his finest effort he reserved until he had first succeeded in 
having connection with her, when he actually blamed her for 
the occurrence—‘‘ I am sad at what we did,’’ he wrote; ‘‘ I 
regret it very much. Why, Mimi, did you give way after 
your promises? My pet, it is a pity. . . . I was dis- 
appointed, my love, at the little you had to say, but I can 
understand why. You are not stupid, Mimi, but if you 
disappoint me in information, and I have cause to reproach 
you of it, you will have no one to blame but yourself, as I 
have given you warning long enough to improve yourself. 
Sometimes I do think you take no notice of my wishes and 


my desires, but say ‘ yes’ for a mere matter of form. 
10 


Introduction. 


We must not be separated all this winter, for I know, Mimi, 
you will be as giddy as last. You will be going to public 
balls, and that I cannot endure. On my honour, dearest, 
sooner than see you or hear of you running about as you 
did last, I would leave Glasgow myself. Though I have truly 
forgiven you, I do not forget the misery I endured for your 
sake. - . Icannot help doubting your word about flirt- 
ing. Non told me the same thing before you left for Edin- 
burgh, and you did nothing else during your stay there. I 
do trust you will give me no cause to find fault again with 
you on that score, but I doubt very much the sincerity of 
your promise. . . . Oh, Mimi, let your conduct make 
me happy.’’ It is no wonder that this sort of thing ended 
in weariness and disgust. When Madeleine is appealing to 
L’Angelier in February of 1857 to let her go she admits as 
much—‘‘ I did love you, and it was my soul’s ambition to 
be your wife. I asked you to tell me my faults. You did 
so and made me cold towards you gradually. When you 
have found fault with me I have cooled. It was not love for 
another, for there is no one I love.’’ 

Madeleine was correct in saying there was no one she 
loved. Her demure acceptance of Mr. Minnoch’s suit and 
her prim little letters leave no doubt that she was marrying 
the wealthy middle-aged merchant simply because she felt the 
time had come to put an end to her liaison with L’Angelier 
and to settle in an establishment of her own. What else 
could she do? She saw more and more clearly that there 
was no hope of a marriage sanctioned by her parents with 
L’Angelier, and she had no economic independence and no 
means of earning it. The months of gratified passion 
between April, 1855, and February, 1857, had probably 
exhausted her emotional capacity for some little time to come, 
for they had been full enough of excitement to please and 
eventually to weary even Madeleine. She had borne with 
a great deal from L’Angelier. His ardours, even those that 
-gavoured of the schoolmaster, she had undoubtedly wanted 
and encouraged, but his open and shameless scheming would 
have disgusted any one less infatuated far earlier. 
In the same letter in which he reproaches her for having 


yielded to his desire, he poses the amazing question—‘“‘ Think 
: II 


Madeleine Smith. 


of the consequences if I were never to marry you. . . - 
Try your friends once more, tell your determination, say 
nothing will change you, that you have thought seriously of 
it, and on that I shall fix speaking to Huggins for September. 
Unless you do something of that sort heaven only knows 
when I shall marry you. Unless you do, dearest, I shall 
have to leave the country. . . . It is your parent’s fault 
if shame is the result. They are to blame for it all. 

Mimi, dearest, you must take a bold step to be my wife. I 
would treat you, pet, by the love you have for me. Mimi, 
do speak to your mother. . . . Oh, Mimi, be bold for 
once. Do not fear them. Tell them you are my wife before 
God. Do not let them leave you without being married, for 
I cannot answer what would happen. My conscience re- 
proaches me of a sin that marriage only can efface. 5 
I was not angry at your loving me, Mimi, but I am sad it 
happened. You had no resolution. It was very bad indeed. 
I shall look with regret at that night. No, nothing except 
our marriage will efface it from my memory. Mimi, only 
fancy if it was known!’”’ This ineffable effusion was not 
admitted as evidence in the trial, as both it and another long 
letter which he wrote to Madeleine she had destroyed, and 
they only existed in drafts which this cautious lover had kept 
in his own rooms. The defence argued that the admission 
of drafts as evidence was not allowable, and this objection 
was sustained. L’Angelier’s letters, therefore, except for 
the few notes which were actually sent through the post and. 
one press-copy which was admitted as evidence, remain merely 
unofficial proof of his peculiar frame of mind. 

In the summers the Smith family stayed at their country 
house at Rowaleyn, and here L’Angelier came several times 
and met Madeleine after dark by appointment. It was at 
Rowaleyn that the first connection between them took place 
in the summer of 1856, but that there must have been much 
love-making of an intimate nature in the months preceding 
this date there can be no doubt from a study of Madeleine’s 
letters, which had been full for months of the most ardent 
endearments. For a long time she had been signing her- 
self “‘ his. wife’’ and calling him ‘‘her own darling 
husband,’’ talking of the pleasure of being “fondled” by 


12 


Introduction. 


her dear Emile. Complete intimacy once established between 
them, Madeleine lets loose the pagan side of her nature, which 
was perhaps its most admirable quality, and which shocked 
most utterly her contemporaries when once it became known 
to them. She was quite frank about her enjoyment of 
physical pleasures—‘‘ M. [mother] won’t allow us to leave 
when we have friends in our own house, so I do not know 
when wé may go. I do wish she would go, and then I could 
see you, be pressed to your heart, be kissed by you, my own, 
my beloved, my fond Emile. I am excited much to-night. 
Were you here I would love you with my heart and soul.’ 
**T must go to bed, for I feel cold, so good-night. Would 
to God it were to bo by your side. I would feel well and 
happy then. I think I would be wishing you to love me 
if I were with you, but I do not suppose you would refuse 
me, for I know you would like to love your Mimi.” And 
again—‘‘ Emile, you were not pleased because I would not 
let you Jove me last night. Your last visit you said you 
would not do it again until we were married. I said to 
myself at the time, well, I shall not let Emile do this again. 
It was a punishment to me to be deprived of your loving me, 
for it is a pleasure, and no one can deny that. It is but 
human nature. Is not every one who Joves of the same 
mind? Yes.’’ Candour such as this was felt to be per- 
fectly shocking from a young woman, and to do the spirit 
of that time justice it would probably have been felt to be 
just as shocking had the parties been married. Love- 
making was a mysterious arrangement on the part of Provi- 
dence, which was necessary to gentlemen and which a good 
wife accepted as her bounden duty. It was not a pagan 
festival such as Madeleine found it. The Lord Justice-Clerk 
(Lord Hope) expressed the feelings of every one when he 
observed in his summing up—‘‘ The letters continued on her 
part in the same terms of passionate love for a very consider- 
able time. I say ‘ passionate love,’ because, unhappily, 
they are written without any sense of decency and in most 
licentious terms.’’ His lordship then read one of the letters 
which ended ‘‘ Oh, to be in thy embrace, my sweet love. 
Love again to thee from thy ever-loving and ever-devoted 
Mimi, thine own wife.’’ ‘‘ What,’’ asks his lordship, ‘‘ could 
13 


Madeleine Smith. 


she expect but sexual intercourse after. thus presenting and 
inviting it?’’ The answer is, of course, that she did intend 
and wish sexual intercourse, and that had L’Angelier only 
let her go when she tired she would probably have never re- 
gretted it in spite of the conventional expressions of remorse 
in her later letters—written when she was trying to soften 
L’Angelier’s heart. Her candour seemed to the judge almost 
incredible, and he continues as follows :—‘‘ Can you be sur- 
prised after such letters as those of the 29th April and the 
8rd May that on the 6th of May, three days afterwards, he 
got possession of her person? On the 7th of May she writes 
to him, and in that letter is there the slightest appearance 
of grief or remorse? None whatever. It. is the letter of 
a girl rejoicing in what had passed, and alluding to it, in 
one passage in particular, in terms which I will not read, for 
perhaps they were never previously committed to paper as 
having passed between a man and a woman. What passed 
must have passed out of doors, not in the house, and she talks 
of the act as hers as much as his.’’ These remarks, which 
at that time were considered the most severe condemnation, 
convey a truth which was Madeleine’s only justification. The 
act was as much hers as his, and she never pretended other- 
wise. As to the satisfaction of her desire, she probably 
thought that it made small difference whether it took place 
respectably in a bedroom or beneath the trees at Rowaleyn. 
‘* This is a letter from a girl,’’ continued the judge, ‘‘ written 
at five in the morning, just after she had submitted to his 
embraces. Can you conceive any worse state of mind than 
this letter exhibits? In other letters she uses the word ‘ love ’ 
underscored, showing clearly what she meant by it. . . .” 
Madeleine meant by it what most people mean by it, but at 
had the courage to say so. 

Madeleine had been unashamed at the height of her fervent 
love, but when the force of her passion had subsided she felt 
very differently. There is no doubt that she did not show 
this change in her feelings to L’Angelier for some time. Mr. 
Minnoch had been paying her attentions, the nature of which 
was quite understood by every one concerned, the whole 
winter of 1856, and L’Angelier had been extremely jealous. 


**T did tell you at one time that I did not like William 
14 


Introduction. 


Minnoch, but he was so pleasant that he quite raised himself 
in my estimation,’ Madeleine writes to L’Angelier in the 
autumn of 1856; and again—‘‘ Mr. Minnoch has been here 
since Friday—he is most agreeable—I think—we shall see 
him very often this winter—he says we shall, and P. being 
so fond of him I am sure he shall ask him in often.’’ She 
knew that L’Angelier was bound to hear of Minnoch’s atten- 
tions, and probably thought it better to'write with an appear- 
ance of frankness. Not two weeks after the letter last quoted 
we find her writing a letter, beginning coldly, ‘‘ My dear 
Emile,’’ in which she says—‘‘ Our meeting last night was 
peculiar. Emile, you are not reasonable; I do not wonder 
at your not loving me as you once did. Emile, I am not 
worthy of you. You deserve a better wife than I. I see 
misery before me this winter. I would to God we were not 
to be so near Mr. Minnoch. You shall hear all stories and 
believe them. You will say I am indifferent, because I shall 
not be able to see you much. I forgot to tell you last night 
that I shall not be able of an evening to let you in. My room 
is next to Bessie’s and on the same floor as the front door. 
I shall: never be able to spend the happy hours we did last 
winter.’’? Whether Madeleine hoped by suggesting frequently 
enough to L’Angelier that he no longer loved her, that he 
might come to believe so himself we cannot tell, but if so she 
failed of her effect. 

A servant called Christina Haggart, who had been wont 
to let L’Angelier in while the family still lived at the house 
in India Street, and who received L’Angelier’s letters to 
Madeleine during the two summers at Rowaleyn, was again 
called into the service of the lovers in Blythswood Square, 
though apparently against Madeleine’s wish, for in a letter 
posted on the 20th October she wrote—‘‘ Do you know I have 
taken a great dislike to C. H. I shall try and do without 
her aid in the winter. She has been with us four years, and 
I am tired of her, but I won’t show it to her, so, dearest love, 
be easy on that point.’’? However, by November, when the 
family is back at Biythswood Square, Madeleine’s letters are 
as ardent as ever, and she, who knew she was being courted 
by Minnoch, and who had already tried to suggest a discon- 
tinuance of her relations with L’Angelier, was writing phrases 

15 


Madeleine Smith. 


like ‘‘ My own sweet darling husband, I long to be your 
wife.’’ 

Minnoch was now a constant visitor at the house. ‘‘ It 
was Mr. Minnoch that I was at the concert with. You see 
I would not hide that from you. Emile, he is papa’s friend, 
and I know he will have him at the house; but need you mind 
that, when I have told you that I have no regard for him? 
It is only you, my Emile, that I love. You should not mind | 
public report.’’ In December she sends L’Angelier a portrait, 
saying—‘‘ I hope ere long you will have the original, which 
I know you will like better than a glass likeness. Won’t 
you, sweet love? 1 hope you got it safe. C. H. left it at 
the door for you.’’ Her letters-during this period are full 
of references to her marriage with L’Angelier and her longing 
for it. She even goes so far as to discuss the different ways 
of getting married, when all the time she had determined to 
marry William Minnoch. She had, indeed, accepted his 
proposal of marriage on 28th January. 

L’Angelier was in the habit of leaving notes for her on 
the sill of her bedroom window, which was below the street 
level. On one occasion at least he entered the house, for 
Christina Haggart admitted that she opened the back door, 
and that she and the cook sat in the kitchen while L’Angelier 
and Madeleine occupied the servants’ room, which was next 
to the back door. By the end of January the tone of her 
letters is still loving, but more despairing. ~ She now talks 
of marriage as a beautiful impossibility—‘‘ I never felt so 
restless and so unhappy as I have for some time past. I 
would do anything to keep sad thoughts from my mind. 

A dark spot is in the future. What can it be? Oh, 
God, keep it from us. Oh, may we be happy. Dear darling, 
pray for our happiness. I weep now, Emile, to think of our 
fate. If we could only get married all would be well. But 
alas, alas, I see no chance, no chance of happiness for me. 
I must speak with you. Yes, I must again be pressed to 
your loving bosom, be kissed by you, my only love, my dearest 
darling husband. Why were we fated to be so unhappy ? 
Why were we fated to be kept separate? . . . If you are 
able I need not say it will give me pleasure to hear from you 


to-morrow night. If at ten o’clock do not wait to see me, 
16 


*YOOTq OWLS BY} UL UMOP AOYJANY 91941] V OUO OY} ST BSNOY S,YoouUT]Y “AR 
0} LOOp OY, *49914S OPIS 94} UL MOPUIM BaIV PUODES OYJ SI WOOIpaq S,YIIWIG SSITY JO AOPUIA OL, 


(OD souRINSSY eV] [e3aT YSILUgG 94 Jo SeoWO ey) MON) 
*MOSSE[D ‘2a1enNdDES poomsyiAlg ‘Gi}WEG susayapeP Jo sduapIssy oq TL 


ee ee 


pe ‘ — —— se he chee ee F 


nae - Ne ate ¥ = Mae (Td a eee ee 


Introduction. 


as Janet might not be asleep, and I may have to wait until 
she sleeps to take it in. Make no noise.”’ 

Some letter that she wrote after this one was returned to 
her by L’Angelier, for quite at the beginning of February, 
the exact date is illegible, she writes—‘‘ I felt truly astonished 
to have my last letter returned to me, but it shall be the last 
you shall have an opportunity of returning to me. When. 
you are not pleased with the letters I send you, then our 
correspondence shal] be at an end, and, as there is a coolness 
on both sides, our engagement had better be broken. ; 
Altogether I think, owing to coldness and indifference (nothing 
else), we had better in the future consider ourselves as 
strangers. I trust to your honour as a gentleman that you 
will not reveal anything that may have passed between us. 
I shall feel obliged by your bringing me my letters and my 
likeness on Thursday evening at seven. Be at the area gate 
and C. H. will take the parcel from you.’’ This letter was 
unanswered, and she writes again—‘‘ I attribute it to your 
having cold that I had no answer to my last note. On 
Thursday evening you were, I suppose, afraid of the night 
air. I fear your cold is not better. I again appoint 
Thursday, same place, street gate, seven o’clock.’’ 

L’Angelier evidently answered by threatening her, for the 
next letter begins—‘‘ Monday night. Emile, I have just had 
your note. Emile, for the love you once had for me do 
nothing until I see you. For God’s sake do not bring your 
once loved Mimi to an open shame. Emile, I have deceived 
you; 1 have deceived my mother. . . . I deceived you by 
telling you that she still knew of our engagement. She did 
not. . . . Emile, write to no one, Papa or any other. 
Oh, do not until I see you on Wednesday night.’’ The letter 
goes on madly imploring her lover not to drive her to despair 
and death. L’Angelier wrote her, but apparently nothing 
that would ease her mind, for in her next letter she says— 
‘¢ No one can know the intense agony of mind I have suffered 
last night and to-day. Emile, my father’s wrath would kill 
me. You little know his temper. Emile, for the love you 
once kad for me do not denounce me to my P. Emile, if he 
should read my letters to you—he will put me from him, he: 
will hold me as a guilty wretch. I loved you, and wrote to 

B 17 


Madeleine Smith. 


you in my first ardent love—it was with my deepest love I 
loved you. It was for your love I adored you. I put on 
paper what I should not. I was free, because I loved you 
with my heart. If he or any other one saw those fond letters 
to you what would not be said of me? On my bended knees 
I write to you and ask you, as you hope for mercy at the 
judgment day, do not inform on me. Do not make me @ 
public shame.’’ There is a postscript to this letter—“ I 
cannot get to the back stair. I never could see the way to it. 
I will take you within the door. The area gate will be open. 
I shall see you from my window at twelve o’clock. I will 
wait until one o’clock.”’ A meeting apparently took place, 
during which she must have been able to win him over by 
letting him think she would be his once more—perhaps even 
by becoming his once more—and on 14th February she writes, 
saying—‘‘ Bring me all my cool letters back—the last four 
I have written—and I will give you others in their place.’’ 
L’Angelier, however, was not a man to give up anything, 
and Madeleine saw that there was no way out of her desperate 
position, and to gain time she continued to pour her ardours 
upon L’Angelier. 

Now, on a day in the second week in February, just 
about the time when L’Angelier was threatening her with 
exposure, Madeleine had asked William Murray, a young 
boy employed at the house in Blythswood Square, to go to 
the apothecary’s and get her a small phial of prussic acid. 
She wrote this request down on a piece of paper and gave it 
to him. The apothecary refused, and Madeleine, who had 
told the boy she wanted it to whiten her hands, said, ‘‘ Very 
well, never mind.’’ It was fortunate for Madeleine that the 
Lord Justice-Clerk did not make very much of this point in 
his summing up. Even the Lord Advocate in his speech 
for the prosecution does not seem to have borne on it as 
heavily as he might have done. For Madeleine wrote 
L’Angelier a wildly imploring letter on the 9th of February, 
and William Murray and the doctor and apothecary in the 
shop to which he went for the prussic acid all agreed that the 
date when the purchase was attempted was in the second week 
in February. About the 12th of February a reconciliation 


between Madeleine and L’Angelier took place, and the ardent 
18 


Introduction. 


correspondence and meetings began again. All this time, it 
must be remembered, Madeleine was definitely engaged to 
Mr. Minnoch, with the approval of her parents. She must 
have known that affairs could not possibly continue as they 
were. 

On the 17th of February, which was a Tuesday, L’Angelier 
dined with Miss Perry, and, according to her, he said that 
he was seeing Madeleine on the 19th, but there is no evidence 
that he ever met Madeleine then [on the date in question]. 
This day, on which, according to Miss Perry’s evidence, he 
was to see Madeleine, was Thursday, the 19th of February. 

Now, in a note written by Madeleine after the breach 
between her and L’Angelier had been healed, and posted 
on the 14th of February, she says—‘‘ I hope to see you very 
soon. Write me for next Thursday, and then I shall tell you 
when I can see you.”’ This is in the note in which she says 
she wants all her ‘‘ cool letters ’’ back. 

In the middle of the night of the 19th L’Angelier was 
taken violently ill in his lodgings, having gone out on that 
evening to a destination which will never be known. On the 
morning of the 20th he was found by Mrs. Jenkins, his land- 
lady, writhing in pain on the floor of his bedroom. He told 
her that on his way home he had been taken with a violent 
pain in his bowels and stomach. During the course of the 
morning he recovered somewhat, and between ten and eleven 
o’clock he dressed and went out. He returned in the after- 
noon, said he had seen a doctor, and brought a bottle of 
medicine with him, which he took. The symptoms of this, 
his first, illness were similar to those on the two following 
occasions, and this first illness occurred before Madeleine 
Smith could be shown to have purchased any arsenic or poison 
of any kind. Her first purchase of arsenic, as far as is 
known (and that purchase like her two succeeding ones was 
made quite openly), was on the 21st February. 

On Saturday, the 21st of February, Madeleine Smith went 
to the shop of a Mr. Murdoch and bought arsenic. It was 
entered in Murdoch’s book as follows:—‘‘ Feb. 21. Miss 
Smith, 7 Blythswood Square. Sixpennyworth of arsenic. 
For garden and country house. M.H. Smith.’”” This arsenic 


was common white arsenic mixed with soot in the proportion 
19 


Madeleine Smith. 


required by the Act. Three days after the purchase Madeleine 
called in at the shop again and asked if arsenic should not 
be white, to which Mr. Murdoch replied that the law required 
that it should be mixed with some colouring matter. 

L’Angelier was taken ill with his second attack on the 
night of Sunday, the 22nd, having only just recovered from 
the attack of the previous Friday morning. There is no 
proof that he saw Madeleine on the night of Sunday, the 
22nd. About four o’clock in the morning he called his 
landlady. He was vomiting the same sort of green substance 
as he had previously. She was unaware if he had been out 
the night before; he said nothing about it. Dr. Thomson 
was called in by a friend of L’Angelier’s in the afternoon, 
and left a prescription, which was duly made up. L’Angelier 
was about eight days in the house and away from his place 
of business. The prosecution did not allege any meeting to 
have taken place betwen Madeleine and L’Angelier during 
this period. 

On the 6th of March Madeleine made a second purchase 
of arsenic from the shop of a Mr. Currie. She bought six- 
pennyworth, the same quantity as before. When she made 
this second purchase Madeleine was accompanied by Mary 
Jane Buchanan, a girl friend. Miss Buchanan heard her 
ask for the arsenic, and heard the shopman tell her she must 
sign the book. Miss Buchanan asked Madeleine why she 
needed the arsenic, a question not put by the shopman, and 
Madeleine replied that it was to kill rats. The shopman 
thereupon suggested phosphorus. Madeleine replied that she 
had tried that before and it had proved useless, and she 
added that the family was going to Bridge of Allan, and so 
there was no danger in leaving the arsenic lying about in 
the town house. ‘‘ On leaving the shop,’’ remarks Miss 
Buchanan naively, ‘‘ I laughed at the idea of a young lady 
buying arsenic. She said nothing, but laughed too.’ 
Madeleine and her family left that day for Bridge of Allan. 
On the 4th of March Madeleine had written to L’Angelier 
suggesting that he should go to recover from his indisposi- 
tion to the Isle of Wight—‘‘ I hope you won’t go to Bridge 
of Allan, as Papa and Mama would say it was I brought you 
there . . . Gato Isle of Wight. I am exceedingly sorry, 

20 


Introduction. 


love, I cannot see you where I go. It is impossible, but the 
first thing I do on my return will be to see you, sweet love.’’ 
L’Angelier wrote back—‘‘ The doctor says I must go to 
Bridge of Allan. I cannot travel five hundred miles to the 
Isle of Wight and five hundred back. What is your object 
in wishing me so very much to go south? ’’ What was Made- 
leine’s object? The most probable solution of the riddle is 
that she felt that, if only L’Angelier could be got such « long 
way away, her marriage with Minnoch might be safely nego- 
tiated in his absence, and that, the dreaded event once a fart 
accompli, L’Angelier might cease to trouble her. L’Angelier’s 
refusal, however, made this scheme, if she had intended it, 
of no avail. L’Angelier, angry and suspicious, once again 
expresses his belief in her engagement with Mr. Minnoch. 
Madeleine wrote back soothingly two letters full of love and 
tender expressions. A letter written at the same time to 
William Minnoch contrasts rather strangely with those she 
was writing to L’Angelier. ‘‘ My dearest William,”’ she 
wrote to Mr. Minnoch, “‘ it is but fair after all your kind- 
ness to me that I should write you a note. The day I part 
from friends I always feel sad; but to part from one I love 
as I do you makes me feel truly sad and dull. My only 
consolation is that we meet soon. To-morrow we shall be 
home. I do so wish you were here to-day. We might take 
a long walk. Our walk to Dunblane I shall ever remember 
with pleasure. That walk fixed a day’on which we are to 
begin a new life—a life which I hope may be of happiness 
and long duration to both of us. My aim through life shall be 
to please you and study you. Dear William, I must conclude, 
as Mama is ready to go to Stirling. 1 do not go with the 
same pleasure as I did last time. I hope you got to town 
safe and found your sisters well. Accept my kindest love, 
and ever believe me to be yours with affection, Madeleine.”’ 
The Smith family returned to Blythswood Square on the 
17th of March, and L’Angelier went for a little holiday to 
Bridge of Allan on the 19th, entrusting M. Thuau, his fellow- 
lodger, with the forwarding of his letters. He had hardly 
left the house when a letter came for him, which was for- 


warded on to Bridge of Allan, and in a letter written to Miss 
21 


Madeleine Smith. 


Perry from there on the 20th he seys—‘‘ I should have come 
to see some one last night, but the letter came too late.’’ 

This letter, which was forwarded on to L’Angelier, was 
never found, the envelope alone being in his bag when his 
effects were examined. The subsequent letter, however, shows 
undoubtedly that it had suggested an assignation, for Made- 
leine writes from Glasgow on the 21st of March a letter 
beginning—‘‘ Why, miy beloved, did you not come to me? 
Oh, beloved, are you well? Come to me sweet one. I waited 
and waited for you, but you came not. I shall wait again 
to-morrow night, same hour and arrangement. Do come, 
sweet love, my own dear love of a sweetheart. Come, beloved, 
and clasp me to your heart. Come and we shall be happy. 
A kiss, fond love; adieu, with tender embraces.’’ As the 
Lord Advocate said in his address to the jury—‘‘ That letter 
was posted in Glasgow, if at a box, between 9 a.m. and 12.30 
p-m., and if at the General Post Office, between 11.45 a.m. 
and 1 p.m. That letter was found in the pocket of a coat. 
About that letter and envelope there is no dispute or question 
whatever. There was an appointment for Thursday, the 
19th. On Wednesday, the 18th, she went back to Currie’s 
shop, told him that the first rats had been killed, and that 
they had found a great many large ones lying in the house ; 
and, as she had got arsenic before, appeared to be a respect- 
able person, and told her story without hesitation, she got 
her third packet of arsenic. That letter was forwarded by 
Thuau to L’Angelier on the same day with the rest. He 
enclosed it in a letter of his own, in which he says that the 
letter came at half-past twelve, and that he hastens to put 
it in the post if there is time. L’Angelier got that letter 
after nine o’clock at Stirling on Sunday morning.’’ 

In the evening L’Angelier arrived home at his lodgings, 
and explained to his landlady that a letter forwarded on to 
him had brought him home. He looked well, said the land. 
lady, and stated he was a great deal better, and almost well. 
He went out that night at about nine o’clock, and before 
going out he said—‘“‘ If you please, give me the pags-key. I 
am not sure, but I may be late.’’ 

“I saw him next at about half-past two on the Monday 


morning,’’ affirmed his landlady. ‘‘ He did not use the pass- 
22 


Introduction. 


key. The bell rang with great violence. I rose and called 
‘Who’s there?’ He said, ‘It is I, Mrs. Jenkins, open the 
door if you please.’ I did so. He was standing with his 
arms crossed across his stomach. He said, ‘ I am very bad. 
I am going to have another vomiting of that bile.’ ”’ 

L’Angelier did indeed have another vomiting, far worse 
than on the second occasion, worse even than on the first. By 
four o’clock he was very bad, and the landiady wished to go 
for the doctor, but he said it was too early. By five he was 
so bad that she insisted on fetching the doctor, and she went 
for a Dr. Steven. The doctor himself was ill and could not 
come, but recommended twenty-five drops of laudanum and 
a mustard plaster on the stomach. L’Angelier refused both 
the laudanum and the blister, and continued to retch. At 
seven o’clock Mrs. Jenkins again went for Dr. Steven, and 
this time he came with her. He evidently saw that the 
patient was very ill. The doctor put more blankets upon the 
bed and kept bottles of hot water round the patient’s body. 
He gave him morphia and applied a poultice. Dr. Steven 
called again at a quarter-past eleven, and Mrs. Jenkins met 
him, telling him that L’Angelier had been quite as bad as 
earlier in the morning, but had just become quiet. 

Dr. Steven went into the room and found him lying dead, 
away from the light, in a comfortable position, his knees 
slightly drawn up, one arm outside the bedclothes as though 
he were asleep. At mid-day Dr. Steven went again, and 
met Dr. Thomson, who had attended L’Angelier in his pre- 
vious illness. They decided it was impossible to give a 
certificate of death without making an examination. A 
second post-mortem examination was made later by Dr. 
Frederick Penny, and it was proved beyond a doubt that 
L’Angelier had died as the result of arsenical poisoning. 
Now we have here, excluding the date of the first illness, two 
‘dates of the utmost importance in this case, the 22nd of 
February and the 22nd of March, both of them Sundays, and 
on neither of these dates is there the smallest proof that 
L’Angelier met Madeleine. 

The Dean of Faculty naturally made the most of this— 
“« Observe, gentlemen,’’ he said, ‘‘ that unless you shall hold 


it to be true and proved by the evidence before you that 
23 


Madeleine Smith. 


these two persons met on the 22nd of February, which was a 
Sunday, or unlegg, in like manner, you hold it to be proved 
that they met again on the fatal night of the 22nd March, 
there never was a meeting at all after the prisoner had made 
any of her purchases of arsenic. I maintain that there not 
only was no meeting—that we have no evidence of any meet- 
ing—but that practically there was no possibility of any 
meeting. . I say that, unless you can believe on the evidence 
that there was a meeting on the 22nd of February, or again 
on the 22nd of March, there is no possible occasion on which 
she either could have administered poison or could have pur- 
posed or intended to administer it.’’? Certainly Mrs. Jenkins 
had no recollection of L’Angelier’s going out on the evening 
of the 22nd of February. As the Dean of Faculty went on 
to say—‘‘ L’Angelier was not taken ill until late in the 
morning, and he did not come home ill. There is no evidence 
that he ever came home at all or that he ever was out. All 
we know, as a matter of fact, is that he was taken ill in the 
morning about four or five o’clock.’’ 

The argument of the prosecution that L’Angelier had 
indeed seen Madeleine on the evening of the 22nd was based 
on a letter posted in Glasgow on a Wednesday, but with an 
undecipherable date, in which Madeleine says—‘‘ You did 
look bad Sunday night and Monday morning.”” The argu- 
ment of the prosecution was that this letter was written on 
the 25th of February, and that the writer was referring to 
the attack of the night of Sunday, the 22nd. ‘If this could 
have been proved it would, of course, have been a damning 
piece of evidence, but the postmark on the envelope was 
illegible. The defence maintained that it might have been 
written on any Wednesday during the intercourse between 
the accused and the deceased. The prosecution contended 
that they proved that it was written on the 25th of February, 
irrespective of the postmark. The letter went on to say— 
“I think you got sick with walking: home so late and the 
long want of food, so the next time we meet I shall make you 
eat a loaf of bread before you go out. Iam longing to meet 
you again, sweet love. My head aches so and I am looking 
so bad, so I cannot sit up as I used to do, but I am taking 

24 


Introduction. 


some stuff to bring back the colour, and I shall see you soon 
again.’’ 

‘* Now, gentlemen,”’ said the Lord Advocate, ‘‘ if that was 
written on the 25th, it proves that he saw her on Sunday 
and Monday, the 22nd and 23rd. _—iIt proves that he was sick 
at that time, and was looking very bad. According to my 
statement, he was ill on the 19th. It proves that she was 
thinking about giving him food 3 that she was laying a 
foundation for seeing him; that she was taking stuff to bring 
back her colour. It proves that she was holding out a kind 
of explanation of the symptoms which he had, because she 
says she is ill herself; and it proves that all this took. place 
the, day after she bought the arsenic at Murdoch’s.’”’ 

Now Miss Perry stated in evidence that L’Angelier took 
tea with her on the 9th of March, this after his first two 
illnesses and before the third, and that he said to her—‘‘ I 
cannot think why I was so unwell after getting that coffee and 
chocolate from her.’’ Miss Perry insisted that he referred 
to two separate occasions, and that ‘‘ her ’’ meant Madeleine. 
She also added that he said—‘‘ It is a perfect fascination, 
my attachment to that girl. If she were to poison me I 
would forgive her.’’ As evidence, of course, this is value- 
less, and would have been rejected in an English Court of 
law. 

We now come to the all-important date of the 22nd of 
March, the Sunday on which, after the receipt of a forwarded 
letter, L’Angelier hurried back to Glasgow. There is no 
question but that he went out on that evening, and the land- 
lady concluded that he was going to see his young lady, as 
on these occasions he always asked for the pass-key. This 
in itself is, of coyrse, in favour of the argument of the 
defence that he had not been to see Madeleine on the evening 
of the 22nd of February, for the landlady stated that on that 
date he had not asked for the pass-key, and neither had she 
let him in. There seemed a good deal of justification for 
the Dean of Faculty’s observation that the foundation of the 
prosecution’s case ‘was somewhat shaky. Until it came to 
dealing with the fatal events of the night of 22nd March, it 
may be said that the defence had had rather the better of it. 
In spite of the most rigorous search no purchase of arsenic 

25 


Madeleine Smith. 


could be traced to Madeleine at the time of L’Angelier’s first 
illness, and at the time of his second illness it could not even 
be proved that he had left the house. _ : ' 

By the date of the third illness three purchases of arsenic 
had been proved, and also the fact that L’Angelier had left 
his lodgings, taking the pass-key with him, but, again, we 
are confronted with the fact that no proof has ever been 
forthcoming that he and Madeleine met that night. Made- 
leine’s own account of that evening in her declaration is 
simply—‘‘ I went to bed on Sunday night about eleven 
o’clock, and remained in bed until the usual time of getting 
up the next morning, about eight or nine o’clock.’” Her 
little sister Janet, who was called for the defence, said—‘* I 
remember Sunday, the 22nd of March. We went to bed at 
the same time that night. I am quite sure. We went at 
10.30 or after that. We went downstairs together from the 
dining-room. I don’t remember which was in bed first. 
We were both undressing at the same time and got into bed 
about the same time. We usually take about a half an hour 
to undress. We were in no special hurry that night in un- 
dressing. My sister was in bed with me before I was asleep. 
I am sure of that. She was undressed as usual and in her 
night-clothes.”? | Cross-examined by the Lord Advocate—‘‘ I 
have seen my sister take cocoa. I never saw her make it in 
her room. She kept it in a paper in her room.’”” Re 
examined—‘ I have seen my sister taking cocoa in the dining- 
room. I don’t know she had been recommended to take it. 
No other body in the house took it. She kept it in her room, 
and took it in the dining-room. On Monday morning, the 
23rd of March, I found my sister in bed when I awoke.” 

Now L’Angelier left his lodgings about nine o’clock. A 
man named James Galloway, who knew L’Angelier by sight, 
stated that on Sunday, the 22nd March, he saw L’Angelier 
in Sauchiehall Street going east in the direction of Blyths- 
wood Square, and about four or five minutes from there. 
He was walking rather slowly. Mary Tweedle, a servant in 
8 lodging-house in Terrace Street, who also knew L’Angelier 
by sight, stated that he called at the house of her employer, 
Mrs. Parr, at about twenty minutes past nine that night and 


asked for his friend, Mr. M‘Alester, who was not at home. 
26 


Introduction. 


This house was about five minutes away from Blythswood 
Square. Thomas Kavan, a night constable in Glasgow, 
whose beat included the north and east sides of Blythswood 
Square, remembered seeing L’Angelier more than once pass- 
ing along the garden side by the railings, but he swore 
positively that he had not seen him on the night of the 22nd. 

No one will ever know exactly how L’Angelier spent the 
hours between nine o’clock and half-past two, when Mrs. 
Jenkins was aroused by a violent ringing of the street-door 
bell. The only thing that is certain is that during that 
period of time he had swallowed a vast quantity of arsenic. 

Now there is no doubt that Madeleine had a motive for 
wishing to be rid of L’Angelier. There is no doubt either 
that she could have had the opportunity had she chosen. 
There is also no doubt—it was never even denied by the 
defence—that she was in the possession of arsenic. Her own 
statement was that she had bought the poison as a cosmetic 
for washing her face and arms, and that she had used it all 
for that purpose—all the stories she told of needing it for 
the suppression of rats were proved false. The defence con- 
tended that it was impossible to administer such a large 
quantity of arsenic in any beverage so that it would remain 
undetected. ‘‘Even supposing,’’? argued the Dean of. 
Faculty, ‘‘ that anybody could swallow all that arsenic in a 
cup of cocoa, it was still impossible, with all that gritty un- 
dissolved powder passing over his throat, he should not 
become aware that he had swallowed something unusual. And 
yet,’’ he went on, ‘‘ instead of immediately calling medical 
aid or communicating his alarm or his suspicions to anybody, 
he staggers home in gre 1t pain; and through the long dreary 
hours of that fatal morning, amidst all his frightful suffer- 
ings, neither to the landlady nor to the doctor does he ever 
suggest that he might have been poisoned, or breathes a 
suspicion against her whom he had previously suspected of 
an attempt to poison him.’ 

And here we come to the most mysterious question in this 
mysterious case. Madeleine herself, innocent or guilty, is 
a comparatively straightforward proposition ; it is L’Angelier, 
that little, scheming, sensual, iron-willed lady-killer, who is 


the insoluble riddle. There can be only four explanations, 
27 


Madeleine Smith. 


of which two cannot be entertained seriously, of the events 
of that night. The first is that the poison may have been 
administered to him by some person or persons accidentally, 
which is obviously not worth considering. The second is 
that he was murdered by some person other than Madeleine, 
which is equally untenable. No one had any cause to wish 
him ill. These two flights of fancy can therefore be laid 
aside. The third supposition is that Madeleine deliberately 
administered the poison, and the fourth is the one suggested 
by the defence, that he committed suicide. Now this fourth 
suggestion is not beyond the bounds of possibility, but it may 
be observed that it is unlikely that he should have made 
several attempts on his life by the same very painful means. 
This, however, is not by any means a conclusive argument. 
Human nature holds so inuch that is strange, and L’Angelier 
in particular was a man of such devious ways, that it is just 
possible he might have planned to revenge himself on Made- 
leine by suicide. He may have meant the moral blame for 
his self-killing to be laid at her door, or he may even—for 
nothing is too fantastic to happen in real life—have killed 
himself meaning her to be accused of his murder; but if 
either of these suppositions be true, it is strange that he 
failed to ensure that they should occur. He had only to let. 
fall, when lying in his death agony, some such remark as he 
had made to Miss Perry previously for the onus of the deed 
to be firmly fixed on Madeleine, but through all those hours 
of agonised consciousness he said no word of her. If, on 
the other hand, we can allow ourselves for a moment the sup- 
position, for the sake of argument, that it was indeed Made- 
leine who had handed him the fatal draught, we are con- 
fronted with a riddle of equal strangeness, and we are driven 
into the belief that after all there was more good in this 
hitherto contemptible little man than had ever appeared. If 
he were attacked by his fatal illness after having accepted 
drink from Madeleine’s hand, if there had, indeed, been 
anything in his remark to Miss Perry about his having been 
taken ill after receiving coffee and cocoa from that same hand 
before, then beyond a shadow of a doubt he must have known 
why he was lying there in agony. He had shown himself 


entirely relentless to Madeleine up to that time, he was pre- 
28 


Introduction. 


pared to ruin her life, and yet when, as he must have believed. 
she had committed the last betrayal of him, he closes his lips. 
There is nothing in the whole of the case so strange as the 
problem of L’Angelier’s mind and soul during those last hours 
of his life. No possible solution to the riddle of his death 
provides any possible solution to the riddle of his life. 

It may be mentioned, as against the theory of suicide, 
that when an exhaustive inquiry was being held into all the 
purchases of arsenic made in Glasgow and its environs, there 
was no trace of any having been obtained by L’Angelier, any 
more than there was of any by Madeleine except the three 
amounts she had bought openly. 

L’Angelier died at about nine o’clock on Monday morning. 
He had previously asked his landlady to send for Miss Perry, 
but by the time she arrived he was already dead. L’Angelier 
may, of course, not have thought he was going to die so soon, 
and perhaps had Miss Perry arrived in time he would have 
confided to her the secret of the past night. But he does not 
seem to have been particularly urgent in his request or 
agitated in his mind; indeed, the last words he addressed to 
his landlady were—‘“‘ If I could only get a little sleep I think 
I should be well.’’ It looks as though he did not realise that 
he had got his death, and is an argument against the possi- 
bility of suicide. 

Miss Perry’s next move was a curious one. She went to 
the house in Blythswood Square and asked to see Mrs. Smith, 
whom she did not know and who, she knew, was unaware that 
Madeleine had not given L’Angelier up a couple of years 
before. Miss Perry’s account in the witness-box is as 
follows :—‘‘ I called on Mrs. Smith and intimated his death 
to her. « saw Miss Smith, but I did not mention it to her. 
She recognised me, shook hands, and asked me to go into the 
drawing-room if I wished to see her mamma. She also asked 
if anything was wrong. I said that I wanted to see her 
mamma, and that I would acquaint her with the object of 
my visit.”’ It is incredible, but true, that not only was 
Mrs. Smith never called to give evidence about this singular 
occurrence, but Miss Perry herself was never asked why she 
asked for Mrs. Smith instead of for Madeleine, or how Mrs. 
Smith took the news, whether she asked why Miss Perry had 

29 


Madeleine Smith. 


come to her with it at all, or how Madeleine bore herself that 
morning. If the truth were only known about that inter- 
view it would be invaluable to a right understanding of the 
case. But there is no doubt that the Smith family were 
protected in every way throughout all the proceedings. The 
only member of the family who was called was little Janet, 
and that was by the defence. 

In the afternoon of the same day M. Auguste de Mean, 
Chancellor to the French Consulate at Glasgow, called upon 
Mr. Smith. He had been acquainted with L’Angelier about 
three years, and knew of the liaison with Madeleine. He 
knew that there would be letters of Madeleine’s, which were 
bound to be discovered, and thought it better to go to Mr. 
Smith and warn him, so that he might perhaps be able to 
prevent his daughter’s letters falling into other hands. Mr. 
Smith was not called, so there is no record of how he took 
this news from M. de Mean. 

One day that week—it is impossible to fix the exact day— 
the Frenchman also had an interview with Madeleine in her 
mother’s presence, in which he advised her very seriously to 
tell the truth if she had seen L’Angelier on Sunday night. 
He warned her that any casual passer-by might have seen 
her if she had done so, and in that case, if she denied it, it 
would tell seriously against her. Madeleine persisted in her 
denial, saying—‘‘ I swear to you, Monsieur de Mean, I have 
not seen L’Angelier for three weeks.’”” ‘‘ I told her,’’ said 
M. de Mean, ‘‘ that my conviction of the moment was that 
she must have seen him on Sunday, that he had come on 
purpose from Bridge of Allan at her special invitation to 
see her, and I did not think it likely, admitting that he had 
committed suicide, that he had committed suicide without 
knowing why she had asked him to come to Glasgow.’’ Made- 
leine also denied to M. de Mean that L’Angelier had ever 
been into the Blythswood Square house. 

On the evening of the 25th of March Madeleine dined at 
Mr. Middleton’s, a minister of the United Presbyterian 
Church. Mr. Smith was ill in bed—bed seems to have been 
the great resort of the elder Smiths during this period of 
stress—and it was Mr. Minnoch who called for Madeleine and 
took her to the dinner party. He seemed still to have been 

30 


Introduction. 


unaware that anything was wrong, and it is impossible not 
to admire the gallant way in which the Smith family were 
keeping up the fiction that nothing was the matter. The 
important point about this Wednesday is that something 
occurred on it which frightened Madeleine. Perhaps it was 
the day on which M. de Mean called to see her and her mother 
—sureiy Mrs. Smith should have been questioned as to this— 
or perhaps the talk at the Middleton’s dinner party that 
evening was about the mysterious death of the young clerk. 
No one was questioned as to whether the subject came up in 
conversation that night or not, but next morning Madeleine 
rose early—if she had been to bed at all—and left the house. 
‘* T remember the morning Madeleine went away,’ said Janet 
in her evidence. ‘‘ I suppose she had been in bed that night. 
I was sleeping before she came to bed. She was away when 
I awoke.’’ All of which goes to show incidentally that little 
Janet was a very sound sleeper, and ratber discounts the 
value of her evidence as to the night of the 22nd. 

There must have been consternation in the Smith house- 
hold when it was discovered that Madeleine had vanished, 
and here, again, we do not know nearly enough, since none 
of the family was questioned about the events of that morning. 
Only Mr. Minnoch gave evidence to the effect that when he 
called on the Thursday morning he was told that she had left 
the house. He suggested that she might have gone to 
Rowaleyn, and he and her brother Jack went there to look 
for her. They found her on board the steamer which was 
going to Helensburgh and Row. They went to Rowaleyn with 
her in @ carriage, and brought her back to Blythswood 
Square. Mr. Minnoch seems to have treated her with great 
consideration. He was still unaware of the awful darkness 
of the shadow that was threatening her. He asked her why 
she had left her home and caused all her friends so much 
distress, and she replied that she was distressed to have caused 
her papa and mamma so much annoyance. Mr. Minnoch by 
now knew that there was some old love affair which was up- 
setting the Smith family, and concluded that she referred to 
that. Mr. Minnoch saw her again on the Sunday, when she 
told him that she had written a letter to some one, the object 
of which was to get back some letters she had written to him 

31 


Madeleine Smith. 


previously, The trusting Mr. Minnoch was there again on 
Monday, when they had no conversation on the subject. ‘The 
pretence that nothing serious was wrong was still being kept 
up at No. 7 Blythswood Square. On Monday Mr. Minnoch 
called to inquire for Mrs. Smith, having heard she was 
unwell. On Tuesday morning he called again, and Made- 
leine referred of her own accord to the subject of L’Angelier’s 
death, and spoke of the report that he had been poisoned with 
arsenic. She also remarked that she had been in the habit 
of buying arsenic, as she had learned at school that it was 
good for the complexion. This was the last time William 
Minnoch was to speak with Madeleine Smith, for that Tuesday 
afternoon she was arrested by the Procurator-Fiscal of 
Glasgow. 

She emitted a declaration, all that a prisoner could do 
in those days when it was not allowable to go into the witness- 
box. Her manner was calm and unruffied, her gaze candid. 
She declared that she had not seen L’Angelier for about three 
weeks before his death, when she spoke to him through the 
bars of her bedroom window. She admitted giving him 
cocoa from her window on one occasion, a good time previ- 
ously, on a date which she could not specify. She declared 
that the arsenic she had bought was for use as a cosmetic, and 
that she had so used it, that she had only said it was to kill 
rats because she did not wish anybody to know that she was 
using it for cosmetic purposes. She ended—‘‘ I never admin- 
istered, or caused to be administered, to Mr. L’Angelier 
arsenic or anything injurious, and this I declare to be the 
truth.”’ 

The trial, which lasted nine days, caused a tremendous 
sensation throughout the land. The speeches on both sides 
were brilliant, the defence in especial being a model of its 
kind. The onus of proof resting on the prosecution, the 
defence’s strongest position was that no proof could be brought 
forward as to Madeleine having met L’Angelier before any of 
the three occasions on which he was taken ill. No such proof 
ever was forthcoming, and there cannot be the smallest doubt 
that it was this which enabled the jury to give a verdict of 
““ Not Guilty ’’ as regards the accusation of administering 
the poison on the first occasion and ‘‘ Not Proven ’’ in answer 

32 


Pierre Emile L’Angelier. 


Introduction. 


to the accusation of administering it on the other two 
occasions. 

The Lord Justice-Clerk, in his admirably reasoned and 
scrupulously fair summing up, warned the jury of the differ- 
ence between inference and proof. Speaking of the inference 
to be drawn from her letter asking him to see her, which 
brought L’Angelier back to Glasgow, Lord Hope asked them 
to put themselves the question—‘‘ Is this a satisfactory and 
just inference? If you find it so, I cannot tell you that you 
are not at liberty to act upon it, because most of the matters 
occurring in life must depend upon circumstantial evidence 
and upon the inference which a jury may feel bound to draw. 
But it is an inference of a very serious character—it is an 
inference upon which the death of this party by the hand of 
the prisoner really must depend. And then you will take 
all the other circumstances of the case into consideration and 
see whether you can from them infer that they met. If you 
think they met together that night, and he was seized and 
taken ill, and died of arsenic, the symptoms beginning 
shortly after the time he left her, it will be for you to say 
whether, in that case, there is any doubt as to whose hand 
administered the poison.’’ Towards the close of the summing 
up he again warned them—‘‘ You must keep in view that 
arsenic could only be administered by her if an interview 
took place with L’Angelier, and that interview, though it may 
be the result of an inference that may satisfy you morally 
that it did take place, still rests upon an inference alone; 
and that inference is to be the ground, and must be the 
ground, on which a verdict of ‘ Guilty ’ is to rest. Gentle- 
men, you will see, therefore, the necessity of great caution 
and jealousy in dealing with an inference which you could 
draw from this.”’ 

There were various excellent points for the defence which 
were made the most of, but put all together they did not amount 
to the value of this failure of proof on the part of the prose- 
cution. The Dean of Faculty argued very reasonably that 
L’Angelier’s death only put Madeleine in a worse position, as 
her letters were then bound to be discovered, and the exposure 
and shame which she had dreaded bound to come upon her. 
The arsenic which she had bought at Murdoch’s was mixed 


Co) 33 


Madeleine Smith. 


with soot; Currie’s was mixed with waste indigo. Neither 
of the colouring matters was discovered in the stomach of the 
deceased. The prosecution argued, with medical evidence on 
their side, that the quantity of waste indigo in Currie’s 
arsenic was very small, and that if a sufficient portion of that 
arsenic had been administered to cause death, and that prior 
to death a great vomiting had taken place, no colouring 
matter would remain, and that, if the arsenic containing 
carbonaceous particles had been administered long enough 
before death, traces of the carbon would not be found. The 
defence argued that it was impossible to suspend as much 
arsenic as the deceased must have taken in any fluid. The 
prosecution maintained that cocoa was an ideal vehicle to 
have held a large quantity of poison in suspension. There 
was, in fact, the usual conflict in the medical evidence. 

The defence used the same argument about L’Angelier’s 
habits that were used years later in reference to those of Mr. 
Maybrick. It maintained that L’Angelier was fond of dosing 
himself and was an arsenic eater, and he had certainly -boasted 
of this habit to several people at one time in his life; but 
L’Angelier boasted of so much that it would have been rash 
to accept anything he said as necessarily being the truth. 
The defence also showed that L’Angelier was in the habit of 
doctoring himself, and that he had frequent and bad attacks 
of stomach trouble.. The defence sought to prove that 
L’Angelier was already ill, when on Sunday, the 22nd of 
March, he started to go back to Glasgow from Bridge of 
Allan. Evidence was produced of a man, whom the defence 
declared to be L’Angelier, who entered various apothecary 
shops and demanded laudanum, and in one case a white 
powder, nature unknown. The prosecution produced evi- 
dence to show that L’Angelier had been in perfect health, and 
had not deflected from his way to make any purchases on the 
homeward journey. And, indeed, it seems unlikely that this 
fantastic story of a wandering stranger, alleged to be 
L’Angelier, was ever taken very seriously by the defence. 
The incontrovertible fact remains that the prosecution failed 
to adduce the smallest vestige of proof that Madeleine met 
L’Angelier before any one of the three occasions on which he 
was taken ill. It is also incontrovertible that had the prose- 

34 


Introduction. 


cution been able to adduce such proof, the jury would have 
been unable to bring anything but an unfavourable verdict. 

We now come to the most interesting point in the whole 
of this case. Amongst L’Angelier’s effects was found a little 
pocket-book which he had started to keep on the 11th of 
February that year. There are various entries of no par- 
ticular interest, then comes—‘‘ Thursday, 19th February. 
_ Saw Mimi a few moments. Was very ill during the uight. 
Friday, 20th February. Passed two pleasant hours with 
Mimi in the drawing-room. Saturday, 2lst February. Did 
not feel well. Sunday, 22nd February. Saw Mimi in 
drawing-room. Promised me French Bible. Taken very 
ill.’? These dates cover, it will be observed, the dates of 
the first two illnesses. The diary was not kept beyond the 
14th of March. 

The defence, quite rightly, fought hard to obtain the ex- 
clusion of this pocket-book from the evidence. The Lord 
Justice-Clerk, Lord Handyside, and Lord Ivory had to decide 
this vital question of the pocket-book. The Lord Justice- 
Clerk and Lord Handyside held that it was not admissible. 
Lord Ivory disagreed with them. The Lord Justice-Clerk 
said he was unable to admit such evidence. ‘‘ It might relax 
the sacred laws of evidence to an extent that the mind could 
hardly contemplate. One could not tell how many documents 
might exist and be found in the repositories of a deceased 
person. A man might have threatened another, he might 
have hatred against him and be determined to revenge him- 
self, and what entries might he not make in a diary for this 
purpose? ’’ Lord Handyside pointed out that, had the 
writer of the memoranda still been alive, they could not have 
been used for evidence. They might have been used in the 
witness-box to refresh the memory. It was generally felt 
dangerous to admit as evidence memoranda on which no 
examination could in the nature of things be possible. The 
pocket-book was therefore ruled out as evidence, and it is 
inspiring to observe the scrupulous manner in which the Lord 
Justice-Clerk kept his own knowledge of those entries, not 
only out of his summing up, but apparently even out of his 
mind while he did so. 

The prosecution contended, with every show of reason, that 

35 


Madeleine Smith. 


i= wae perfectly possible for Madeleime to slip upstairs, 
without waking either her little sister sleeping the sound sleep 
of childheed or the exhausted hard-worked servants, for her 
to open the front deor and admit her lover into the drawing- 
roem or dimimg-room of the house in Blythswood Square. 
That she did admit him on several occasions in spite of her 
denial there is no doubt. In a letter written to L’Angelier 
just before Christmas, Madeleine says—‘‘ Beloved Emile, we 
must meet. If you leve me you will come to me when P. 
and M. are away im Edinburgh, which I think will be the 
seventh or tenth of January.’”’ We have Christina Haggart’s 
word for it that he was at least on one occasicn admitted to 
the back of the house. We have nothing but the knowledge 
that it was possible to lead us to infer that he was ever 
admitted by Madeleine herself at the front door. 

Madeleine remained calm, the colour in her cheeks did not 
waver, during the hours when the prosecution and the defence 
were fighting over every inch of the ground—always excepting 
that part railed of and kept sacred to the Smith family— 
about which so much could have been learned. 

It is not uninteresting to picture what might have trans- 
pired had it been possible in those days to put Madeleine 
Smith herself in the box. How would she have dealt with 
the question the prosecution must undoubtedly have put to 
her—the question as to why she wrote that last letter, in terms 
of passionate love, bidding L’Angelier come to her? She 
could not have denied she was wishing to get rid of him, that 
all her preparations for her marriage with Mr. Minnoch were 
going forward. . . . What reason could she have given 
for writing in those terms except that she wanted an inter- 
view with him, and that those terms were the only ones 
which would bring him? And what answer could she have 
given as to why she wanted the interview! The dock pro- 
tected her from the possibility of such questioning, and in the 
dock her poise never deserted her. 

The verdict ‘‘ Not Proven ’’ was received with wild en- 
thusiaam in the Court; Madeleine Smith remained the 
calmest person there. In the division on the vote of the jury 
@ minority of two cast their vote for ‘‘ Guilty ” against the 
remaining thirteen. and it has beetf said that many of the 

36 


Introduction. 


majority felt convinced of Madeleine’s guilt, but preferred 
to take the other way out of the dilemma in which they found 
themselves. 

Madeleine was taken below, where she changed her dress 
of rich brown silk, put on a cloak and a bonnet with a dark 
veil, and she was then escorted by her brother out of a side- 
door to a waiting carriage. They took the train to a siation 
near Glasgow, where another cab was waiting to drive her 
home to Rowaleyn, which she reached after ten o’clock that 
night. Of that strange homecoming nothing is known, 
though much may be conjectured. Four days later she wrote 
a letter to Miss Aitken, the matron of Edinburgh prison, 
which is far more profoundly shocking than ay of her violent 
epistles to L’Angelier. 

“* Dear Miss Aitken. You shall be glad to hear that I am 
well—in fact I am quite well, and my spirits not in the least 
down. I left Edinburgh and went to Slateford, and got 
home to Rowaleyn during the night. But, alas, I found 
Mama in a bad state of health. But I trust in a short time 
all will be well with her. The others are all well. The 
feeling in the west is not so good towards me as you kind 
Edinburgh people showed me. I rather think it shall be 
necessary for me to leave Scotland for a few months, but 
Mama is so unwell we do not like to fix anything at present. 
If ever you see Mr. C. Combe tell him that the panel was not 
at all pleased with the verdict. I was delighted with the 
loud cheer the court gave. I did not feel in the least put 
about when the jury were out considering whether they should 
send me home or keep me. I think I must have had several 
hundred letters, all from gentlemen, some offering me con- 
solation, and some their hearths and homes. My friend I 
know nothing of. I have not seen him. I hear he has been 
ill, which I don’t much care. I hope you will give me a note. 
Thank Miss Bell and Agnes in my name for all their kindness 
and attention to me. I should like you to send me my Bible 
and watch to 124 St. Vincent Street, Glasgow, to J. Smith. 
The country is looking most lovely. As soon as I know my 
arrangements I shall let you know where I am to be sent to. 
With kind love to yourself and Mr. Smith, ever believe me, 


yours sincerely, Madeleine Smith.”’ : 


Madeleine Smith. 


This is our last glimpse of Madeleine, not ravaged, not 
beaten down, merely slightly piqued because ‘‘ the feeling in 
the west is not so good towards me as you kind Edinburgh 
people showed me.’’ She even thinks it -‘‘ may ”’ be necessary 
for her to go away for a few months! But best of all is— 
‘* If ever you see Mr. C. Combe, tell him the panel was not 
at all pleased with the verdict. . . .’? Whatever we may 
think of Madeleine Smith, it is impossible not to admire the 
excellent state of her nervous system. 


38 


Leading Dates in the Madeleine Smith Case. 


1855, April. 
April. 

18th April. 
July. 

1856, June. 
September. 
November. 

1857, 28th January. 
February. 


9th February. 
10th February. 


llth February. 


L’Angelier introduced to Madeleine Smith. 
Madeleine’s first letter to L’Angelier. 

Madeleine’s first attempt to end the acquaintance. 
Madeleine’s second attempt to break off acquaintance. 
Madeleine becomes L’ Angelier’s mistress. 

William Minnoch stays with the Smiths at Rowaleyn. 
The Smiths move to the Blythswood Square house. 
Madeleine accepts Mr. Minnoch’s offer of marriage. 


Madeleine writes breaking her engagement with 
L’Angelier. 


Madeleine writes again to same effect. 


Madeleine writes in answer to L’Angelier’s letter refusing 
to break engagement. 


Madeleine writes begging for mercy and asking for an 
interview. 


Some date in 2nd week Madeleine attempts to buy prussic acid and fails. 


in February. 
About 12th February. 
Tuesday, 17th. 
Thursday, 19th. 
Saturday, 21st. 
Sunday, 22nd. 
4th March. 


6th March. 
12th March. 


17th March. 
18th March. 


Madeleine is reconciled with L’ Angelier. 
L’Angelier dines with Miss Perry. 
L’Angelier’s first attack of illness. 
Madeleine buys arsenic from Murdoch. 
L’Angelier’s second attack of illness. 


Madeleine writes L’Angelier suggesting he goes to Isle 
of Wight. 


Madeleine buys arsenic from Currie and goes with her 
family to Bridge of Allan. 


Madeleine arranges date of her marriage with Mr. 
Minnoch. 


The Smiths return to Glasgow. 
Madeleine buys arsenic from Currie. 
39 


Leading Dates. 


19th March, L’Angelier goes: to Bridge of Allan. 

21st March. Madeleine writes begging L’Angelier to come to her. 
Sunday, 22nd. L’Angelier returns from Bridge of Allan. 

Monday, 23rd. _‘L’Angelier dies of arsenical poison. 


Monday, 23rd. Miss Perry oa on Mrs. Smith. M. de Mean calls on 
r. Smit 


Tuesday, 24th. First post-mortem examination. 
Wednesday, 25th, Mr. Minnoch takes Madeleine to dine at the Middletons, 


Thursday, 26th Madeleine flees to Rowaleyn and is brought home by Mr. 
March. Minnoch. 


Thursday, 26th L’Angelier buried. 


March, 
Tuesday, 31st _L’Angelier’s body exhumed. 
March. 
Tuesday, 31st | Madeleine arrested. 
March. 
30th June. Trial of Madeleine Smith begins. 
9th July. Trial of Madeleine Smith ends with a verdict of ‘‘ Not 


Proven.” 


40 


THE TRIAL. 


First Day—Tuesday, 30th June, 1857. 


The High Court of Justiciary met at ten o’clock. The judges 
present were the Lorp Justicu-Cimrxk (Horr) and Lords Ivory 
and Hanpysips. The Court-room—to which admission was 
strictly regulated by special arrangements approved of by the 
Lord Justice-Clerk—was crowded in every part. 

There appeared on behalf of the Crown—The Lorp Apvocats 
Moncrmrr), the Soxicrror-GeneraL (MaiTtanp), and Mr. 

ONALD Mackenziz, Advocate-Depute; Mr. J. C. Bropm, W.S., 
agent for the Crown. For the defence there appeared—The 
Dzan or Facunty (Inexis), and Messrs. Gzorce Youna and 
AtexanpgeR Mownorierr, advocates; the agents being Messrs. 
Rangen, Warxer & Jonnston, W.S., Edinburgh; Messrs. 
MoncrizFr, Parsrson, Forszs, & Barr, Glasgow; and Mr. Jonn 
Wuxi, of Messrs. Wilkie & Faulds, Glasgow. 

Mapsuging Suita was placed at the bar, charged with having 
(1) on two separate occasions in February, 1857, administered 
arsenic, or other poison, to Pierre Emile L’Angelier, with intent 
to murder him ; and (2) on an occasion in March, 1857, by means 
- of poison, murdered L’Angelier. The following is a copy of the 
indictment against her at the instance of Her Majesty’s 
Advocate :— 

Mape.zings SmitH, or Mapgizine Hamitron Smrru, now or 
lately prisoner in the prison of Glasgow, you are indicted and 
accused, at the instance of James Moncreiff, Esquire, Her 
Majesty's Advocate for Her Majesty’s interest: That albeit, by 
the laws of this and of every other well-governed realm, the 
wickedly and feloniously administering arsenic, or other poison, 
to any of the lieges, with intent to murder; as also, murder, are 
crimes of an heinous nature, and severely punishable: Yet true 
it is and of verity, that you, the said Madeleine Smith, or 
Madeleine Hamilton Smith, are guilty of the said crimes, or of 
one or other of them, actor, or art and part: In so far as (1) 
on the 19th or 20th day of February, 1857 (Thursday or Friday), 
or on one or other of the days of that month, or of January 
immediately preceding, or of March immediately following, 
within or near the house situated in or near Blythswood Square, 
fn or near Glasgow, or situated in or near Blythswood Square, 

4t 


Madeleine Smith. 


and in or near Mains Street, both in or near Glasgow, then 
occupied by James Smith, architect, your father, then residing 
there, and with whom you then and there resided, you the said 
Madeleine Smith, or Madeleine Hamilton Smith, did, wickedly 
and feloniously, administer to (or cause to be taken by) Emile 
L’Angelier, or Pierre Emile L’Angelier, now deceased, and then 
or lately before in the employment of W. B. Huggins and Com- 
pany, then and now or lately merchants in or near Bothwell 
Street, im or near Glasgow, as a clerk, or in some 
other capacity, and then or lately before lodging or 
residing with David Jenkins, a joiner, or with Ann 
Duthie or Jenkins, wife of the said David Jenkins, in or 
near Franklin Place, in or near Glasgow, a quantity or quantities 
of arsenic, or other poison to the prosecutor unknown, in cocoa, 
or in coffee, or in some other article or articles of food or drink 
to the prosecutor unknown, or in some other manner to the 
prosecutor unknown, and this you did with intent to murder the 
said Emile L’Angelier, or Pierre Emile L’Angelier; and the 
said Emile L’Angelier, or Pierre Emile L’Angelier, having 
accordingly taken the said quantity or quantities of 
arsenic or other poison, or part thereof, so ad- 
ministered (or caused to be taken) by you, did, in conse 
quence thereof, and immediately or soon after taking the same, 
or part thereof, suffer severe illness: Likeas (2), on the 22nd 
or 23rd day of February, 1857 (Sunday or Monday), or on one or 
other of the days of that month, or of January immediately pre- 
ceding, or of March immediately following, within or near the 
said house situated in or near Blythswood Square aforesajd, or 
situated in or near Blythswood Square, and in or near Mains 
Street aforesaid, you, the said Madeleine Smith, or Madeleine 
Hamilton Smith, did, wickedly and feloniously, administer to 
(or cause to be taken by) the said Emile L’Angelier or Pierre 
Emile L’Angelier, now deceased, a quantity or quantities of 
arsenic, or other poison to the prosecutor unknown, in cocoa, 
or in coffee, or in some other article or articles of food or drink 
to the prosecutor unknown, or in some other manner to the prose- 
cutor unknown ; and this you did with intent to murder the said 
Emile L’Angelier, or Pierre Emile L’Angelier ; and the said Emile 
L’Angelier, or Pierre Emile L’Angelier, having accordingly taken 
the said quantity or quantities of arsenic or other poison, or part 
thereof, so administered (or caused to be taken) by you, did, in 
consequence thereof, and immediately or soon after taking the 
same, or part thereof, suffer severe illness; Likeas (3), on the 
22nd or 23rd day of March, 1857 (Sunday or Monday), or on one 
or other of the days of that month, or of February immediately 
preceding, or of April immediately following, within or near the 
said house situated in or near Blythswood Square aforesaid, or 
situated in or near Blythswood Square, and in or near Mains 
42 


The Trial. 


Street aforesaid, you the said Madeleine Smith, or Madeleine 
Hamilton Smith, did, wickedly and feloniously, administer to 
(or cause to be taken by) the said Emile L’Angelier, or Pierre 
Emile L’Angelier, in some article or articles of food or drink to 
the prosecutor unknown, or in some other manner to the prose- 
cutor unknown, a quantity or quantities of arsenic, or other poison 
to the prosecutor unknown; and the said Emile L’Angelier, or 
Pierre Emile L’Angelier, having accordingly taken the said 
quantity or quantities of arsenic or other poison, or part thereof, 
so administered (or caused to be taken) by you, did, in conse- 
quence thereof, and immediately or soon after taking the same, 
or part thereof, suffer severe illness, and did, on the 23rd day 
of March, 1857, or about that time, die in consequence of the 
said quantity or quantities of arsenic or other poison, or part 
thereof, having been so taken by him, and was thus murdered 
by you the said Madeleine Smjth, or Madeleine Hamilton Smith : 
And you, the said Madeleine Smith, or Madeleine Hamilton 
Smith, having been apprehended and taken before Archibald 
Smith, Esquire, Advocate, Sheriff-Substitute of Lanarkshire, did, 
in his presence, at Glasgow, on the 31st day of March, 1857, emit 
and subscribe a declaration: Which declaration, as also the 
papers, documents, letters, envelopes, prints, likenesses or 
portraits, books, and articles, or one or more of them, enumerated 
in an inventory hereunto annexed, being to be used in evidence 
against you, the said Madeleine Smith, or Madeleine Hamilton 
Smith, at your trial, will, for that purpose, be in due time lodged 
in the hands of the Clerk of the High Court of Justiciary, before 
which you are to be tried, that you may have an opportunity of 
seeing the same: All which, or part thereof, being found proven 
by the verdict of an Assize, or admitted by the judicial confession 
of you, the said Madeleine Smith, or Madeleine Hamilton Smith, 
before the Lord Justice-General, Lord Justice-Clerk, and Lords 
Commissioners of Justiciary, you, the said Madeleine Smith, or 
Madeleine Hamilton Smith, ought to be punished with the pains 
of law, to deter others from committing the like crimes in all 


time coming. D. Macxenzim, A.D 
Ly At DL. 


Inventory of Papers, Documents, Letters, Envelopes, Prints, 
Likenesses or Portraits, Books, and Articles referred to in 


the foregoing Indictment. 


1-154. A list of letters and envelopes, 77 in number with an 

ual number of copies of said letters, and of the addresses on 
said envelopes. 

155. A medical report or certificate, bearing to be dated ‘‘ At 
Glasgow, this twenty-eighth day of March, one thousand eight 
hundred and Sak Ga years,” and to be subscribed ‘‘ Hugh 
Thomson, M.D., 35 Bath Street ; James Steven, M.D., 168 Stafford 
Place, Glasgow,” or bearing to be similarly dated and subscribed. 


43 


Madeleine Smith. 


156. A medical report or certificate, bearing te be dated 
‘Glasgow, 8rd April, 1857,’’ and to be subscribed ‘ ee i Thom- 
son, Doctor of Medicine, 35 Bath Street ; James Steven, M.D., 168 
Stafford Place; Robert T. Corbett, M.D.,”’ or bearing to be simi- 
larly dated and subscribed. ‘ ; 

17. A chemical or other report or certificate, bearing to be 
dated ‘‘ Andersonian University, Glasgow, 8th April, 1857,”’ and 
to be subscribed ‘‘ Frederick Penny, Professor of Chemistry,” or 
bearing to be similarly dated and subscribed. ; 

158. A chemical or other report or certificate, bearing to be 
dated ‘‘ Andersonian Upirem: Glasgow, 30th April, 1857,’’ and 
to be subscribed. ‘‘ Frederick Penny, Professor of Chemistry,’”’ or 
bearing to be similarly dated and subscribed. : 

159. A chemical or other report or certificate, bearing to be 
dated ‘‘ Andersonian University, Glasgow, 30th April, 1857,”’ and 
to be subscribed ‘‘ Frederick Penny, Profr. of Chemistry,’’ or 
bearing to be similarly dated and subscribed. : 

160. A chemical or other report or certificate, bearing to be 
dated ‘‘ Edinburgh, 8th May, 1857,” and to be subscribed “‘R. 
Christison, M.D., &c.,’’ or bearing to be similarly dated and 
subscribed. ; ‘ 

161. A chemical or other report or certificate, bearing to be 
dated ‘‘ Edinburgh, 26th May, 1857,” and to be subscribed ‘R. 
Christison,’’ or bearing to be similarly dated and subscribed. 

162. A phial, with brown or other liquid therein, labelled 
“‘The draught to be taken as directed—Mr. ys Angst ** and 
having a label attached thereto, marked ‘‘ No. 162 of nventory Hae 
and also said labels. 

163. A bottle, labelled ‘‘ Cough Mixture,’ and containing cough 
mixture or other contents, and having a label attached thereto, 
marked *‘‘ No. 163 of Inventory’’; and also said labels. 

164. A bottle, labelled ‘‘Camphorated Oil,’’ and containin 
camphorated oil or other li uid, and having a label attach 
thereto, marked ‘‘ No. 164 of Inventory ’’; and also said labels. 


65. A phial, labelled ‘‘ Laudanum,”’ and containing laudanum 
or other li uid, and having a label attached thereto, marked 
“‘No. 165 of Inventory ’’; and also said labels 


166. A phial, containing a quantity of liquid, labelled ‘‘ A tea- 
ealeg every two hours, in water,” and having a label attached 
thereto, marked ‘ No. 166 of Inventory ’’; and also said labels. 

167. A bottle, containing a white or other powder, labelled ‘‘ For 
Cliolera,’’ and having a label attached thereto, marked ‘‘ No. 167 
of Inventory ’’; and also said labels. 

168. A bottle, containing oil or other liquid, and having a label 
pops ee thereto, marked ‘“‘ No. 168 of Inventory ’’; and also said 
abel. 

169. A bottle, containing a brown or other liquid, labelled “A 
tablespoonful to be taken thrice daily,’’ and having a label 
ee thereto, marked ‘‘ No. 169 of Inventory ’’; and also said 
abels. 

170. Four packets, containing powders, and having a label 
attached thereto, marked ‘‘ No. 170 of Inventory,”’ and iearine to 
be respectively marked A, B,C, D; and also the said label. 

171. A bottle, containing Eau de Cologne or other liquid, and 
having a label attached thereto, marked ‘‘ No. 171 of Inventory " ; 
pas : _ peepee label. . 

, ottle, containing a white or other powder, and havin 
a label attached thereto, marked ‘‘ No. 172 ue Inventory ’’; an 
also the said label. C 


173. Part of a cake of cocoa or chocolate or other substance, 
44 


The Trial. 


having a label attached thereto, marked ‘‘ No. 173 of Inventory ” ; 
and also the said label. 

174. Some dried plants, having a label attached thereto, marked 
‘‘No. 174 of Inventory ’’; and also the said label. 

175. A leather or other dressing-case and fittings, having a label 
—— thereto, marked “‘ No. 175 of Inventory”; and also the 
said label. 

176. A leather bag, having a label attached thereto, marked 
‘No. 176 of Inventory ’’; and also the said label. 

177. A pocket-book or other book, entitled ‘“‘The Glasgow Com- 
mercial Memorandum Book or Pocket Journal, with Almanack, 
1857,”’ containing memoranda, or entries, or other writing therein, 
and having a label attached thereto, bearing the date ‘‘ Glasgow, 
80th March, 1857,’’ and bearing to be subscribed ‘“‘ John Murray, 
Bernard M‘Lachlin, W. A. Stevenson,’’ or bearing to be spoeoeebel 
dated and subscribed, and having another label attached, marke 
“No. 177 of Inventory ’’; and also said labels. 

178. A copy of said pocket-book or other book, mentioned in No. 
177 hereof, and containing a copy of the memoranda or entries or 
other writing contained in the pocket-book’ or other book men- 
tioned in No. 177 hereof, and having a label attached thereto, 
marked ‘‘ No. 178 of Inventory’’; as also said label. 

179. A likeness or portrait, and a frame, selges a label attached 
thereto, bearing to be dated ‘‘ Glasgow, 30th March, 1857,” and 
to be subscribed ‘‘ John Morey. Bernard M‘Lauchlin,” or penne 
to be similarly dated and subscribed, and having another labe 
ha, thereto, marked ‘‘ No. 179 of Inventory ”’ ;: as also said 
abels. 

180. A likeness or portrait, and a leather or other case, having 
a label attached thereto, bearing to be dated ‘‘ Glasgow, 31st 
March, 1857,” and to be subscribed ‘‘ John Murray, Bernard 
M‘Lauchlin,”’ or bearing to be similarly dated and subscribed 
and having another label attached thereto bearing to be marked 
«*No. 180 of Inventory ”’ as also said labels. 

181. A top or other coat. 

182. A Balmoral or other bonnet. 

183. A phial, containing glycerine or other fluid, labelled 
<‘ @lycerine and Rose Water,” and having a label attached thereto, 
marked ‘‘ No. 183 of Inventory ’’ ; as also said labels. 

184. A phial, containing a yellowish or other substance, having 
a eet a thereto, marked ‘‘ No. 184 of Inventory ’’; as also 
said label. 

185, A book, entitled ‘‘ Fisher’s Sale of Poisons Registry Book,” 
or bearing to be similarly entituled, having entries or writing 
therein, and bearing a docquet thereon in the following or 
similar terms :—‘‘ Glasgow, 3rd April, 1857, produced and referred 
to by George Murdoch, James Dic ie,” and having a label attached 
thereto, marked “‘ No. 185 of Inventory” ; as also said label. 

186. A book, entitled ‘‘ Fisher’s Sale of Poisons Registry Book,” 
or bearing to be similarly entitled, having entries or writing 
therein, and bearing a docquet thereon in the following or 
similar terms :—‘“‘ Glasgow, 8rd April, 1857, produced and referred 
to by G. C. Haliburton, John Currie,’ and having a label attached 
thereto, marked ‘‘ No. 186 of Inventory ” : as also said label. 

187. A glass bottle, labelled ‘‘ Pickles,’ and having a label 
po oreg terete: marked ‘‘No. 187 of Inventory’’; as also said 
abels. 

188. A crest die or other die, and a wax impression of said crest 
or other die, both attached to a label, marked ‘No. 188 o 
Inventory ’’; as also said label. 
45 


Madeleine Smith. 


189. A document, entitled on the.back ‘‘ Plan of the house occu- 

ied by Mr. James Smith at No. 7 Blythswood Square, 185732 and 

aring to be subscribed ‘‘ Charles O’Neil, Glasgow, April, 1857, 
or bearing to be similarly subscribed. 

190. Two pasteboard or other boxes. ‘ a 

191. A pass-book, commencing with the colloming- or similar 
words :—‘‘ Mr. Langelier, Falkland Place, to J. almers, 42 
St. George’s Road.’ ; : ; : 

192. A pass-book, labelled on the outside ‘‘ Mr. Langelier, with 
John Stewart, 38 St. George’s Road,”’ or bearing to be similarly 
labelled. 

198. A book, bearing to be titled ger Book, post office 
Glasgow,’’ and to commence with the date of 21st July, 1856, an 
to eet with the date of 7th March, 1857, or bearing a similar title 
and date. 

194. A card, bearing the words ‘‘ Emile L’ Angelier.” . 

195. A book, entituled on the back “‘ Oliver & Boyd’s New Edin- 
burgh Almanac, 1857.”’ § 

196. A book, entituled on the back ‘‘ Oliver & Boyd’s New Edin- 
burgh Almanac, 1856.’’ : 

197 . A book, entituled ‘‘ Oliver & Boyd’s New Edinburgh 
Almanac, 1855.” 

198. A tube, labelled ‘‘ Powder from contents of stomach,” and 
having a label attached thereto, marked ‘‘ No. 198 of Inventory ’’ ; 
as also said labels. 

199. A bottle, having a label attached, bearing the date and 
words ‘‘ 27th March, 1857. _ Portion of preparad fluid from con- 
tents of small intestine,’ and bearing to be subscribed ‘‘ Frederick 
Penny,’’ or bearing a similar date, words, and signature, and 
-having another label attached, marked “‘ No. 199 of p PES NG 
and also said labels. 

200. A bottle, containing a liquid, and labelled ‘‘ L’ Angelier— 
Portion of prepared fluid from stomach, 27th March,. 1857. 
Frederick Penny,’’ and having a label attached, marked ‘No. 200 
of Inventory ’’; as also said labels. 

201. A bottle, having a label attached, bearing the words ‘‘Con- 
tents of small intestine,’’ and bearing to be subscribed ‘‘ Frederick 
Penny,’ or bearing similar words and subscription, and having 
another label attached, marked ‘‘ No. 201 of Inventory”; as also 
said labels. 

202. A jar, containing a portion of small intestine or other 
substance or substances, and having a label attached, bearing to 
be dated ‘‘ 31st March, 1857,’’ and to be subscribed ‘‘ Frederick 
Penny,’”’ and having another label attached, marked ‘‘ No. 202 of 
Inventory ’’; as also said labels. 

203. A jar, having a label attached, bearing the date and words 
‘‘ Large intestine, 3lst March, 1857,’’ and bearing to be subscribed 
‘‘Frederick Penny,’ or bearing a similar date, words, and sub- 
aoripiien and having another label attached, marked “No. 203 
of p Pnrentery ie as a = eae lapels 

2 r, having a label attac bearing the date and wo 

“31st March, 1857, Portion of Liver,” ath! to be iat er 
‘‘ Frederick Penny,’’ or bearing a similar date, words, and sub- 
scription, and having another label attached, marked “No. 204 of 
thgentory a8 ae said labels. ; 

: jar, having a piece of leather attached, bearing th 
date and words, ‘‘ 31st March, 1857, Portion of Brain,’ Seeing 
subscribed ‘‘ Frederick Penny,’’ or bearing a similar date, words, 
and subscription, and neve & label attached, marked ‘No. 205 
of Inventory ’’;-as also said labels. 


46 ; 


The Trial. 


Penny,” and having another ‘label attached, marked ‘‘ No. 208 of 
Inventory ’’ ; as also said labels. 

209. A document, bearing to be entituled on the back ‘‘ Death 
of Pierre Emile L’Angelier, List of Articles taken by Dr. Penny to 
Dr. Christison, 11th April, 1857,‘‘ and to be initialed ‘“F. P.,” or 
bearing to be similarly entituled and initialed. 

210. A packet, containing arsenic or other powder, bearing to 
_ mark ‘‘ Murdoch’s Arsenic,’’ and to be subscribed ‘‘ Frederick 

enny. 

211. A packet, bearing to be marked ‘‘Currie’s Arsenic,” and 
to be subscribed ‘“‘ Frederick Penny.” 

212. A bottle, containing arsenic or other powder, and bearing 
to be labelled ‘‘ Arsenic oison,”’ and having a piece of paper 
attached, bearing the signature ‘George Carruthers Haliburton,” 
and dated “‘ April, 1857,’ or bearing # similar signature and date. 

213. A bottle, containing arsenic or other powder, and bearing, 
to be labelled ‘“‘ Arsenic Poison,’’? and having a piece of paper 
attached, bearing the signature ‘‘ James Dickie,’’ and the date 
“18th April, 1857,”’ or bearing a similar signature and date. 


214. A portmanteau. 
D. Macxznzr, A.D. 


Eighty-nine witnesses were cited, of whom the following fifty- 
seven were called to give evidence against the accused : — 


1. Archibald Smith, Esquire, advocate, Sheriff-Substitute of 
Lanarkshire. 

2. George Gray, clerk in the Sheriff-clerk’s Office, Glasgow. 

3. Ann SDuthic or Jenkins, wife of David Jenkins, joiner, No. 
11 Franklin Place, Glasgow. a 

4. James Heggie, salesman to John Chalmers, provision dealer, 
St. George’s Road, Glasgow. 

5. John Stewart, flesher, St. George’s Road, Glasgow. 

6. Catherine Robertson, lodging-house keeper, No. 6 Elm Row, 
Edinburgh. ’ ; ; 

7. Peter Pollock, stationer, Leith Street, Edinburgh. _ 

8. Mrs. Jane Bayne, wife of James Bayne, tailor, Bridge of 
Allan. 

9. Charles Neil Rutherfoord, postmaster, Bridge of Allan. 

10. William Fairfoul, railway guard, Academy Street, Coat-— 


bridge. 


11. Thomas Ross, auctioneer, Govan Street, Hutchesontown, 
Glasgow. i , 

12. William A. Stevenson, warehouseman with Huggins & Co., 
Glasgow. 

13. Hugh Thomson, physician and surgeon, Bath Street, 
Glasgow. 


14. James Steven, physician and surgeon, New City Road, 


Glasgow. 
47 


Madeleine Smith. 


15. Frederick Penny, professor of chemistry, Andersonian Uni- 
versity, Glasgow. ; ; 

16. Robert Christison, physician, Moray Place, Edinburgh. 
prs! . Amadee Thuau, clerk, residing at South Portland Street, 

asgow. 

18: Auguste Vauvert de Mean, chancellor of the French Con- 
sulate, Glasgow. : 

Charles O’Neill, C.E. and architect, Glasgow. 

. Miss Mary Jane Buchanan, daughter of Dr. Buchanan, 
Dumbarton. ee 
21. re rag Guibilei or Walcot, wife of Thomas Walcot, solici- 
tor, Clapham Road, London. : 
ie William Murray, page to Mr. Smith, Blythswood Square, 

asgow. 

23. George Yeaman, physician, Sauchichall Street, Glasgow. 

24. James Stewart, residing with Farquhar Kinnaird, tailor, 
Dunblane. % 

25. George Murdoch, of Murdoch Bros., druggists, Sauchiehall 
Street, Glasgow. 

26. James ickie, assistant to the said Murdoch Brothers. 

27. George Carruthers Haliburton, assistant to John Currie, 
drngaist Cinscow. 
28. John Currie, druggist, Sauchichall Street, Glasgow. 
29. William Campsie, gardener at Rowaleyn, Row. 
30. Robert Oliphant, stationer, Argyle Place, Helensburgh. 
31. William Harper Minnooh, merchant, Mains Street, Glasgow. 
32. Mrs. Margaret Houston or Clark, Royal Botanic Gardens, 


Glasgow. 

Pape Thomas Fleming Kennedy, cashier to Huggins & Co., 
asgow. 
34, John Murray, sheriff-officer in Glasgow. 


4 

35. Bernard M‘Lauchlin, assistant to the said John Murray. 

36. William Wilson, clerk to Hart & Young writérs, Glasgow. 

37. William Hart, joint proeurator-fiscal of Glasgow. , 

38. Peter ‘Taylor Young, joint procurator-fiseal of Glasgow. 

39. Andrew Murray, junior, 8., Edinburgh. 

40, Alexander Soutar Hunter, writer, Edinburgh. 

41. Rowland Hill Macdonald, comptroller, Post Office, Glasgow. 

42, George M‘Call, merchant, Forth Street, Edinburgh. 

43. Robert Monteith, packer to Huggins & Co., Glasgow. 

44, Robert Sinclair, ——— to Huggins & Co. Glasgow. 

45, Janet M‘Dougall, keeper of Post Office, Row. 

46. Catherine M‘Donald, lod ing-house keeper, Bridge of Allan. 

47. Robert Telfer Corbett, physician and surgeon, West Regent 
Street, Glasgow. : 

Christina Heagery or MacKenzie, wife of Duncan Mackenzie, 

joiner, St. George’s Road, Glasgow. 

49. Charlotte M‘Lean, domestic servant, formerly with Mr. 
Smith, Blythswood Square, Glasgow. 

50. Duncan MacKenzie, joiner, St. George’s Road, Glasgow. 

51. James Galloway, mason, St. George’s Road, Glasgow. 

52. Mary Tweedle, formerly servant to Mrs. Parr, Terrace 
Street, Glasgow. 

53, Thomas Kavan, night constable, Glasgow police. 

54. William Young, photographer, Helensburgh. 


55. Jane Scott Perry or Towers, wife of James Tow Brigh 
Place, Portobello. : ila Rrra 


The said James Towers. 
57. Mary Arthur Perry, residing in Renfrew Street, Glasgow. 


48 


“Sseigzoid uy A[Tenjoe a1aM SZuypeedo0aid oy} a[TYM jANOD UT epeur Yo}ays & Woy Pe] FY} JO MalA 


The Trial. 


Sixty-five witnesses were cited, of whom the following thirty- 
one were called to give evidence on behalf of the 
accused : — 


Robert Baker, grocer, St. Helen’s, Jersey. 
William Pringle Laird, nurseryman, Dundee. 
‘William Pringle, in employment of the said W. P. Laird. 
Andrew Watson Smith, upholsterer, Dundee. 
William Anderson, nurseryman, Dundee. 
William M‘Dougal Ogilvie, assistant teller, Dundee Bank. 
. David Hill, market gardener, Dundee. 
. Edward Vokes Mackay, merchant, Dublin. 
. Janet B. Christie, Glasgow. 
10. Alexander Miller, in employment of Huggins & Co., Glasgow. 
11, Agnes M‘Millan, formerly tablemaid with Mr. Smith, Blyths- 
wood Square, Glasgow. 
12. James Girdwood, surgeon, Falkirk. 
13. John Roberton, druggist, Queen Street, Glasgow. 
14. Peter Guthrie, manager to Frazer & Green, Sauchiehall 
Street, Glasgow. - 
15. William D’Esterre Roberts, merchant, Glasgow. 
a Charles Baird, son of the deceased Robert Baird, writer, 
asgow. 
een Robert Baird, son of the deceased Robert Baird, writer, 
asgow. ‘ 
18. Elizabeth Wallace, lodging-house keeper, Glasgow. 
19. Lieutenant-Colonel Robert Fraser, Portobello. 
20. Charles Adam, M.D., Coatbridge. 
21. Dr. James Dickson, Baillieston, near Glasgow. 
22. Jane Kirk, residing with Dr. Kirk Gallowgate, Glasgow. 
23. Robert Morrison, employed with W. & RB. Chambers, Edin- 


burgh. i 
‘ 24. George Simpson, employed with W. Blackwood & Sons, Edin- 
urgh. 
25. Robert Paterson, physician in Leith. 
PA John Fleming, employed with Todd & Higginbotham, dyers,. 
asgow. 
27. Robert Townsend, manager to Mr. Townsend, manufacturing 
chemist, Glasgow. ; 
28. Janet Smith, Blythswood Square, Glasgow (sister of accused). 
29. James Adair Lawrie, physician, Glasgow. 
30. Douglas Maclagan, physician, Edinburgh. 
31. Hugh Hart, druggist, Glasgow. 


The diet having been called “at the instance of Her Majesty’s 
Advocate, for Her Majesty’s interest, against Madeleine Smith 
or Madeleine Hamilton Smith ”— 

Mr. Youne, for the accused, took objection to the words “ or 
cause to be taken by” in the first and second charges of the 
indictment, on the ground that if they were precisely equivalent 
to the words “administer to” they were superfluous, and there- 
fore objectionable, and that if they meant anything more they 
were also objectionable, as not being covered by the major 
proposition, z.¢e., the “wickedly and feloniously administering 
arsenic or other poison to any of the lieges with intent to 
murder.” 


D 49 


£0 ~I D> OY G0 89 ps 


A. Smith 


George Gray’ 


Madeleine Smith. 


The Lorp Apvocats, in reply, said that the words were not 
material in any way. They were substantially an interpretation 
or enlargement of the words “administer to”; but since they 
were objected to he would have them struck out. 

The words were accordingly deleted, and the libel was found 
relevant; and on the accused being called upon to plead to the 
indictment, she pleaded “ Not Guilty ” in a distinct and unshaken 
tone of voice. 

[There was considerable delay at this stage owing to the 
absence of Dr. Penny, an important witness from Glasgow, and 
on his arrival at 12.15 he was called into Court and reprimanded 
by the Lord Justice-Clerk for his “singular disregard of the 
orders and forms of citation,* which had required his attend- 
ance at 10 o’clock.] 

The following jury was then balloted for and empanelled : — 
James Christie, farmer, Hailes; James Pearson, farmer, North- 
field; James Walker, farmer, Kilpunt ; Charles Thomson Combe, 
merchant, York Place; William Sharp, Auckland Villa; 
Archibald Weir, bootmaker, Leith; Charles Scott King, Shake- 
speare Square; Alexander Morrison, currier, Linlithgow; 
Andrew Williamson, clerk, Parkside Street; Hugh Hunter, 
cabinetmaker, North-West Circus Place; Robert Andrew, cow- 
feeder, Nether Liberton ; George-Gibb, shoemaker, Glover Street, 
Leith; William Moffat, teacher, Duke Street; David Forbes, 
Scotland Street ; Alexander Thomson, Torphichen. 

The trial then proceeded. 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


1. ArcoiBaLD SmiTH, Esq., Advocate, Sheriff-Substitute of 
Lanarkshire, examined by the Lorp Apvocats—The prisoner 
was judicially examined before me, and emitted a declaration on 
3lst March, which I identify. It was freely and voluntarily 
emitted, after she had been duly admonished. The two letters 
ee shown to me were exhibited to the prisoner, and signed by 

er. 

Cross-examined by the Dan or Facutty—Only four letters 
in all were shown to the prisoner. She was examined on a 
charge of murder. The greater part of the questions were put 
by me. The statements in the declaration were all made in 
answer to questions. The answers were given clearly and dis- 
tinctly. There was no appearance of hesitation or Yeserve. 
There was a great appearance of frankness and candour. The 
declaration was of some length. 

2. Gzorcs Gray, clerk in the Sheriff-Clerk’s Office, Glasgow— 
This is the prisoner’s declaration, which was freely and volun- 
tarily emitted after the usual cautions. 

50 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


; 3. Ann Dutue or Jenxins—I am the wife of David Jenkins, Ann Jenkins 
joiner, and I live at No. 11 Franklin Place, Glasgow. I knew 
the late M. L’Angelier. He lodged in our house. He came 
about the end of July, and remained with me till his death. 
His usual habits were regular. He was sometimes out at night, 
not very often, but has been late. His general health was good 
till about January. I recollect his having an illness about the 
middle of February. He had one about the 22nd, and one 
eight or ten days befwre. This was his first illness, and that 
night he wished a pass-key, as he thought he would be out late. 
I cannot say when he returned. I went to bed, and did not 
hear him come in. I knocked at his door about eight in the 
morning, and got no answer. I knocked again, and he answered 
“Come in, if you please.” 

[The Lorp Apvocats here suggested that the medical witnesses 
should hear the evidence now to be led. The indictment, besides 
a (charge of murder, set forth two attempts at poisoning, and it 
séemed to him material that the medical men should hear 
distinctly stated by the witnesses themselves the symptoms on 
which they were afterwards to give their opinion. 

The Dzan or Facutty said that the proposal had taken him 
by surprise. His own impression was that the medical witnesses 
should be present, and had notice been given to him he would 
willingly have acceded to the proposal. But the medical wit- 
nesses for the defence ought also to be present, and that was 
impossible in the present case. 

The Lorp Justice-Cierxk—I may say that the rule of Court 
is that the medical witnesses shall not be present unless the case 
is such as to induce us to relax that rule. The rule is an 
expedient one. We dispensed with it in the case of Dr. Gibson, 
surgeon to the Prison Board of Glasgow, who was tried in 1848 
for granting a false certificate, in consequence of which a 
prisoner was improperly removed, and afterwards died, in conse- 
quence, as was alleged, of that improper removal. But in that 
case the circumstances were peculiar, as there was no medical 
report of the post-mortem appearances, and the witnesses for 
the panel could only be examined on the evidence of those who 
were present being read over to them, which might not be so 
clear to them as hearing the evidence given. 

The Lorp Apvooatr said that, under these circumstances, he 
would not press the motion.] 

Awn. Duta or Janxrns was then recalled, and continued—I 
went in, and found him in bed. He said, “I have been very 
uuwell; look what I have vomited.” I said, “I think that’s 
bile.” It was & greenish substance. There was a great deal of 
it. It was thick stuff like gruel. I said, “Why did you not 
eall on me?” He said, “On the road coming home I was seized 


51 


Madeleine Smith. 


Ann Jenkins: with a violent pain in my bowels and stomach, and when I waa 
taking off my clothes I lay down upon the carpet. I thought 
I would have died, and no human eye would have seen me. 
was not able to ring the bell.” He asked me to make him a 
little tea, and said he thought he would not go out. I- emptied 
what he had vomited. I advised him to go to 4 doctor, and he 
said he would. He got some sleep till about nine o’clock. 1 
went back then. He said he was a little better, and would 
go out. Hevthen got some tea. M. Thuau, who also lodged in 
our house, saw him. Deceased rose between ten and eleven 
o’clock, and went out. He said he was going to his place of 
business, but intended to call for a doctor. He was with Huggins 
& Co., 10 Bothwell Street, not far from our house. He returned 
about three in the afternoon, and said he had been at the doctor, 
and had got a bottle, which he had with him. He took the 
medicine. I cannot say he complained of anything but pain ; but 
he had been very thirsty, and was so also at three o’clock, but 
not so much. This illness made a great change in his appearance. 
He looked yellow and dull—not like-what he used to be. Before 
that his complexion was fresh, but after that his colour left him 
He became dark under the eyes, and the red on his cheeks 
seemed to be more broken. He complained of cold after he 
came in at three. He lay down on the sofa, and I laid a railway 
rug over him. I do not remember doing anything to his feet, 
He never was the same after this, and when asked how he felt, 
he always said, “I never feel well.” I cannot fix the date of 
this illness. I think the second illness was about 22nd February. 
On a Monday morning about four o’clock he called me. He was 
vomiting. It was the same kind of stuff as before, in colour 
and otherwise. I think there was not so much of it. He com- 
plained of the same pain in the bowels and stomach, and of 
thirst. He was very cold. I was not aware he was out the 
night before—he said nothing about that. I put more clothes 
on him, and jars of hot water to his feet and stomach. I made 
some tea, and he had a great many drinks—toast and water 
and lemon and water. He got a little better. I left him, and 
called about six. He was a little better then. He did not rise 
till the forenoon. I think this was on 22nd February, because 
he had bought a piece of boiling meat on the Saturday from 
Stewart, St. George’s Road. He had a pass-book with Stewart, 
which I now identify. I see the piece of beef entered on 21st 
February, and it was sent on the Saturday before that illness— 
which was on the Monday morning. A doctor came—Dr. 
Thomson—on the Monday. Thuau went for him in the fore 
noon, but I do not remember the hour he called. The doctor 
left a prescription for powders, which I sent for and got. 
L’Angelier was eight days, I think, in the house, and away 
from his office. I recollect him taking one or two powders, 


52 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


but cannot say if he took the rest. He said he did not think Amn Jenkins 
they did him the good he expected. Dr. Thomson came more 
than once. L’Angelier said, “The ductor always says I am 
getting well”; but he said he did not feel well; he said, “1 
do not think I am getting better.” He said this often. He 
went to Edinburgh soon after. I cannot say the date, or how 
long it was after this illness. I think he was eight days away. 
He came back, I think, on a Tuesday. Thuau told me at four 
that L’Angelier would be back that evening, and I got in bread 
and butter. I identify his pass-book with Chalmers, a baker. 
The bread and butter are entered on 17th March. He returned 
that night at half-past ten. He was in the habit of receiving 
a great many letters, but I thought they were addressed in a 
gentleman’s hand. There were a great many in the same hand- 
writing. He never told me who the letters were from. I 
identify a photograph of a lady which I saw lying about his 
room. I said, “Is that your intended, sir?” He said, “ Perhaps 
—some day.” I did not think the letters came from a lady. 
I always took in the letters, but he never said anything about 
my taking them in. I knew he expected to be married about 
the end of September, 1856. He wished a bedroom and dining- 
room. He said he was going to be married about the end of 
March, and said he would like me to take him in. I did not 
agree. One time when he was badly I said,“ It will be a bad 
job if you get ill and you going to get married.” He said, “It 
will be a long time before you see that, Mrs. Jenkins.” On 
his return on 17th March he asked me if I had a letter for him. 
I said I had not, and he seemed disappointed. He stayed over 
the 18th and left on the 19th, and when he left he told me to 
give any letters to Thuau, who would address them. He said 
he was going to Bridge of Allan. A letter came for him on 
the 19th. It was the same ae the others that had been coming. 
I gave it to M. Thuau to address. I cannot say if any came on 
the Friday, but one came on the Saturday in what was more 
like a lady’s writing than the others. I gave it to Thuau. 
L’Angelier said he would not be home till Wednesday night 
or Thursday morning of the following week. He was very much 
disappointed at not getting a letter, and when he went away 
he said, “ If I get a letter I may be back to-night.” I don’t know 
whether he went anywhere else before going to Bridge of Allan. 
I identify an envelope as like the one that came on the Saturday, 
but I cannot speak as to the other one shown me. I next saw 
L’Angelier on the Sunday night about eight o’clock. I was 
surprised, and asked why he came home. He said, “The letter 
you sent brought me home.” He asked when it came. I said, 
“On Saturday afternoon.” He said he had walked fifteen miles, 
but he did not say where he had come from. I understood he 
had been at Bridge of Allan. He told me to call him early 


53 


Madeleine Smith. 


Ann Jenking next morning. He said he intended to go back by the first 
train, but whether or not to Bridge of Allan I cannot say. He 
looked well, and said he was a great deal better, and almost well. 
He went out that night about nine o’clock, and before going 
out he said, “If you please, give me the pass-key, I am not 
sure but I may be late.” I saw him next about half-past two 
on the Monday morning. He did not use the pass-key. The 
bell rang with great violence. I rose, and called, ‘“ Who’s 
there?” He said, “It is I, Mrs. Jenkins; open the door, if 
you please.” I did so. He was standing .with his arms closed 
across his stomach. He said, “I am very bad; I am going to 
have another vomiting of that bile.” The first time I had 
said, “ That’s bile,” and he had replied, “I never had bile; I 
never was troubled with bile.’ He said he thought he never 
would have got home, he was so bad on the road. He did-not 
say whether it was pain or vomiting. After he had come in he 
asked for a little water. I filled a tumbler, and ‘he drank it 
empty. He wished some tea. I went into the room before he 
was half-undressed, and he was vomiting severely. It was the 
same kind of matter as before, and it seemed so both in colour 
and substance. There was gaslight. The second occasion was 
the easiest. On the third occasion he suffered great pain. I 
said, “ Were you not taking anything that disagreed with you?” 
referring to his food at Bridge of Allan. He said, “ No, I have 
taken nothing that disagreed with me; I never was better than 
when I was at the coast ”—meaning, as I understood, at Bridge 
of Allan. I said, “ You have not taken enough of meditine” ; 
and he said, “I never approved of medicine.” He was chilly 
and cold, and wished hot water to his feet and stomach. I got 
jars of hot water, and also three or four pairs of blankets and 
two mats. He got a little easier, but became very bad at four 
o'clock. I said I would go for Dr. Thomson, in Dundas Street. 
He thanked me, but said it was tou much trouble so early. I 
said, “ No.” He told me the name and residence of the doctor, 
but said he feared I would not find the way. I said, “No fear.” 
He got a little better; but about five he got very bad again, 
and his bowels got very bad. I said I would go to the nearest 
doctor—a Dr. Steven. He asked what kind of a doctor he was, 
and told me to go and bring him. I went for Dr. Steven at five 
o'clock. The doctor was badly, and could not come. He said 
to give twenty-five drops of laudanum, and to put a mustard 
blister on the stomach, and hot water, and that if L’Angelier 
was no better he would come. L’Angelier said he could not 
take laudanum. I gave him plenty of hot water. He said 
that a blister would be of no use; he was only retching. About 
seven o'clock he was dark about the eyes. I again proposed to 
get Dr. Steven; and he was anxious this time that I should go 
for the doctor. When the doctor came he ordered mustard 


54 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


immediately, and I left the room to get it. I did not hear the Ann Jenkins» 
doctor ask L’Angelier what was wrong. I said to the doctor, 
“Look what he has vomited”; and the doctor said, “Take it 
away, it is making him faintish.” I got mustard, and the doctor 
put iton. He said he would wait to see the effect, and gave him, 
I think, a little morphia. He stayed about half an hour. I 
went in with more hot water, and when I was applying it 
L’Angelier said, “Oh, Mrs. Jenkins, this is the worst attack 
I ever had.” He said, “I feel something here”—pointing to 
his forehead. Dr. Steven said, “It must be something inter- 
nally ; I see nothing wrong.” L’Angelier said, “ Can you do any- 
thing, doctor?” He said time and quietness were required. 
I left the room, pointing to the doctor to come, and I asked 
what was wrong. He asked if L’Angelier was a person that 
tippled? I said he was not. The doctor said he was like a 
man that tippled, and I assured him that L’Angelier was not 
given to drink. I remarked, “ It is strange; this is the second 
time he has gone out well and returned very ill; I must speak 
to him and ask the cause.” The doctor said, “That will be 
an after-explanation ”; and he said he would be back between 
ten and eleven. The first time I went back to him L’Angelier 
asked me what the doctor thought. I replied, “He thinks you 
will get over it”; at which he said, “I am far worse than the 
doctor thinks.” I saw him several times. He always said, 
“Jf I could get some sleep I should be better.” About nine 
o’clock, when I drew the curtains, he looked badly. I asked if 
there was no one he would like to see. He then asked to see a 
Miss Perry, and told her address—Bath Street or Renfrew Street, 
I think No. 44. I sent for her. I went out and in three or 
four times. The last time I went in he said, “Oh, if I could 
get five minutes’ sleep, I think I would get better.” These 
were his last words. I left him, and went back quietly in five 
or ten minutes. I thought him asleep, and went out. The doctor 
came soon after. He asked for his patient, and I said he was 
newly asleep, and that it was a pity to waken him. He said 
he would like to see him, and we went in. The doctor felt his 
pulse, and lifted up the head, which fell down. He told me 
L’Angelier was dead. I think I have told all I know. I did 
not ask L’Angelier where he had been. I knew, from the time 
he said he was going to be married, that there was a private 
correspondence ; but I did not know who the lady was or where 
she lived. That was the reason why I did not ask where he 
had been at nights. Miss Perry came, but she was too late. 
I sent my little boy to Mr. Clark, another lodger; he was at 
the National Bank. Clark came, and also Chrystal, a grocer. 
Stevenson came, but not then. Chrystal went in and shut 
L’Angelier’s eyes. He said he would send word to his employers. 
A Mr. Scott, the foreman of Menzies, an undertaker, came first. 
55 


Madeleine Smith, 


“Ann Jenkins Stevenson, from Huggins & Co., came also. Dr. Thomson, M. 
Thuau, and Dr. Steven were sent for. I told Stevenson I 
wished him to take charge, and he did so. The clothes which 
L’Angelier took off at night were on the sofa. They took a 
letter out of his pocket, and some one said, “This explains 
all.” I saw the letter and said, “ This is the letter that came on 
Saturday.” When the letter was got Thuau and Stevenson were 
there, and perhaps Kennedy. I cannot say which said, “ This 
explains all,” I think Stevenson. Stevenson locked up the 
things. At that time I did not hear anything said of an 
examination. The examination by the doctor was, I think, on 
the Wednesday. All the things were left just as they were till 
Stevenson locked them up. When L’Angelier came from Bridge 
of Allan on the Sunday he had a tight short coat or jacket, 
with handkerchief in breast pocket, and he wore a Glengarry 
bonnet. I did not see him go out; he had a bonnet when he 
came back at two, but I cannot say if it was the same. He had 
bowel complaints on both of his first illnesses. 

Cross-examined by the Dwan or Facunrr—As to the first 
illness before the 22nd, I cannot speak to the date of it. It 
might be eight or ten days before the second illness. I think 
so, but I cannot remember its date. The first illnesy was much 
worse than the second. I think he began to complain of his 
health in January. He had a sore throat, then a boil on hia 
‘neck, and then another about the end of January. On these 
illnesses I suggested that it was bile that was wrong with him. 
I was troubled with that myself, and my symptoms were some- 
thing like his, but not so violent. There was purging on both 
of his first illnesses. The second illness was on a Monday 
morning, the 23rd. He dined at home on the Sunday. On 
the Saturday night he said he was not very well, and did not 
intend to go out on Sunday. He was taking fresh . herrings, 
with sauce of eggs and vinegar, on that Saturday, and I said, 
“That is not good for you.” He used many vegetables. He 
said he always got them at college in France, and wag never the 
wo-se. I cannot say if he was out on the Sunday. I think I 
would have recollected his asking for the key, but Thuau some- 
times let him in. He was confined to the house eight days after 
that Sunday. I only remember his being out once—about the 
23rd or 24th. Dr. Thomson visited him during these eight 
days. After his first illness he brought home a bottle. I do 
not recollect his bringing more than one. The bottle was 
laudanum. There were eight bottles and some powders in his 
room after his death. The authorities got the bottles. Mr. 
Murray, I think, and Stevenson were there. This was some 
days after the death, I think, but I am not sure. I was in the 
room when they took the bottles away. Murray put some 
questions to me, but I do not remember what they were, 


56 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


L’Angelier spoke of coming back on the Thursday night if a Ann Jenkins 
letter came on the day he went to Bridge of Allan. Thuau sent 
the letter after him, but he did not come. The letter came 
about half-past three on the Saturday. Thuau came in to 
dinner about six o’clock, and re-addressed it. I think it came 
by the last post before dinner. L’Angelier said he was a little 
better when he came from Edinburgh; but I knew a greater 
difference on him when he came from Bridge of Allan. He took 
tea and toast that Sunday night. I cannot say what he had on 
when he went out on Sunday nor when he came in next morning. 
The gas was out in the lobby, and when I went into the bedroom 
he was half-undressed. He said he had been very bad, but he 
did not say what it was. He did not say he had been vomiting 
on the way home. After he came back he vomited a great 
quantity of stuff. The chamber-pot was quite full, but he did 
not vomit much after I emptied it. He purged twice—once 
before I went for the doctor and once after. I gave him hot 
water ; he vomited much, and got better. That was before the 
chamber-pot was emptied, which was done after the doctor came, 
and by his orders. Before he came I told L’Angelier I would 
keep what he had vomited, and let the doctor see it. There 
was laudanum in his press, but he refused to take 
it, and said he never could take it. “Besides,” he 
said, “it’s not good; it has been standing without 
acork.” Dr. Steven assured me that L’Angelier would get over 
it the same as before. I think on the morning of his death he 
complained of his throat, but I cannot say. The doctor gave 
him some water, and he said it was like to choke him; and I 
think he also spoke of his throat. When he was in bed that 
morning he always put his arms out of the clothes, stiff-like. 
I cannot say if his hands were clenched, but his right hand was 
clenched when he’ died. Miss Perry came about ten o'clock. 
I asked, “ Are you the intended, ma’am?” and she said, “ Oh, no! 
I am only a friend.” I had supposed, when L’Angelier asked 
to see her, that she was the intended. I told her he was dead. 
She was very sorry—very strikingly so—very much overwhelmed, 
cried a great deal. Iwas surprised. My message to her by the 
little boy had been that L’Angelier was very bad, and, a8 soon 
ag convenient, to come and see him. I took her in to see the 
body after it was laid out. When she said she was not the 
intended, I said I heard he was going to be married, and how 
sorry the lady would be. She kissed the forehead several times.. 
It was not violent grief. She cried very much, and said how 
sorry she was for his mother. I cannot say that she spoke 
as if she knew his mother. L/Angelier had two wooden writing- 
desks in hig room. I took no note of the things taken away. 
I know of some of the clothes, but other things I don’t know of. 
I was not in the room when the boxes were searched. I was 


57 


Ann Jenkins 


James Heggie 
John Stewart 


C. Robertson, 


Peter Pollock 


Madeleine Smith. 


in the house; when I once went in, they got the gas lighted, 
and said, “That will do,” or “That’s all that’s required.” I 
do not recollect. any lady calling for L’Angelier. A married lady 
and her husband were once at tea with him. Sometimes 
messages came from ladies. When L’Angelier was badly, a can 
of marmalade and some books were sent. “Mrs. Overton” was 
on the card. L’Angelier had an illness one night about the end 
of August or beginning of September. He said his bowels had 
been very bad, and that he had not been in bed all night. That 
wag the same night on which there was a fire in Windsor Terrace. 

Re-examined by the Lorp ApvocatE—The topcoat and Balmoral 
bonnet now shown me are like L’Angelier’s things—like the coat 
he had on when he died, and the bonnet or cap he had on that 
night, but he had two or three caps. I identify his portmanteau. 
When I said to Miss Perry the intended would be sorry, she 
told me not to say much about the intended, or to leave the 
matter alone. I identify the small morocco leather bag, which 
belonged to Thuau, and L’Angelier had at Bridge of Allan. 

To the Court—On the last illness, my inquiry as to his taking 
anything referred to Bridge of Allan. His answer was, “No, 
I never was better than the few days I was at the coast.” I 
never asked where he had been that night,.as I thought he might 
be visiting his intended. My husband was away all the time, 
and I saw him only once—about New-Year time. The letters 
that came on the Thursday and Saturday I took from the post, 
and laid down in his bedroom in the morning. ‘I saw the Satur- 
day one more fully, and I noticed that the handwriting was very 
like a lady’s. 

To the Duan or Facutty—While L’Angelier was lodging with 
me, I left home about the end of August, and was away all 
September. L’Angelier’s illness was before that. 

To the Court—Thuau was in Edinburgh during L’Angelier’s 
last illness. He had gone there on the Saturday. 

4 and 5. Jamms Hees and Jonn Srewarr, examined by the 
Lorp ApvocatTR, respectively identified the baker’s and butcher’s 
pass-books, and entries therein, referred to by the previous 
witness, Mrs. Jenkins. 

6. Caruurins Rossrrson, lodging-house keeper, examined by 
the Lorp Apvocatz—I live at No. 6 Elm Row, Edinburgh. On 
10th March a gentleman came to my house for lodgings. He 
was a foreigner. He did not tell me his name, but I saw 
“M. L’Angelier” on his portmanteau. He left on the 17th, 
He said that he had come from Glasgow, and was going to Bridge 
of Allan. He seemed in good health, but said he had been an 
invalid. He was in good health while he lodged with me. 

7. Persr Pouiock, stationer, Leith Street, Edinburgh, 
examined by the Lorp Apvocarz—I knew M. L’Angelier. I 
saw him on 19th March last. He had come from Glasgow. He 

58 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


called at my shop. He had come for a letter he expected at the Peter Pollock 
Post Office, Edinburgh. I knew he had been lodging in Edin- 

burgh for a week. He did not get the letter. He left the 

same day for Bridge of Allan at a quarter past four. 

Cross-examined by the Dzan or Facuttr—I saw him about 
two o’clock. He said he had come straight from Glasgow. I 
saw him twice. He did not get the letter. He came back in 
about half an hour, and left me about three, saying he had got 
no letter, and was to leave for Bridge of Allan. This was on 
Thursday, 19th March. 

8. Mrs. Jann Barns, examined by the Lorp ApvocaTs—I live Jane Bayne 
at Bridge of Allan. L’Angelier came to my house on 19th 
March between five and six o’clock in the evening. He lodged 
in my house till the Sunday. He had a bag with him like the 
one now shown me. He seemed in good health and spirits, and 
ate hig meals well. He left on Sunday just as the churches 
“went in” in the afternoon. He had meant to stay longer. 

9. Cuartes Neu, RuraRFoorD, examined by the Lorp Apvo- Charles Neil 
caTe—I was postmaster at Bridge of Allan in the beginning of Butherfoord 
this year. The envelope shown me is stamped at my office. 

It must have come on 22nd March. A gentleman of the name 
of L’Angelier left his card at my office about the 20th. I gave 
the letter to him when he called. 

Cross-examined by the Daan or Facoury—I know nothing 
about the letter but from the postmark of 22nd March. On 
our mark the letter B denotes the morning arrival, about half- 
past ten. The mail would leave Glasgow about seven in the 
morning. 

10. Wiutau Farrrovun, examined by the Lorp Apvocats—I W. Fairfoul 
was guard of the train that left Stirling on 22nd March at half- 
past three. A gentleman, apparently a foreigner, travelled by 
this train on his way to Glasgow. [Shown a photograph.] This 
is he. He went from Stirling to Coatbridge, the nearest point 
to Glasgow. He said he was hungry, and asked me to show him 
where he could get something to eat. He said he would walk 
to Glasgow, for he did not wish to get in till dark. A Mr. Ross 
travelled by the same train. He was going to Glasgow, and 
they went off together. I saw L’Angelier get some roast beef, 
and he ate it very heartily. He drank some porter. I was 
with him all the while. I left the train at Coatbridge. 

Cross-examined by the Dzan or Facuttr—There were about — 
eight passengers of all classes in the train. None but the two 
stopped at Coatbridge. I never saw Ross before that day, and 
I have not seen him since. Mr. Miller, from Glasgow, who is 
engaged for the defence, told me Ross’s name. I was first 
examined about this four or five days after the occurrence, by 
the Procurator-Fiscal at Stirling. Donald’s was the name of 


59 


W. Fairfoul 


Thomas Ross 


William A. 
Stevenson 


Madeleine Smith. 


the house at Coatbridge. The gentleman ate a good deal, but 
Ross—whom I identify—did not eat. 


11. Tuomas Ross, examined by the Lorp Apvocatz—I am an 
auctioneer in Glasgow. I was in Stirling on 22nd March. I 
left in the afternoon for Glasgow, and went to Coatbridge. I 
saw a foreigner get out of the train. The guard said he was 
going to Glasgow. The gentleman had some refreshment—roast 
beef and porter—after which he and I started for Glasgow. 
It took us a little more than two hours to walk to Glasgow, 
which is eight miles from Coatbridge. He had a Balmoral 
bonnet on his head, like the one now shown me, but the coat 
now shown is not the coat he had on. He walked well, and did 
not seem tired. He smoked several times on the road. He 
did not mention his name. He was in good health and spirits. 
We parted at Abercromby Street, Gallowgate. He said he was 
going to Great Western Road. I cannot say if Franklin Place 
is near that. 

Cross-examined by the Dgan or Faounty—He said he had 
walked from Alloa to Stirling that morning. He said it was 
eight miles. He said nothing about having been at Bridge of 
Allan. Our conversation was as to the scenery and localities 
on our way. He did not eat a great deal. He said he had been 
in Stirling, and had presented a cheque at the bank there 
either the previous day or the day before that, but, as he was 
a stranger, they would not cash it. Abercromby Street is 
about the middle of the Gallowgate. 

Re-examined by the Lorp Apvocatz—We were in no house 
between Coatbridge and Glasgow, and in no shop. We left 
Coatbridge at twenty minutes paat five. 


12, Wu114sam A. Synvmnson, examined by the So.icrror- 
Gunerat—I am warehouseman with Huggins & Co., Bothwell 
Street. The late M. L’Angelier was in our warehouse under 
me. He was unwell in March, and got leave of absence that 
month. He said he was to go to Edinburgh. He afterwards 
went to Bridge of Allan. I did not see him in the interval. I 
got a letter from him from Bridge of Allan. The postmark is 
Bridge of Allan, March 20. The letter is in these terms :— 


Bridge of Allan, 
riday. 

Dean Wii11aM,—I am happy to say I feel much better, though 
I fear I slept in a damp bed, for my limbs are all sore, and scarcely 
able to bear me—but a day or two will put all to rights. What 
a dull place this is. I went to Stirling to-day, but it was so cold 
and damp that I soon hurried home again. Are you very busy? 
Am I wanted? If so, I am ready to come home at any time. 
Just drop me a line at P.O. You were talking of taking a few 
days to yourself, so I shall come up whenever you like. If any 
letters come, please send them to me here. I intend to be home 
not later than Thursday morning.—Yours sincerely, 


P. Emme L’ Ancenmr. 
60 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


That is his handwriting. He generally signed “P. Emile William A, 
L’Angelier.” In our office he was generally called Emile. To Stevenson 
that letter I now identify my reply—which I got back at the 
Post Office, Bridge of Allan. I was sent to Bridge of Allan on 
Friday, 27th March, to take possession of L’Angelier’s property. 
He had been four and a half years with Huggins & Co. I got 
notice of his death on the Monday forenoon from Corbet, a 
partner of the firm. I went to our place of business, then to the 
French Consul’s office, where I saw Thuau, a fellow-lodger of 
L’Angelier’s. Thuau told me that Dr. Thomson was L’Angelier’s 
medical man. We went there, and got Dr. Thomson to go with 
us to Mrs. Jenkins’s. We saw the body there. I heard of 
another medical man, a Dr. Steven, having attended him; we 
sent for him, and he came. There was then no suspicion. The 
doctors said an examination of the body was the only way 
in which more could be known. I authorised that to be done 
next day (Tuesday). In consequence of the examination I 
informed the Fiscal. I did not expect L’Angelier to be in 
Glasgow on the Sunday night; that was inconsistent with his 
letter to me. When I went to his lodgings on the Monday I 
saw his clothes lying on his bedroom sofa. I examined them, 
and found on them various articles—a bit of tobacco, three 
finger-rings, 5s. 74d., a bunch of keys, and in his vest pocket 
were a letter and its envelope. I identify these. The letter 
reads— 

Why, my beloved, did you not come to meP Oh, beloved, are 
ou ill? Come to me, sweet one. I waited and waited for you, 
ut you came not. I shall wait again to-morrow night, same hour 

and arrangement. Do come, sweet love, my own dear love of a 
sweetheart. Come, beloved, and clasp me to your heart. Come 
and we shall be happy. A kiss, fond love. Adieu, with tender 
embraces. Ever believe me to be your own ever dear fond 


The letter was addressed “Mr. E. L’Angelier, Mrs. Jenkins, 
11 Franklin Place, Great Western Road, Glasgow.” When I 
found this letter I said something, but I cannot exactly say 
what it was. I said this letter explained his being in Glasgow, 
and not at Bridge of Allan. 

To the Lorp Justice-Cierxk—I did not know who Mini was. 

By the Soxicrror-Gunzrat—I was intimate with him in busi- 
ness, not much otherwise. I found a bunch of keys in his 
pocket. I kept them, and on that or the following day gave 
them to T. F. Kennedy, our cashier. I know L’Angelier had | 
a memorandum book. I saw it on the Monday, but where I 
got it I cannot say. I identify it. I know the handwriting to 
be his. I took the book to our office, sealed it up, and I saw 
it subsequently given up to the police officer Murray, under 
@ warrant. 

Cross-examined by the Dzan or Facutty—Look at that label, 


61 


Madeleine Smith. 


William A. “Glasgow, 30th March. Found in the desk of the deceased 

Stevenson Pierre L’Angelier, in the office of W. B. Huggins & Co., 10 Both- 
well Street.” That is my signature. I put it into his desk. 
It was not then sealed up. I did not take it out after I put: 
it in. I saw two officers open the desk. I am not sure which 
officer took it. The label bears that it was found in the desk. 
‘They found it there. I saw the book when they got it, and when 
they opened the desk. When I found the memorandum book 
in L’Angelier’s lodgings on the Monday, Dr. Steven, Dr. Thom- 
son, Thuau, and T. F. Kennedy, and perhaps Mrs. Jenkins, 
were there. I cannot say if they knew of the book being found 
by me. I put it into the desk, but I cannot say if that was the 
same day. It was the same week. I did not carry it about in 
my pocket. I sealed it up and put it on one of the desks. I 
found it there again. I cannot say how long it lay on a desk; 
I think it remained till next day (Tuesday). I do not mind 
of putting it into the desk. I saw it several times lying. It 
was opened once or twice on Monday by me. It was sealed, 
and opened, and sealed again, the ordinary office seal being 
used. I saw it in the desk, I think, on the Wednesday morning, 
as the Fiscal desired me to bring the letters. I took some 
letters, but not the book. I saw it; it was not then sealed. I 
never saw L’Angelier write in this book. His desk was opened 
frequently, and when this was done and they were looking at 
the letters, I was always present. T. F. Kennedy, our cashier, 
Walker, our invoice clerk, Miller, one of the warehouse lads, 
and it may be others, were present; but not a single man who 
was a stranger to our establishment was there except the Rev. 
Mr. Miles. He did not see the letters. He came to inquire 
about the death. I saw him once or twice. I made no list 
of the things in L’Angelier’s lodgings, nor any list of the 
things in the desk. I saw the letters. They were numbered 
in the office. 

Re-examined—I did not notice any of the entries on the 
day I got the memorandum book. All the entries between 
llth February and 14th March are in L’Angelier’s handwriting. 
The lagt entry is on 14th March. 

To the Duan or Facunry—The entries are in pencil. Some 
of them are very faint, and it is difficult to identify such. 

To the Soxicrror-GanzraL—I was accustomed to see ‘L’Angelier 
write in pencil. 

To the Courtr—The entries are not at all about business. 

The Soticrror-Grygrat then asked the witness to read these 
entries. 

The Dzan or Facuuty objected to this being done: 

Witness was removed. 

‘The Dwaw or Facutty argued that there was no evidence 
whatever of this book being a journal at all. It might be « 


62 


Fvidence for Prosecution. 


memorandum book, but it was irregularly kept, and there was William A. 
no reason to believe that the entries were put under their Stevenson 
proper dates. 

The Lorp Apvooats, in reply, stated that the memoranda were 
in L’Angelier’s handwriting, as had been proved, and that: they 
were written under certain dates. Whether all these entries 
were written on the dates they bore was another matter, but 
they would be able to prove that very many of the things 
mentioned therein did happen on the dates when they were 
entered. That, therefore, this was most material and weighty 
fas evidence he thought it was impossible to deny. They had 
there, in the deceased’s handwriting and under certain dates, 
a mention of circumstances which tallied with many of the 
events, as they would be able to prove. He thought if they 
showed, as they could show, that the entries after 7th March 
were all entered at their proper dates, it would go far to prove 
that the other entries also represented circumstances which 
took place under their dates. 

The Court retired for consultation, and on their return— 

The Lorp Justice-CLurk said they were of opinion that, in 
the present state of the case, and with the information the 
Court had, they could not allow these entries all to be read. 
At present they did not know the individual by the name in 
the entries, or by the blank that occurred in one or two 
of them. They gave no opinion as to whether it would be 
competent to have the entries read when a foundation was laid 
for them. 

The witness was then recalled, and the examination resumed. 

When I was at Mrs. Jenkins’s on the Monday I did not see 
the desks. I did not examine the repositories on Monday. On 
that day I examined his desk in our office. There were a great 
many letters there; I examined some of them, and I observed 
they were principally in the same handwriting. I locked the 
desk. On Friday, the 27th, I went to Bridge of Allan. I went 
to Mrs. Bayne’s. She showed me some things of L’Angelier’s— 
a portmanteau, a cigarette-case, & travelling rug, @ leather bag, 
and a dressing-case. The portmanteau and leather bag, which 
I identify, were both locked, but the dressing case, which I 
also identify, was open. I desired Mrs. Bayne to send them 
to Huggins’s office, which she did. In L’Angelier’s lodgings I 
found keys to open the portmanteau and bag. The bag I 
found contained a leather letter-case, in which were several 
letters. In the portmanteau I found clothes and a prayer- 
book, but no letters. I sent the bag and portmanteau locked 
to Mrs. Jenkins’s. I gave the letters and papers in the desk 
to Murray, the police officer. I saw them put into a box, which 
I sealed in Murray's presence. It was taken to the Fiscal’s 
office, and I saw it opened there. I did not then initial the 


63 


Madeleine Smith. 


William A. letters, but I did so some days afterwards. From the hand- 

Stevenson writing I believed them to have been the letters which had 
been in the box. I went with Murray to Mrs. Jenkins’s. Murray 
took away the bag locked. I afterwards took the key to the 
Fiscal’s office, and saw the bag opened and the lettere taken 
out. Murray afterwards opened a desk of L’Angelier’s at Mrs. 
Jenkins’s. I did not think there was another. I saw Murray 
take away all the letters that were in different articles at 
Mrs. Jenkins’s. He put them into a parcel, and I saw them 
afterwards in the Fiscal’s office. I did not go with Murray 
there. I cannot say what letters were found in the different 
places. The four letters shown me are all in L’Angelier’s 
handwriting. I was present at the funeral on Thursday, the 
26th. He was buried in the burying-ground of St. David’s 
Church. I was present afterwards when the body was exhumed. 
I saw the body on Tuesday, the 31st. It was the same body. 
I read some of the letters in the small travelling bag. So far 
as I examined them I kept them in their original envelopes. 
I did not shift the letters and envelopes, to my knowledge. 

The Court at this point adjourned till the following morning, 
and the record bears—“It being now six o’clock in the evening, 
in respect of the impossibility, with a due regard to the justice 
of the case, of bringing this trial to a conclusion in the, course 
of the present sederunt—therefore, and in respect of the 
necessity of the case, the Lords continued the diet against the 
panel till to-morrow morning at ten o’clock, and ordained the 
haill parties, panel, assizers, and all concerned, then to attend, 
each under the pains of law; and the haill fifteen jurors now 
in the box to repair, under the charge of the macers of Court, 
to the Regent Hotel, Waterloo Place, Edinburgh, to remain 
under their charge till brought here to-morrow morning, in the 
hour of cause above-mentioned, and being strictly secluded, 
during the period of adjournment, from all communication 
with any person whatever on the subject of this trial, the 
Clerks of Court having liberty to communicate with them in 
relation to their private affairs. Meantime, ordained the panel 
to be carried to, and detained in the prison of Edinburgh.” 


64 


‘sulsno(d “AT pue qoouuryy “rp JO S9SNoY aq} YALA UWO:}d9MUOD UT JUsUIUE, JO Jrvd-pue LOOp ayy SMOYS UOT]LOd paqjop 9, 
‘qaenbgG pooMsy}A[g JO S100; 4 YUNG pue punoiy jo suelg 


+ 


—— —= = — —SGacans = =o! * = = > 
i oy. Ss ¥ Z f2f fe YP 
< auynds GOOMSHLATE 
auvnds SOGMSHTAIS WOOTY WWIS 40 MW) Lew FSTOW 


YOOTs 48U/F FO NWId Lew 4570 € 


Hwookore ri08, 


= 
> 
= woobozg 
= SINITIOER 
a 
« 
~ 
> 
™ 
oo 
— 
«woohoo 
savor 
woovore 


cree 


aa? 


wybrogiw  yroaig sy Y poder semi ob arian Gy) 4 


Second Day—Wednesday, Ist July, 1857. 
The Court met at ten o’clock. 


12. Wiu1am A. Srevenson, recalled, and examined by the William A. 
Soxicrror-GenzRAL—On Wednesday morning, 25th March, Stevenson 
before delivering the great mass of letters, I personally delivered 
some to Mr. Young, Joint-Fiscal. I did not mark them, but 
I took a note of the date of post-marks. They were afterwards 
numbered by me—in the hands of the Fiscal. I took a note 
of the numbers when put on. This is it. I had a note of the 
post-marks—one had not a post-mark. I have not my note of 
the post-marks. 

The Dzan or Facutty—lIt is extremely loose this sort of 
evidence. 

The Lorp Justice-CLerx—Nothing can be looser or more 
singularly unsatisfactory than that there should be the slightest 
deficiency in the proof in such a case. 

Cross-examined by the Dzan or Facurry—Mr. Young, the 
Fiscal, did not mark the letters. A clerk of the Fiscal’s was, ] 
think, present at the time. I never saw the Sheriff—he was 
never present. Mr. Hart was not present. I have not now 
got the note of the post-marks. I destroyed it. I think the 
Fiscal saw the note when I laid it down to compare it with the 
numbers; but he did not tell me to keep it. 

To the Soticrtor-GenzraL—I gave up seven letters, I think, 
on the Wednesday, and the five now shown me I identify by 
my initials and the numbers I put on them, and the word 
“desk ”—which word was to explain that I got them in 
L’Angelier’s desk in our office. I read portions of some of 
these letters before I gave them to the Fiscal. I did not look 
at the contents when I gave them up. I first communicated 
with the Fiscal on the subject on the afternoon of Tuesday, 
25th March, after the doctors had made their post-mortem 
examination. I did not on the Tuesday believe there was any 
ground for a criminal charge; but on the Wednesday I felt 
uncomfortable about the case. My feelings then pointed to a 
quarter where he was likely to have been. 

Cross examined by the Dzan or Facutty—I have a memor- 
andum of the letters here. There were six letters in the 
memorandum. When I said seven that included one found in 
the breast-pocket of the deceased. I am not aware of having 
seen No. 56 of my list. The numbers were put on the letters 


E 65 


Madeleine Smith. 


William A. in the Fiscal’s office in my presence. I was requested to take 

Stevenson Jetters of different dates. I cannot tell why these numbers 
were put on. All these five letters have envelopes, and the 
post-marks are on the envelopes only. When I checked the 
letters by the post-marks I cannot say that some were in the 
same envelopes as before; I merely believed them to be the 
same. I had no other means of identifying the letters them- 
selves. J was precognosced several times; I have not been 
precognosced since I came to Edinburgh. I saw parties 
connected with the Crown yesterday, or the day before, and 
this morning. This morning I saw Mr. Wilson and Mr. Gray, 
of thé Fiscal’s office in Glasgow. They did not ask me about 
the letters. I told them I was in a most uncomfortable position 
about this matter; that I had got quite a sufficiency in the 
Court, and that I wanted to be done with it. That was not in 
consequence of anything said by those gentlemen ; it was because 
I felt exceedingly uncomfortable and very unwell. As to the 
entry about the six letters, I cannot say when it was made. 

To the Lorp Justicu-CLerK—The entry was not made on 25th 
March. That was the day on which I got the letters. 

By the Dzan or Facutty—It appears in the book after an 
entry on 24th April. I found letters belonging to L’Angelier 
in the tourist’s bag in the desk in the warehouse, in a leather 
portmanteau at his lodgings, and also in the desk in his lodgings, 
and one in his vest pocket. I can’t say how many letters there 
were in the desk at the warehouse. They were numerous. Part 
of them were wrapped in two brown paper parcels, and part 
were lying loose. The two parcels were sealed with the com- 
pany’s stamp. They had been sealed by L’Angelier himself 
apparently.. As to the seven letters I gave to the Fiscal, I 
don’t know whether they were in a sealed packet or lying loose. 
I cannot identify any of the letters found in the desk, except 
the six in the desk which I have spoken to, and the one found 
in the vest pocket. I don’t know how many letters I found in 
the travelling bag. They were not very numerous. I should 
say under a dozen. I did not count them. I read a portion of 
them. In the portmanteau I have no idea how many I found. 
They were numerous. I think they were partly loose and partly 
tied with twine or tape. I saw them in the Fiscal’s office. I 
presumed them to be the same, but I cannot distinguish those 
found in the portmanteau, nor those found in the desk at the 
lodgings. I recollect L’Augelier going to Edinburgh. I never 
saw him after he went there. He was not back to the ware- 
house, to my knowledge. I have seen a number of letters in the 
same handwriting as those now. shown me. The signature is 
“M. A. P.”; it is Miss Perry’s signature. I found portions of 
this handwriting in all his repositories. I can’t say as to the 
small bag. J can’t say how many in this handwriting I may have 


66 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


seen. There were a good many; I think not so many as in William A. 
the other handwriting—not nearly so many. My impression Stevenson 
is that there would not be one-half of them in this handwriting. 
I could not say if there would be a third, but there were a good 
many of them. I should be inclined to say, speaking roughly, 
that there were 250 to 300 of all the letters found, in all hand- 
writings. I understood that L’Angelier corresponded with a 
number of ladies in the South and in France. I have seen 
letters addressed to ladies in France and in England. I have 
heard him speak about ladies in England. He was a vain 
person—vain of his personal appearance—very much so. He 
never spoke of himself to me as very successful among ladies. 
He was of a rather mercurial disposition—changeable. His 
situation in Huggins’s warehouse was packing-clerk. I am 
not aware what money he had when he went to Bridge of Allan 
or to Edinburgh. I saw the first medical report made by Dr. 
Thomson. It was made on Tuesday, the 24th. Shown seven 
medical reports, witness was asked to find it. 

The Court—You had better show it to him. 

The Duan or Facutty—lIt is not there—that is the point. 

Wrrness—Need I look for it then? 

The Dean or Facutty—No; but you saw a report. 

Wrrnzss—Yes; it was on a small slip of paper. There is a 
report here by Dr. Steven and Dr. Thomson, dated “28th 
March.” The report I speak of was made on 24th March. It 
was given to me, and I gave it to Mr. Young, the Fiscal. I 
have not seen it since. (Shown a portmonnaie.) This was got, 
I think, in L’Angelier’s vest—at all events in his clothes. There 
were three rings in it, which I have already spoken to as having 
been found on him. I did not give this up to the Fiscal with 
the other things. It was found on the Monday that he died; 
it was locked up in one of his drawers; it was not taken out 
till all the articles of dress were packed up a considerable time 
afterwards; it was then packed up in one of the portmanteaux ; 
I have no note of when it was given up, but I recollect giving 
some articles out of the portmanteau to Mr. Miller and Mr. 
Forbes, agent for the prisoner. 

To the Lorp Justicr-Cumrx—I was several times precog- 
nosced; at the time of the first precognition I understood there 
was a criminal charge against some one on account of the death 
of L’Angelier; and it was known I was the first person who had 
seen any of the articles in his repositories. I have not the 
date of the first precognition. I think it was after giving up 
the articles to Murray on the 30th. On none of these occasions 
am I aware that the Sheriff was present during my precogni- 
tion. I understood at the time that it was known and under- 
stood who the letters in the first handwriting were from, and 
I knew that the charge was murder. The party was in custody 

67 


‘William A. 


Stevenson 


Dr. Hugh 
Thomson 


Madeleine Smith. 


at that time. Murray is an officer belonging to the Fiscal. — I 
did not see the Sheriff or the Fiscal at the desk or repositories 
while I was there. The letters were put into a bag by me, 
and no inventory was made. Everything in the shape of letters 
was given up. The box containing the letters found in 
Huggins’s office was sealed up. I am not aware whether the 
bag was sealed up. The letters found in the lodgings were 
put into a brown paper parcel. I am not aware whether it was 
sealed. There was another officer with Murray, and he initialed 
some. 

The Lorp Justice-CLerk—You seem to have done all that 
you thought necessary, and with much propriety, in the way of 


making memoranda, though not in the way that the Fiscal 


would have done it. But during any of your precognitions were 
you asked to go over the letters and put any marks on them 
to enable you to say where they were found? 

-Witness—Not when they were delivered up. Afterwards I 
was requested to put my initials on some of them. 

The Lorp Justice-Crerzk—I think it right to say that I know 
of no duty so urgent, so impressive, and sc imperative as 
that of the Sheriff superintending and directing every step in 
a precognition for murder ; and that, in the experience of myself 
as an old Crown officer, and of my two brethren as Sheriffs, 
the course which this case seems to have taken is unprecedented. 
I must say that, although your memoranda (addressing witness) 
were not made artistically or scientifically, I think you have 
done the best according to your judgment and experience; 
nor do I suppose that there is any imputation against you. 

The Duan or Facutty—No, on the contrary. 

The Lorp Apvocats—I think it right to say that, perhaps 
before the end of the case, in some respects the observations of 
your lordship will be modified. 

The Lorp Justice-CLerk—I only speak to what occurred in 
reference to the examination of one witness, who apparently 
received all the letters founded on to support a charge of 
murder, I presume. 

The Lorp Apvocars—With regard to the first stage, unques- 
tionably there was very great looseness. 

The witness then left the Court, on the understanding that he 
was to hold bimself in readiness for being recalled. 

13. Dr. Hueu THomson, examined by the Lorp Apvocarr— 
I am a physician in Glasgow. I knew the late M. L’Angelier 
for fully two years. He consulted me professionally ; the first 
time fully a year ago. He had a bowel complaint. He soon 
got the better of that. Next time he consulted me on 3rd 
February of this year. He had a cold and cough, and a boil 
at the back of his neck. He was very feverish, and the cough 
was rather a dry cough. These are all the particulars I have. 

68 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


I prescribed for him. I saw him next about a week after 3rd Dr. Hugh 
February. He was better of his cold, but I think another boil Tomson 
had made its appearance on his neck. I saw him again on 
23rd February. He came to me. He was very feverish, and 
his tongue was furred and had a patchy appearance, from the 
fur being off in various places; he complained of nausea, and 
said he had been vomiting and purging; he was prostrate, his 
pulse was quick, and he had the general symptoms of fever. 
I prescribed for him. I took his complaint to be a bilious 
derangement, and I prescribed an aperient draught. He had 
been unwell, I think, for a day or two, but he had been taken 
worse the night before he called on me. It was during the 
night of the 22nd and morning of the 23rd that he was taken 
worse. He was confined to the house for two or three days 
afterwards. I am reading from notes I made on 6th April. 
I made them from recollection, but the dates of my visits 
and the medicine were entered in my books. I visited him 
on 24th February and on 25th and 26th February; and on Ist 
March I intended to visit him, but I met him in Great Western 
Road. The aperient draught I prescribed for him on the 23rd 
contained magnesia and soda; on the 24th I prescribed some 
powders containing rhubarb, soda, chalk with mercury, and 
ipecacuanha. These were the medicines I prescribed. On 
23rd February, I have described his state. On 24th he was 
much in the same state. He had vomited the draught that I 
had given him on the 23rd, and I observed that his skin was 
considerably jaundiced on the 24th; and from the whole 
symptoms I called the disease a bilious fever. On the 25th 
he was rather better, and had risen from his bed to the sofa, 
but he was not dressed. On the 26th he felt considerably 
better and cooler, and I did not think it necessary to repeat 
my visits till I happened to be in the neighbourhood. It did 
not occur to me at the time that these symptoms arose from 
the action of any irritant poison. If I had known he had taken 
an irritant poison, these were the symptoms I should have 
expected to follow. I don’t think I asked him when he was 
first taken ill. I had not seen him for some little time before, 
and certainly he looked very dejected and ill; his colour was 
rather darker and jaundiced, and round the eye the colour 
was rather darker than usual. I saw him again eight or ten 
days after Ist March. He called on me, and I have no note of 
the day. He was then much the same as on 1st March. He 
said that he was thinking of going to the country, but he did 
not say where. I did not prescribe medicines for him then, 
and gave him no particular advice. About 26th February, 
I think, I told him to give up smoking ; I thought that was 
injurious to his stomach. I never saw him again in life. On 
the morning of 23rd March, Mr. Stevenson and M. Thuau 
69 


Madeleine Smith. : 


Dr. Hugh called on me and mentioned that M. L’Angelier was dead, and 

Thomson they wished me to go and see the body, and see if I could give 
any opinion as to the cause of death. They did not then know 
that I had not seen him during his last illness. I went to the 
house. The body was laid out on a stretcher, dressed in grave- 
clothes, and lying on the table. The skin had @ slightly 
jaundiced hue. I made the notes from which I read on the 
same day. I said it was impossible to give any decided opinion 
as to the cause of death, and I requested Dr. Steven to be 
called, who had been in attendance during the illness. I 
examined the body with my hands externally, and over the 
region of the liver the sound was dull—the region seemed full ; 
over the region of the heart the sound was natural. I 
saw what he had vomited, and the landlady volunteered a 
statement of the symptoms before death. When Dr. Steven 
arrived he corroborated the landlady’s statements as far as 
he was concerned. He could not account for the death. There 
was no resolution come to on the Monday as to a post-mortem 
examination. On the afternoon of that day I was called on 
by Mr. Huggins and another gentleman, and I said the symptoms 
were such as might have been produced by an irritant poison. 
I said it was such a case as if it had occurred in England a 
coroner’s inquest would be held. Next morning Mr. Stevenson 
called again, and said that Messrs. Huggins & Co. requested 
me to make an inspection. In consequence of that I said 
I would require a colleague, and Dr. Steven was agreed on. 
I called on him, and he went with me to the house, and we 
made the inspection on Tuesday forenoon about twelve o’clock. 
We wrote a short report of that examination to Mr. Huggins 
immediately. We afterwards made an enlarged report. I 
identify this report, which is in the following terms :— 

“ At the request of Messrs. W. B. Huggins & Co., of this city, 
we, the undersigned, made a post-mortem examination of the 
body of the late M. L’Angelier, at the house of Mrs. Jenkins, 
11 Great Western Road, on the 24th March current, at noon, 
when the appearances were as follows:—The body, dressed in 
grave clothes and coffined, viewed externally, presented nothing 
remarkable, except a tawny hue of the surface. The incision 
made on opening the belly and chest revealed a considerable 
deposit of sub-cutaneous fat. The heart appeared large for the 
individual, but not so large as, in our opinion, to amount to 
disease. Its surface presented, externally, some opaque patches, 
such as are frequently seen on this organ without giving rise 
to any symptoms. Its right cavities were filled with dark 
fluid blood. The lungs, the liver, and the spleen appeared quite 
healthy. The gall bladder was moderately full of bile, and 
contained no calculi. The stomach and intestines, externally, 
presented nothing abnormal. The stomach, being tied at both 

70 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


extremities, was removed from the body. Its contents, consist- Dr. Hugh 
ing of about half a pint of dark fluid resembling coffee, were Thomson 
poured into a clean bottle, and the organ itself was laid open 
along its great curvature. The mucous membrane, except for 
a slight extent at the lesser curvature, was then seen to be 
deeply injected with blood, presenting an appearance of dark- 
red mottling, and its substance was remarked to be soft, being 
easily torn by scratching with the finger-nail. The other 
organs of the abdomen were not examined. The appearance 
of the mucous membrane, taken in connection with the history 
as related to us by witnesses, being such as, in our opinion, 
justified a suspicion of death having resulted from poison, we 
considered it proper to preserve the stomach and its contents 
in a sealed bottle for further investigation by chemical analysis, 
should such pe determined on. We, however, do not imply 
that, in our opinion, death may not have resulted from natural 
causes; a8, for example, severe internal congestion, the effect 
of exposure to celd after much bodily fatigue, which we under- 
stand the deceased to have undergone. Before closing this 
report, which we make at the request of the procurator-fiscal 
for the county of Lanark, we beg to state that, having had no 
legal authority for making the post-mortem examination above 
detailed, we restricted our examination to the organs in which 
we thought we were likely to find something to account for 
the death. Given under our hands at Glasgow, the 28th day 
of March, 1857, on soul and conscience. 
(Signed) Hueu Tuomson, M.D. 
ee James Steven, M.D. 


Examination continued—I afterwards received instructions 
from the procurator-fiscal in regard to the stomach. I was 
summoned to attend at his office before I wrote that report ; 
that was on 27th March. The contents of the stomach, and 
the stomach itself, sealed up in @ bottle, were handed to Dr. 
Penny on the 27th: they were in my custody till then On 
the 3lst I received instructions from the procurator-fiscal to 
attend at the Ramshorn Church, by order of the Sheriff, to 
make an inspection of L’Angelier’s body. _ Dr. Steven, Dr. 
Corbet, and Dr. Penny were there. ‘The coffin was in a vault, 
and was opened in our presence, and the body taken out. I 
recognised it as L’Angelier’s body. It presented much the 
same appearance generally as when we left it ; it was particularly 
well preserved, considering the time that had elapsed. On 
that occasion we removed other parts of the body for analysis. 
The report of the examination then made is as follows :— 

“Glasgow, 3rd April, 1857.—By virtue of a warrant from the 
Sheriff of Lanarkshire, we, the undersigned, proceeded to the 
post-mortem examination of the body of Pierre Emile L’Angelier, 
within the vault of the Ramshorn Church, on the 31st March 

ot 


Madeleine Smith. 


Dr. Hugh ult., in presence of two friends of the deceased. The body 
Thomson being removed from the coffin, two of our number, Drs. Thomson 
and Steven, who examined the body on the 24th ult., remarked 
that the features had lost their former pinched appearance, 
and that the general surface of the skin, instead of the tawny 
or dingy hue observed by them on that occasion, had become 
rather florid. Drs, Thomson and Steven likewise remarked that, 
with the exception of the upper surface of the liver, which had 
assumed a purplish colour, all the internal parts were little 
changed in appearance; and we all agreed that the evidences 
of putrefaction were much less marked than they usually are 
at such a date—the ninth day after death and the fifth after 
burial. The duodenum, along with the upper part of the 
small intestine, after both ends of the gut had been secured 
by ligatures, was removed and placed in a clean jar. A portion 
of the large intestine, consisting of part of the descending 
colon and sigmoid flexure, along with a portion of the rectum, 
after using the like precaution of ptacing ligatures on both ends 
of the bowel, was removed and placed in the same jar with the 
duodenum and portion of small intestine. A portion of the 
liver, being about a sixth part of that organ, was cut off and 
placed in another clean jar. We then proceeded to open the 
head in the usual manner, and observed nothing calling for 
remark beyond a greater degree of vascularity of the membranes 
of the brain than ordinary. A portion of the brain was removed 
and placed in a fourth clean vessel. We then adjourned to Dr. 
Penny’s rooms in the Andersonian Institution, taking with us 
the vessels containing the parts of the viscera before mentioned. 
The duodenum and portion of small intestine were found to 
Measure together 36 inches in length. Their contents, poured 
into a clean glass measure, were found to amount to four fluid 
ounces, and consisted of a turbid, sanguinolent fluid, having 
suspended in it much flocculent matter, which settled towards 
the bottom, whilst a few mucouslike masses floated on the 
surface. The mucous membrane of this part of the bowels 
was then examined. Its colour was decidedly redder than 
natural, and this redness was more marked over several patches, 
portions of which, when carefully examined, were found to be 
eroded. Several small whitish and somewhat gritty particles 
were removed from its surface, and, being placed on a clean 
piece of glass, were delivered to Dr. Penny. A few small ulcers, 
about the sixteenth of an inch in diameter, and having elevated 
edges, were observed on it at the upper part of the duodenum. 
On account of the failing light, it was determined to adjourn till 
a quarter-past eleven o’clock forenoon of the following day— 
all the jars, with their contents, and the glass measure, with 
its contents, being left in the custody of Dr. Penny. Having 
again met at the time appointed, and having received the various 


72 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


vessels, with their contents, at Dr. Penny’s hands, in the condi- Dr. Hugh 
tion in which we had given them to him, we proceeded to Thomson 
complete our examination. The portion of the largest intestine, 

along with the portion of the rectum, measuring twenty-six inches 

in length, on being laid open, was found empty. Its mucous 
membrane, coated with an abundant, pale, slimy mucus, pre- 

sented nothing abnormal, except in that part lining the rectum, 

on which were observed two vascular patches, about the size 

of a shilling. On decanting the contents of the glass measure, 

we observed a number of crystals adhering to its interior, and 

at the bottom a notable quantity of whitish sedimentary matter. 

Having now completed our examination of the various parts, 

we finally handed them all over to Dr. Penny. The above we 

attest on soul and conscience.”—Signed by Dr. Thomson, Dr. 
Steven, and Dr. Corbet. 

Examination resumed.—The appearance of the mucous mem- 
brane of the duodenum denoted the action of an irritant poison. 
The patches of vascularity in the rectum might be also con- 
sidered the effects of an irritant poison. But they were not 
very characteristic of that. There were ulcers there. We 
could not form any opinion as to their duration. ll these 
substances removed from the body were left in charge of Dr. 
Penny. The ulcers might have resulted from an irritant poison, 
but I am not aware that they are characteristic of that. They 
might have been produced by any cause which would have 
produced inflammation. 

Cross-examined by the Daan or Facutrr—On 24th March the 
contents of the stomach were poured into a clean bottle which 
Dr. Steven got. The meaning of the statement that the stomach 
was tied at both extremities, is that that was done before the 
contents were taken out. I am sure that the entire contents 
were poured into this bottle. The stomach itself was put 
into the same bottle. We took none of the intestines out of 
the body. When we put the stomach and contents into this 
bottle, we secured it well with oil-silk and a cork. We did 
that in the lodgings. The oil-silk was put under the cork to 
make it fit the bottle, and partly to make it more secure, and 
over the whole a double piece of oil-silk. We could not seal 
it there. We went to Dr, Steven’s house, where Dr. Steven 
affixed his seal, and I took it with me, and it remained in my 
possession, locked into my consulting table. On the Monday 
of the deceased’s death I was shown by Mrs. Jenkins the matter 
which had been vomited or purged. It was not preserved, so 
far as I know. We made a short report on the 24th to Mr. 
Huggins. It was delivered to one of the partners of the firm, 
I am not sure to which. At the time I attended M. L’Angelier 
in February, there were no symptoms that I could definitely 
say were not due to a bilious attack. They were the symptoms 


73 


Madeleine Smith. 


Dr. Hugh of a bilious attack, all of them. There was an appearance 


Thomson 


Dr. J. Steven 


of jaundice. I have heard of that as a symptom of irritant 
poison. It is in Dr. Taylor’s work on poisons. ‘ ‘ 

By the Lorp Jusrice-CLark—Was the appearance of jaundice 
in the eyes?—It was in the skin. 

The Dgan or Facuurr—Show me the passage in Dr. Taylor’s 
work (handing it to witness). : 

Wirnuss—I can’t find the particular passage. It is in the 
case of Marshall. : 

The Duan or Facuutr—What was the poison in the case of 
Marshall ? 

Wirness—Arsenic. 

The Dwan or Facutry—Well, see if you can find it. 

Lorp Hanpysrpz—Perhaps he has made a mistake on the 
subject, and refers to Marshall as a writer on the subject. He 
is referred to in Taylor’s “ Medical Jurisprudence.” 

Wirness—Yes (shown “Taylor on Poisons *); at page 62 
Marshall is quoted— Strangury and jaundice have been noticed 
among the secondary symptoms”; that is, under chronic 
poisoning. 

The Dgan or Facutty—Do you know any case in which 
jaundice has been observed as a symptom of arsenical poisoning, 
except that single line in Taylor’s book? 

Wirness—That is the only case. 

The Dan or Facutty—That is not a case. Are you 
acquainted with Marshall’s work? 

Wirngess—No. 

The Dzan or Facutry—You never saw it? 

Wrirness—No, I never saw it. 

The Dzan or Facurry—You were under the impression that 
Marshall was the name of a case? 

Wirness—Yes; from the manner in which I had noted it 
down, I made that mistake. 

By the Dgan or Facutty—The jaundice I saw in L’Angelier’s 
case was quite consistent with the idea that he was labouring 
under a bilious attack, and it could easily be accounted for in 
that way. 

By the Lorp Apvocars—The jar now shown me was the jar 
in which the stomach and its contents were placed. 

14. Dr. James Steven, examined by the Lorp Apvocats—I am 
a physician in Glasgow, and live in Stafford Place, near Franklin 
Street. I was applied to by Mrs. Jenkins early in the morning 
of 23rd March last. She asked me to go to a lodger of hers 
who was ill. I did not know her or her lodger before. I had 
myself been ill for a week, and was unwilling to go out at night. 
It was named to me as a severe bilious attack. I advised 
Mra. Jenkins to give him large draughts of hot water to effectu- 
ally wash out the stomach, and then some drops of laudanum. 

74 


- 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


She came to me again that morning, I think about seven. _I Dr. J. Steven 


went, thinking that, as he was a Frenchman, he might uot 
be understood. I found him in bed. He was very much 
depressed. His features were pinched, and his hands and fingers. 
He complained of coldness, and of pain over the region of the 
stomach. By pinched I mean shrunk and cold, or inclined to 
become cold. He complained of general chilliness, and his face 
and hands were cold to the touch. He was physically and men- 
tally depressed. I spoke to him. I observed nothing very 
peculiar in his voice. I did not expect a strong voice, and it 
was not particularly weak. That was when I first entered the 
room. But his voice became weaker. He complained that his 
breathing was painful, but it did not seem hurried. I dissuaded 
him from speaking. I had more blankets put upon the bed, 
and bottles of hot water around his body. I gave him a little 
morphia to quiet the painful retching and inclination to vomit, 
as he seemed to have already vomited all he could. He hada 
weak pulse. I felt the action of the heart; it was not particu- 
larly weak. That imported that the circulation was weaker at 
the extremities. His feet were not cold; hot bottles were put 
to them, and also near his body for his hands. He was not 
urgently complaining of thirst. He seemed afraid to drink 
large quantities in case of bringing back the vomiting. He 
asked particularly for cold water, and was unwilling to take 
whisky, which his landlady talked of giving him. He said 
he had been vomiting and purging. I saw a chamber-pot filled 
with the combined matter vomited and purged. I ordered 
it to be removed, and a clean vessel put in its place, that I 
might see what he vomited. I did not afterwards see it. I 
believe it was kept for some time, but I said it might be thrown 
away. That was after his death. He said, “This is the third 
attack I have had; the landlady says it is the bile, but I never 
was subject to bile.” These were his words. He seemed to 
get worse while I was there. He got up to go to stool, and 
passed a very small quantity of mucous fluid. He got in again 
himself While I was sitting beside him he several times 
said, “Oh, my poor mother,” and remarked how dull he felt at 
being so ill and away from friends. I ordered a mustard poultice 
to the stomach. I stayed, I suppose, about half an hour. It 
was about seven when I went there, and I got home at twenty 
minutes to eight. I applied the poultice myself. I called 
again at a quarter past eleven. His landlady met me in the 
lobby, and told me he had been quite as bad as in the morning, 
but had just fallen quiet. I went into the bedroom, and found 
him dead. He was lying on his right side, with his back 
towards the light, his knees a little drawn up, one arm outside 
the bedclothes and another in. They were not much drawn 
up—not unnaturally drawn up. He seemed in a comfortable 


75 


Madeleine Smith. 


Dr. J. Steven position, as if he was sleeping. About mid-day I was sent for 


Dr. F. Penny 


again. Dr. Thomson was there when I went. I asked him 
if there was anything in his previous illness which, with the 
symptoms I mentioned, could account for the death ; but we 
were entirely at a loss to account for it on any supposition of 
natural cause. I declined giving a certificate of death unless I 
made an examination; and Dr. Thomson and I made one next 
day. I now identify the report of that examination, which is 
a true report. Subsequently we made a second zost-mortem 
examination after the body was exhumed, and I identify 
the report of it. The stomach and its contents were put into 
a picklebottle on the first examination. The bottle was 
repeatedly washed by myself and others. I was quite satisfied 
with its purity. It was sealed up. It was taken to my house. 
The portions of the body removed on the second examination 
were handed to an officer, who went, with Dr. Penny and myself, 


‘to Dr. Penny’s laboratory. On the second post-mortem examina- 
Mf Mi 


tion I noticed that the body was remarkably well preserved. I 
had never attended any case in which there had been poisoning 
by arsenic. In Dr. Penny’s laboratory I again examined the 
articles which had been sent. They were in the same state, 
and were.again left in Br Penny’s charge. 

15. Dr. Frepertck Penny, examined by the Lorp Apvocats— 
I am Professor of Chemistry in the Andersonian University, 
Glasgow. On 27th March last I was communicated with by 
Dr. Hugh Thomson. He came to the institution and delivered 
a bottle. It was securely closed and sealed. I broke the seal, 
and made an examination of the contents. They were a stomach 
and a reddish-coloured fluid. I was requested to make the 
examination for the purpose of ascertaining if those matters 
contained poison. I commenced the analysis on the following 
day, the 28th. One of the clerks of the Fiscal called with Dr. 
Thomson, and it was done at his request. Till I made the 
analysis the jar and its contents remained in the 
state in which I received them. My report of this analysis is 
as follows :— 

“T hereby certify that on Friday, the 27th of March last, 
Dr. Hugh Thomson, of Glasgow, delivered to me, at the 
Andersonian Institution, a glass bottle containing a stomach and 
a reddish-coloured turbid liquid, said to be the contents of the 
stomach. The bottle was securely closed and duly sealed, and 
the seal was unbroken. 

“Tn compliance with the request of William Hart, Esq., one 
of the Procurators-Fiscal for the Lower Ward of Lanarkshire, 
I have carefully analysed and chemically examined the said 
stomach and its contents, with a view to ascertain whether they 
contained any poisonous substance. 


76 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


“1. Conrants oF THE STOMACH.’ 


“This liquid measured eight and a half ounces. On being Dr. F. Penny 
allowed to repose it deposited a white powder, which was found 
on examination to possess the external characters and all the 
chemical properties peculiar to arsenious acid; that-is, the 
common white arsenic of the shops. It consisted of hard, gritty, 
transparent, colourless, crystalline particles; it was soluble in 
boiling water, and readily dissolved in a solution of caustio 
potash ; it was unchanged by sulphide of ammonium, and vola- 
tilised when heated on platina foil. Heated in a tube it gave 
a sparkling white sublimate which, under the microscope, was 
found to consist of octohedral crystals. Its aqueous solution 
afforded, with ammonio-nitrate of silver, ammonio-sulphate of 
copper, sulphuretted hydrogen, and bichromate of potash, the 
highly characteristic results that are produced by arsenious acid. 
On heating @ portion of it in a small tube with black-flux, a 
brilliant ring of metallic arsenic was obtained with all its dis- 
tinctive properties. Heated with dilute hydrochloric acid and 
a slip of copper-foil, a steel-grey coating was deposited on 
the copper, and this coating by further examination was proved 
to be metallic arsenic. 

“ Another portion of the powder, on being treated with nitric 
acid, yielded a substance having the peculiar characters of 
arsenio acid.* A small portion of the powder was also sub- 
jected to what is commonly known as ‘ Marsh’s process,’ and 
metallic arsenic was thus obtained, with all its peculiar physical 
and chemical properties. 

“ These results show unequivocally that the said white powder 
was arsenious acid; that is, the preparation of arsenic which 
is usually sold in commerce, and administered or taken as a 
poison under the name of arsenic or oxide of arsenic. 

“T then examined the fluid contents of the stomach. After 
the usual preparatory operations the fluid was subjected to the 
following processes : — 

“First. To a portion of the fluid Reinsch’s process was 
applied, and an abundant steel-like coating was obtained on 
copper-foil. On heating the coated copper in a glass tube, the 
peculiar odour of arsenic was distinctly perceptible, and a white 
crystalline sublimate was produced, possessing the properties 
peculiar to arsenious acid. i 

“Secondly. Another portion of the prepared fluid was dis- 
tilled, and the distillate subjected to Marsh’s process. The gas 
produced by this process had an arsenical odour, burned with 


*In the official report of the trial, edited by Mr. Forbes Irvine, this 
wrongly appears as arsentous acid. The error doubtless occurred in the 
transcription of Professor Penny’s Analytical Report. Arsenic acid is the 
product obtained by the action of nitric acid on arsenious acid. 


77 


Madeleine Smith. 


Dr. F. Penny a bluish-white flame, and gave, with nitrate of silver, the char- 
acteristic reaction of arseniuretted hydrogen. On holding above 
the flame a slip of bibulous paper, moistened with a solution of 
ammonio-nitrate of silver, a yellow colour was communicated to 
the paper. A white porcelain capsule depressed upon the flame 
was quickly covered with brilliant stains, which, on being tested 
with the appropriate re-agents, were found to be metallic 
arsenic. By a modification of Marsh’s apparatus the gas was 
conducted through a heated tube, when a lustrous mirror-like 
deposit of arsenic in the metallic state was collected, and this 
deposit was afterwards converted into arsenious acid. 

“Thirdly. Through another portion of the fluid a stream of 
sulphuretted hydrogen gas was transmitted, when a bright 
yellow precipitate separated, having the chemical peculiarities 
of the tri-sulphide of arsenic. It dissolved readily in ammonia 
and in carbonate of ammonia, it remained unchanged in hydro- 
chloric atid, and it gave, on being heated with black flux, a 
brilliant ring of metallic arsenic. 

“Fourthly. A fourth portion of the prepared fluid, being pro- 
perly acidified with hydrochloric acid, was distilled, and the 
distillate subjected to Fleitmann’s process. For this purpose 
it was boiled with zinc and a strong solution of caustic potash. 
Arseniuretted hydrogen was disengaged, and was recognised by 
its odour, and by its characteristic action upon nitrate of silver 


“ Stomach. 


“T examined, in the next place, the stomach itself. It was 
cut into small pieces, and boiled for some time in water con- 
taining hydrochloric acid, and the solution, after being filtered, 
was subjected to the same processes as those applied to the 
contents of the stomach. The results in every case were 
precisely similar, and the presence of a considerable quantity 
of arsenic was unequivocally detected. 


“ Quantity of Arsenic. 

“T made, in the last place, a careful determination of the 
quantity of arsenic contained in the said stomach and its con- 
tents. A stream of sulphuretted hydrogen gas was transmitted 
through a known quantity of the prepared fluids from the said 
matters, until the whole of the arsenic was precipitated in the 
form of tri-sulphide of arsenic. This sulphide, after being 
carefully purified, was collected, dried, and weighed. Its weight 
corresponded to a quantity of arsenious acid (common white 
arsenic), in the entire stomach and its contents, equal to eighty- 
two grains and seven-tenths of a grain, or to very nearly one- 
fifth of an ounce. The accuracy of this result was confirmed 
by converting the sulphide of arsenic into arseniate of ammonia 


7d 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


and magnesia, and weighing the product. The quantity here Dr. F. Penny 
stated is exclusive of the white powder first baretned: 7 

Be The purity of the various materials and reagents employed 

in this investigation was most scrupulously ascertained. 


“ Conclusions. 


“ Having carefully considered the results of this investigation, 
1 am clearly of opinion that they are conclusive in showing— 

“First.: That the matters subjected to examination and 
analysis contained arsenic; and, 

“Secondly. That the quantity of arsenic found was consider- 
ably more than sufficient to destroy life. 

“ All this is true on soul and conscience. 

(Signed) “FREDERICK PENNY, 
Professor of Chemistry. 
“ Glasgow, April 6, 1857.” 


Examination resumed—How much arsenic would destroy life? 
—It is not easy to give a precise answer to that question ; 
cases are on record in which life was destroyed by two and 
four grains; four or six grains are generally regarded as suffi- 
cient to destroy life, and the amount I determined as existing 
in the stomach was eighty-two grains. On 31st March I attended 
at the exhumation of M. L’Angelier’s body. I saw the coffin 
opened, and portions of the body removed. These portions 
were carefully preserved and submitted to a chemical analysis 
by myself. They were placed in jars, which I never lost sight 
of until they reached my laboratory. I made an analysis of 
the contents, and prepared the following report (No. 158 of 
inventory) :-— 

“On Tuesday, the 31st March last, I was present at a post- 
mortem examination of the body of Pierre Emile L’Angelier, 
made by Drs. Corbet, Thomson, and Steven, in a vault of the 
Ramshorn Church, Glasgow. 

“ At my request portions of the following organs were removed 
from the body and properly preserved for chemical analysis 
and examination :— 

. Small intestine and contents. 
. Large intestine. 

. Liver. 

Heart. 

Lung. 

. Brain, 

“These articles were taken direct to the laboratory in the 
Andersonian Institution, and were there delivered to me by the 
parties before named. I have since made a careful analysis 


79 


> Ot 9 BD Ee 


Madeleine Smith. 


Dr. F. Penny and examination of all the said matters, with the following 
results : — 


“1, Swatyi Inrestinzg AnD 1Ts CoNnTENTS. 


“The portion of small intestine contained a turbid and 
reddish-coloured liquid, which measured four ounces. On stand- 
ing for several hours in a glass vessel this liquid deposited 
numerous and well-defined octohedral crystals, which, on being 
subjected to the usual chemical processes for the detection of 
arsenic, were found to be arsenious acid. 

“ Araenic was also detected in the small intestine. 


“9. LARGE INTESTINE. 


“This organ yielded arsenic, but in less proportion than in 
the small intestine. 


“ 3. Liver, Brain, and Heart. 
9 


“ Arsenic was separated from the liver, heart, and brain, but 
in much less proportion than from the small and large intestine. 


“4, Luna. 


“The lung gave only a slight indication of the presence of 
arsenic. 


“ CoNCLUSIONS. 

“}. That the body of the deceased Pierre Emile L’Angelier 
contained arsenic. 

“2. That the arsenic must have been taken by or administered 
to him while living. 

“ All this is true on soul and conscience. 

(Signed) “ FREDERICK Prnny, 
Professor of Chemistry.” 


Examination continued—The actual quantity on the second 
occasion was not ascertained. It was not necessary to determine 
this quantity. The presence of arsenic in the brain does not 
enable me to say when the arsenic was taken. I can see no 
physiological reason why the arsenic should not make its appear- 
ance at the same time in the various textures of the body. 

To the Lorp Justice-CLerxk—Purging would account for a 
smaller portion of arsenic being found in the large intestine. 

By the Lorp Apvocats—When my analysis was completed, 
on the llth April, I removed the portions of the body to 
Edinburgh. [Shown No. 209 of inventory.] These articles were 
delivered to Dr. Christison. They were—powder from contents 
of stomach, fluid from contents of stomach, fluid from stomach, 
portions of small and large intestines, liver, heart, lung, &c. 
They were in my custody till delivered to Dr. Christison. They 
were portions of L’Angelier’s body. I was asked to make an 


80 


Evidence for Prosecution, 


investigation as to arsenic purchased at the shops of Mr. Currie Dr. F. 
and Mr. Murdoch, to ascertain if the sibatands sold by them a 
as arsenic really contained arsenic and in what proportion. The 
following is the report on this matter (No. 159) :— 

“On the 18th inst., I purchased from James Dickie, at Mr. 
Murdoch’s drug shop in Sauchiehall Street, Glasgow, one ounce 
and a half of arsenic, said to be mixed with soot, ana in the 
state in which it is usually sold retail at that establishment. 

“On the same day I purchased also from George Carruthers 
Halliburton, at Mr. Currie’s drug shop, Sauchiehall Street, 
Glasgow, one ounce of arsenic, said to be mixed with indigo. 

“T have since made a careful analysis and chemical examina- 
tion of each of these quantities of arsenic, and I find that they 
contain respectively the following proportions per cent. of 
arsenious acid; that is, of pure white arsenic : — 


Arsenious Acid. 


“Mr. Murdoch’s arsenic, - - - 95°1 per cent. 
“Mr, Currie’s arsenic, - - - 94°4 per cent. 
(Signed) “ Frepgrivk Penny, 


Professor of Chemistry.” 


Examination resumed—The other substances, besides pure 
arsenic, were inorganic matter, and in Mr. Murdoch’s carbona- 
ceous matter, and in Currie’s particles of indigo and carbonaceous 
matter, with ash or inorganic matter. The arsenic bought at 
Mr. Currie’s contained an extremely small portion of the blue 
colouring matter of indigo. The greater part of that colouring 
matter, by peculiar and dexterous manipulation, could be 
removed, and the arsenic would afterwards appear white to the 
unassisted eye. If a sufficient portion of that arsenic was 
administered to cause death, and prior to death great vomiting 
had taken place, I would not have expected to find any portion 
of the indigo. Indigo would show a blue colour in solution. 

To the Lorn Justicz-Crerxk—The quantity of indigo was so 
small that it would not colour wine of any sort—certainly not 
port wine. 

By the Lorp Apvocats—In regard to the arsenic purchased 
from Mr. Murdoch, that was mixed with carbonaceous particles. 
If that had been administered, and if the arsenic had settled 
down from the contents of the stomach, as in this case, I should 
have expected to find carbonaceous particles. Suppose there 
had been prior administration of arsenic a month before, similar 
to what was purchased from Murdoch’s, I would not have 
expected to have found traces of that carbonaceous matter. 
Various articles were delivered to me by Mr. Wilson, said to 
have been found in M. L’Angelier’s lodgings; there were fifteen 
articles, viz., twelve bottles, two paper packages, and a cake 
of chocolate. I examined them specially for arsenic, and to 


¥F 81 


Madeleine Smith. 


Dr. F. Penny ascertain their general nature. No. 1 (@ bottle) contained a 


brown liquid, containing magnesia, epsom salts, soda, and 
rhubarb; No. 2, sugar and ammonia; No. 3, camphorated oil ; 
No. 4, laudanum; No. 5, bottle containing colourless liquid, a 
very weak solution of aconite; No. 6, bottle containing whitish 
powder, chalk, sugar, and cinnamon chiefly; No. t. olive oil; 
No. 8, a brown liquid and sediment containing chalk, cinnamon, 
and an astringent matter like catechu; No. 9, four packages of 
powders, A, B, ©, D, consisting exclusively of sulphate of 
quinine—very good; No. 10, eau de Cologne; No. 11, cam- 
phorated chalk; No. 12, cake of chocolate; No. 13, paper 
package—a dried plant, much decayed ; No. 22, empty phial, 
labélled “ glycerine”; No. 23, small bottle containing @ resinous 
cement. The witness then identified the various bottles which 
contained the stomach (save Nos. 162 to 174, and Nos. 183 and 
184 of Inventory). None of these substances, excepting that con- 
taining solution of aconite, are poisonous. It was extremely 
weak, and the quartity I found was not sufficient to destroy 
life. There were nearly two ounces in the phial, and it was more 
than half-full; if the whole quantity taken out had been 
swallowed it would not have been sufficient to destroy life; it 
had a label of Frazer & Green—‘ A teaspoonful every two hours 
in water.” Aconite produces convulsions and coma. I cannot 
speak further as to its effects. I never heard of prussic acid 
being used externally as a cosmetic; I should think it highly 
dangerous to use it in that way. I am not aware of any chemical 
action that it exerts. I should say it would be very dangerous 
to use arsenic for a similar purpose; if rubbed on the skin it 
might produce constitutional symptoms of poisoning by 
arsenic. It might produce an eruption on the skin. I have 
heard of its being used as a depilatory to remove hairs from the 
skin, mixed, however, with other matters, lime generally, solid. 
It is not arsenious acid that is so used; it is usually the yellow 
sulphuret. 

Cross-examined by the Dzan or Facutty—In the entire 
stomach and its contents there was arsenious acid equal to 
82 7-10th grains. That was exclusive of the white powder which 
I first examined. The white powder that I examined, after being 
collected and dried, weighed 5 2-10th grains, and that was 
arsenious acid. I did not determine the quantity of arsenic in 
the lungs, liver, brain, or heart; I can give no notion of the 
quantity that might be in these organs; in the small intestine 
it must have been considerable, because, when its contents were 
allowed to repose, arsenious acid crystallised out of that liquid, 
and deposited abundantly on the sides of the vessel. That 
indicated the liquid had as much arsenic as it could hold in 
solution at the temperature. I can’t give any idea of the 
quantity in the small intestine. It was decidedly appreciable. 


82 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


It would be a mere matter of guess how much, and [I should Dr. F. Penny 
not like to guess in so serious a matter. If the deceased, when 
attacked by the symptoms of arsenical poisoning, vomited a 
great deal and in large quantities, it would depend on the mode 
of administration whether a large quantity would be carried 
off. If given with solid food, and in a solid state, a large portion 
of the arsenic would be ejected from the stomach if all that 
food were vomited; but if the arsenic were stirred up with a 
liquid, and thereby thrown into a state of mechanical suspension, 
I should not expect that so considerable a portion should be 
ejected by vomiting. I could not say what proportion. By 
solid food I mean bread and the like. In the case of the arsenic 
being taken in a fluid I could not say what proportion might 
be ejected. I should not be surprised to find that as much had 
been ejected as remained. Judging from what I found on the 
examination of the body the dose of arsenic must. have been 
of very unusual size. There are cases on record in which very 
large quantities of arsenic have been found in the stomach and 
intestines. I know them as a matter of reading. There are 
examples of larger quantities being found than in the present. 
I think there is a case in which two drachms were found—that 
is, 120 grains. That is the largest quantity which occurs to 
my mind at this moment as having been found. The cases in 
which a very large quantity of arsenic was found did not turn 
out to be cases of intentional murder by a third party. In the 
cases to which I refer the arsenic was taken by the party volun- 
tarily with the intention to commit suicide. It would be very 
difficult to give a large dose of arsenic in a liquid; by a large 
dose of arsenic you exclude many vehicles in which arsenic 
might be administered. Nothing which I found in my investiga- 
tion indicated the time when the arsenic might have been taken. 
The period that elapses between the administration of this poison 
and the symptoms being manifested may be eight or ten hours; 
that is the extreme time; there are some cases in which the 
symptoms show -themselves in less than half an hour; we have 
cases in which death has resulted in a few hours, and cases in 
which death has been delayed for two or three days. As to 
the arsenic obtained from Currie’s shop, the greater part of the 
colouring matter might be removed by dexterous manipulation ; 
if you were to throw water on the arsenic and agitate the two 
together, and after the arsenic had subsided you decant the 
liquid, a portion of colouring matter is thrown off; but if you 
keep the vessel shaken in a particular way you may coax the 
greater part of the colouring matter away. This would require 
skilful agitation. I think none but a chemist would be likely 
to know about it, or try it. Murdoch’s arsenic was coloured 
with carbonaceous matter; it was coal soot. I cannot tell from 
examination whether the arsenic found was administered in 


83 


Madeleine Smith. 


Dr. F. Penny one dose or several. It would be very dangerous to use arsenic 
externally in any way. There are ‘cases in which it has been 
applied to the entire or whole skin, where there was no abrasion, 
and in which symptoms of poisoning have been produced— 
yomiting, pain, but not death. In one case it was rubbed on the 
head I think; but I don’t remember the details of the case. 
From the remembrance of general reading my impression is 
that it produces eruption on the sound skin. If cold water were 
used I should not like to wash in it. That is all the answer I 
can give on that matter. 

To the Lorn JusticeCuere—There are cases in which 
inflammation of the intestines has been produced by external 
application of arsenic. 

Cross-examined by the DgAN oF Facutty—Arsenic is an irri- 
tant poison. It is absorbed into the blood, I presume, with great 
rapidity, and, through the blood, it reaches all the organs in 
which we find it. 

Reexamined by the Lorp Apvocate—Cocoa or coffee is a 
vehicle in which a large dose might be given. There is @ great 
difference between giving rise to suspicion and actual detection. 
I have found by actual experiment that when thirty or forty 
grains of arsenic are put into a cup of warm chocolate, a large 
portion of the arsenic settles down in the bottom of the cup, 
and I think a person drinking such poisonous chocolate would 
suspect something when the gritty particles came into his mouth. 
But if the same quantity, and even a larger quantity, was 
boiled with the chocolate, instead of merely being stirred or 
mixed, none of it settles down, and so might be gulped over. I 
could not wholly separate the soot by washing from Murdoch’s 
arsenic, but a very large quantity of it might be separated. 
Suppose a person the subject of repeated doses of arsenic, I 
have no evidence on which to form an opinion whether the 
last dose would be fatal more rapidly. I delivered to Dr. 
Christison some of the arsenic I got at Currie’s and Murdoch’s. - 

By the Duan or Facurty—In case of chocolate being boiled 
with arsenic in it a larger proportion dissolves and does not 
subside. That is what I find to be the case from actual experi- 
ment. Coffee or tea could not be made the vehicle of a large 
dose of arsenic. 

To the Lorp Justicu-Cimurxk—The period in which the arsenic 
produces its effect varies in different individuals, and according 
to the mode of administration. Pain in the stomach is one of 
the first symptoms when a large dose is administered, and 
vomiting usually accompanies the pain; but it may be very 
severe before vomiting actually begins. Ten, fifteen, or twenty 
grains might be given in coffee. 

The Lorp Justice-CLerk—Certainly, Dr. Penny, more satis- 
factory, lucid, or distinct evidence I never heard. 


84 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


16. Dr. Ropsrt Curistison, examined by the Lorp Apvyooate Dr. Robert 
—Dr. Penny, of Glasgow, delivered to me portions of the body Christison 
of L’Angelier on 10th April. I made a chemical analysis of 
the subjects so delivered, with the view of ascertaining if they 
contained poison. The report (No. 160) now shown me is my 
report, and a true report, and it is as follows :— 

“T certify, on soul and conscience, that I received on the 
llth ultimo, for chemical examination, from the hands of Dr. 
Frederick Penny, of Glasgow, a box containing various articles 
connected with the case of Pierre Emile L’Angelier, who is 
supposed to have died of poison. The articles, nine in number, 
were all duly sealed and labelled. 

“No. 1 was a ‘small tube containing powder from contents 
of stomach.’ This powder was a coarse, gritty, white, shining, 
erystalliform powder which (1) sublimed at a gentle heat; (2) 
condensed in sparkling octohedral crystals ; (3) was slowly soluble 
in boiling distilled water; and, when so dissolved, gave (4) a 
sulphur-yellow precipitate with sulphuretted hydrogen water ; 
(5) a lemon-yellow precipitate, with solution of ammoniacal 
nitrate of silver ; (6) an apple-green precipitate, with ammoniacal 
sulphate of copper; and, on being mixed with hydrochloric 
acid, and then boiled on copper-gauze, yielded (7) a dark greyish- 
black encrustation on the gauze, which, on being heated in a 
small glass tube, (8) became again bright copper-red, and at 
the same time yielded a ring of white sparkling sublimate in 
octohedral crystals, or forms derivable from the octohedrae. 

“The powder was, therefore, oxide of arsenic. 

“No. 2 was ‘a bottle containing prepared fluid from contents 
of stomach.’ This fluid was colourless and nearly transparent. 
(1) A stream of sulphuretted hydrogen threw down from it an 
abundant sulphur-yellow precipitate. (2) Hydrochloric acid 
being added to a portion of it, copper-gauze was subjected to 
a boiling heat in the mixture, upon which, in a few seconds, 
the gauze became encrusted with a greyish-black coat. (3) 
This gauze, when washed, dried, and heated in a glass tube, 
was restored to its original bright copper-red appearance, and, 
at the same time, a ring of sparkling crystals was obtained, 
the form of which was the regular octohedrae, or some form 
derived from it. 

“The fluid prepared from the contents of the stomach there- 
fore contained oxide of arsenic, and in considerable quantity. 

“No. 4 was ‘a bottle containing portion of contents of small 
intestine.’ This was a turbid, opaque, dirty grey liquid, holding 
much insoluble matter in suspension, and white glittering par- 
ticles were seen on the bottom of the bottle. 

“The contents were poured out, so as to leave the powder 
behind. Hydrochloric acid being added to the portion poured 
off, the mixture was boiled for a little, and copper-gauze was 

85 


Madeleine Smith. 


Dr. Robert subjected to its action at a boiling temperature. In a few 

‘istison seconds the gauze was encrusted with a.greyish-black film, which 

was proved to be arsenic in the same way as in the experiments 
previously described. 

“The powder was cleaned by washing it with cold distilled 
water, and was found to be oxide of arsenic by the tests to 
which the powder from the contents of the stomach was 
subjected. 

“The contents of the small intestine, therefore, contained 
oxide of arsenic. 

“No. 7 was a common gallipot ‘jar containing portion of 
liver.’ The contents, being about four ounces of a liver, were 
subjected to a modification, proposed in 1852 by Dr. Penny, of 
the process of Reinsch for detecting arsenic in such matter. 
The liver having been cut into small pieces, and boiled in hydro 
chloric acid and distilled water in a glass flask, to which a 
distilling apparatus of glass was connected, the whole texture 
was gradually reduced to a fine pulp, and a distilled liquor was 
obtained, which was collected in divided portions. These 
liquors were colourless, and nearly clear. The two first portions 
obtained did not contain any arsenic; the vhird gave faint 
traces of it; the fifth and sixth portions, when separately 
subjected to the action of copper-gauze, gave characteristically 
the usual dark-grey encrustation, and this, again, was driven off, 
as usual, by heat in a small glass tube, and yielded, in each 
case, a white sparkling ring of crystals which were regular 
octohedrae, or forms derived from the octohedrae. 

“The liver, therefore, contained oxide of arsenic. 

“Having obtained unequivocal proof of the presence of arsenic 
in the contents of the stomach, in the contents of the small 
intestine, and in the liver, it does not appear to me necessary 
to examine the other articles delivered to me by Dr. Penny. 
These are—(3) prepared fluid from the textures of stomach ; 
(5) portions of the small intestine; (6) portion of the large 
intestine ; (8) portions of the heart and lungs; (9) portion of 
the brain. 

(Signed) “R. Caristison, M.D., &e.” 

The fluid from the stomach appeared to indicate a considerable 
quantity—more than sufficient to destroy life. I have had 
great experience in regard to poisons, and published a work 
on the subject (Edinburgh, 1845). At pages 301 and 303 of 
that work I state the usual effects of poisoning by arsenic. 
If I found all these effects in a case, it would lead me to suspect 
the presence of arsenic, or some other irritant poison. I have 
not seen Dr. Thomson’s and Dr. Steven’s reports on the post- 
mortem examination of the bedy. Supposing arsenic taken 
on the 19th and 22nd February, in the interval] between that 
and 22nd March, the symptoms I would expect to find would 

86 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


be variable. Sometimes they pass off quickly, and sometimes Dr. Robert 


continue for weeks or months. When they continue they are— 
indigestion, loss of strength, emaciation, sometimes diarrhaa, 
lassitude of the limbs. If there appeared erosions with elevated 
edges in the intestines, I should have been led to suspect the 
existence of some affection of the intestines previous to the 
final attack ; but much would depend on appearances. 

The Lorp Apvocats read the description of the post-mortem 
examination of the body (No. 156), and asked—Was this what 
witness would have expected to find after the administration of 
arsenic?—Witness deponed that it would be very natural to 
expect. such appearances from arsenic. He would have thought 
them the natural result if he had known it had been administered, 

The Lorn Apvocatz—If you had been consulted in a case of 
this kind—that, on the 18th or 19th of February, a person, 
having gone out in good health, returns, is attacked during 
the night with great pain in the bowels, severe vomiting of a 
green viscous fluid, accompanied by intense thirst and purging, 
and, after the lapse of two or three days and partial recovery. 
the patient is again seized with the same symptoms, though in 
a somewhat modified form; if, after the second attack, he had 
continued affected with great lassitude, change of colour, low 
pulse, and, after going from home for ten days or a fortnight, 
had again returned, and been attacked the same night with these 
symptoms in an aggravated form, that he died within eight or 
ten hours of his return to his house, and that, on a post-mortem 
examination, the results were found which you have heard 
detailed in this case, I wish you to give me your opinion, as 
a man of science and skill, what conclusion you would draw 
as to the cause of these illnesses, and the ultimate cause of 
death?—I could have no doubt that the cause of his death 
was poisoning with arsenic, and, that such being the case, ] 
should have entertained a strong suspicion in regard to his 
previous illnesses, but only a suspicion, because his death would 
have prevented me from taking the means of satisfying my 
mind on the subject by a careful examination of all the cir 
cumstances. 

The symptoms are consistent with what you would expect if 
continuous poisoning were taking place #—They are those which 
have occurred in parallel cases of the administration of repeated 
doses, singly insufficient to cause death. Dr. Penny gave me 
two packets of arsenic, and I examined some portions of the 
body not previously analysed. No. 161 is my report; it is true 


and correct. [Reads|— 
“ Edinburgh, May 26, 1857. 


“J certify that, since the delivery of my first report on the 
case of Pierre Emile L’Angelier, I have examined— 
“No, 6, being a portion of the great intestine, by the same 
87 


Christison 


Madeleine Smith. 


Dr. Robert process employed in the instance of the liver, and that I obtained 
Christison from it unequivocal evidence of the existence of arsenic; and 

“No. 8 also, being a portion of the brain. This was dried 
up, and amounted to about a quarter of an ounce only. I 
obtained from it, by the same process, traces of arsenic, but 
not satisfactory evidence. That result might have been owing 
to the small quantity of material I had to analyse. 

“T further certify that on 6th May Dr. Penny put into my 
hands two small paper packets duly sealed, one supposed to be 
arsenic mixed with soot, the other arsenic mixed with indigo, 
according to the directions of the Act for the sale of arsenic. 

“The one marked ‘Murdoch’s arsenic’ I found to contain 
soot. Judging from the depth of colour I infer that it contains 
the due proportion of soot. 

“The other, marked ‘Currie’s arsenic,’ and supposed to 
contain indigo, does not contain the indigo directed to be used 
in the Act for the sale of arsenic. It may contain a little of 
the colouring matter of indigo. But when the colouring matter 
is detached, it does not give the peculiar reactions of indigo, 
neither does it impart a blue colour to the arsenic as good 
indigo does characteristically, for the colour is a pale greyish 
black. The colouring matter in this article is also imperfectly 
mixed. It may be easily removed in a great measure by washing 
the powder with cold water, which is not to be accomplished 
easily or so perfectly when good indigo is used. The proportion 
of the admixture amounts to a 36th part. This is a little less 
than the proportion which the Act directs, viz., a 32nd, when 
indigo is used. 

“All this I certify on soul and conscience. 

(Signed) “R. Caristison.” 

The samples Nos. 212 and 213 now shown me are similar to 
what I got from Dr. Penny. 

Cross-examined by the Duan or Facunry—I did not detect 
colouring matter in the dead body; my attention was not 
directed to it. I got only one article in which it might have 
been found if my attention had been directed to it, viz., the 
contents of the small intestine; the others had been subjected 
to previous preparation. I was not asked to attend to colouring 
matter. I did not see it, and I did not search for it. Supposing 
soot or indigo to have been administered with the arsenic, I 
think it might have been found in the stomach. I can’t say 
it would have been found even by careful examination; many 
circumstances go to the possibility of its being found. Many 
of the component parts of soot are insoluble, and it might have 
been partially removed by frequent vomiting, but not entirely. 
It is very difficult to remove soot from arsenic entirely. Indigo 
wovld have been found moro easily from the peculiarity of the 
colour and the chemical properties being so precise. Currie’s 

88 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


arsenic is not coloured with true indigo; it appears to be Dr. Robert 
waste indigo, or what has been used for the purposes of the Christison 
dyer. I don’t know how it is prepared. I did not analyse 
the colouring matter of Currie’s arsenic. I ascertained that it 
was not the indigo directed by the Act to be used, and I 
ascertained the quantity. I separated the colouring matter 
from the arsenic, and subjected it to the action of sulphuric 
acid. Charcoal is one of the chief constituents of good indigo, 
and necessarily of waste indigo. The chief constituent of soot 
is charcoal also. I was informed by Dr. Penny of the quantity 
he found in the stomach—more than eighty grains. There 
was also a white powder found in addition. If there was great 
vomiting and purging the quantity of arsenic administered 
must have been much greater than was found in the stomach 
and intestines. But much would depend on whether means 
were taken to facilitate vomiting. If hot and cold water ‘were 
freely given that would facilitate the discharge of the polson. 
It is impossible to say the proportion ejected; I think it would 
be reasonable to suppose that as much would be vomited as 
remained; it might, without any extravagant supposition, be 
taken at four or five times as much. There was nothing in the 
symptoms mentioned in the last illness in this case inconsistent 
with death being produced by a single dose of arsenic. The 
ordinary symptoms in a case of this kind are not unlike the 
symptoms of malignant cholera. I think all the symptoms in 
this case described to me might have occurred from malignant 
cholera. If there were a sense of choking and soreness of the 
throat I think these are more symptoms of arsenic; I don’t 
think they have occurred in cholera. I think the ulcers in 
the duodenum might indicate the previous existence of inflam- 
mation of the duodenum, called duodenitis. It is a disease 
which might present the outward symptoms of bowel complaint 
or of cholera. The ordinary time that elapses between the 
administration of arsenic and death is from eighteen hours to 
two and a half days. The exceptions to this are numerous; 
some of them are very anomalous as to the shortness of the 
interval. The shortest are two or two and a half hours; these 
have been ascertained ; but it is not always possible to ascertain 
when it is administered. The time between which the poison 
is administered and the manifestation of the symptoms is from 
half an hour to about two hours. I had a case in which it was 
five hours. There are also cases in which it was said to be 
seven, and even ten hours. It does not appear that the size 
of the dose affects this; it does not depend on the amount taken, 
within certain bounds, of course; but I speak of the case as 
arsenic is usually administered. There are a good many cases 
of large doses. I think the dose in this case must have been 
double, probably more than double, the quantity found in the 


89 


Madeleine Smith. 


Dr. Robert stomach. A dose of 220 grains may be considered a large dose. 

Christison J can’t say if, in cases of as large a dose as this, ib was inten- 
tionally administered; in the greater proportion of. cases of 
suicide the dose is generally found to be large. That is easily 
accounted for by the desire of the unfortunate person to make 
certain of death. 

By the Dsan or Facuttr—In a case of murder no such large 
quantity would be used? It is in cases of suicide that double- 
shotted pistols are used and large doses given? 

Witness—But murder, even by injuries, and also by poison, 
is very often detected by the excessive violence or dose. In all 
cases of poisoning by arsenic there is more used than is necessary 
to cause death. If any be found in the stomach it is in excess. 
I cannot recollect how much has been used; but I know very 
well that what is found in the stomach in undoubted cases of 
poisoning by others has been considerably larger than what 
was necessary to occasion death, because the very fact of 
poison being found in the stomach at all, in the case of arsenic, 
shows that more has been administered than is necessary, as 
it i¢ not what is found in the stomach that causes death, but 
what disappears from the stomach. 

The Dzan or Facutty—But do you know any case in which 
so great a dose as the present was administered? 

Wirness—I cannot recollect at the present moment. In cases 
of charges of murder by arsenic it is scarcely possible to get 
information as to the actual quantity used. 

The Duan or Facuutyr—You have information here in this 
charge of murder? 

Witnass—lI have information as to what was in the stomach. 

The Dgan or Facutty—And you are enabled to draw an 
inference ? 

Witngss—Of course, my inference is drawn by a sort of pro- 
bability ; but that is not an inference on which I am entitled 
to found any positive statement. 

The Dean or Facutty—Well, let me put this question—Did 
you ever know of any person murdered by arsenic having 
eighty-eight grains of it found in his stomach and intestines? 

Witness—I don’t recollect at the present moment. 

The Dzan or Facutry—Or anything approaching to it? 

Wirtngss—I don’t recollect, but I would not rely on my recol- 
lection as to a negative fact. 

The Dean or Facutty—You are not, at all events, able to 
give me an example the other way? 

Witness—Not at present. As far as my own observation 
goes, I can say that I never met with eighty grains in the 
stomach of a person who had been poisoned by arsenic. I can’t 
say what is the largest quantity I have found. 

The Duan or Facutry—If a person designs to poison another, 

90 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


the use of a very large quantity of arsenic, greatly exceeding Dr. Robert 
what is necessary, is a thing to be ayoided? Christison 

Wrrnrss—It is a great error. 

Examination continued—In some articles ef food it is easy 
to administer a large quantity of arsenic, and in others it is 
difficult to do so. It is not difficult in solid, or, still better, in 
pulpy articles of food—porridge, for example—but much more 
difficult in liquids. A large quantity could not be administered 
in fluid without a large quantity of the fluid. It is very rare for 
persons to take meals as usual after arsenic has been adminis- 
tered; but there is a case of a girl who took arsenic at eleven 
o'clock forenoon, and at two o’clock she “ made” a pretty good 
dinner. It was a French case, and the words as translated are, 
that she made “a very fair dinner ”—“ elle dind assez bien” — 
though it was observed that she was uneasy previously. Every 
author who notices that case notices it as a very extraordinary 
one. She died, I think, in thirteen or fourteen hours after the 
administration. It was a rapid case. 

Reexamined by the Lorp Apvocats—My opinion as to 
amount vomited is hypothetical. The amount of matter vomited 
is sometimes very little, and sometimes very large doses have 
been thrown off by vomiting, without occasioning death. Half 
an ounce of arsenic might be administered if a proper vehicle 
were used. There is one case in which half an ounce was taken 
and no vomiting ensued. I think chocolate or cocoa would be a 
vehicle in which a considerable dose might be given. Active 
exercise would hasten the effects of arsenic; a long walk would 
do so. Exercise accelerates the action of all poisons except 
narcotic poisons. That a man should take arsenic at Bridge of 
Allan, train to Coatbridge, walk eight miles to Glasgow, and 
reach Glasgow in good health and spirits, and die of arsenie 
next morning, I should think very unlikely ; cases of protraction 
for five hours have occurred in persons who had gone to 
sleep after taking it. The colouring matter of the arsenic 
might have been in the articles I examined without my observing 
it. My attention was not directed to the point. The powder 
of arsenic I found was greyish—not quite white; perhaps mixed 
with something in the intestine. The administration of previous 
doses predisposes the system to the effects of poison, and makes 
the action of the poison more rapid and violent. If the indivi- 
dual had recovered entirely no great effect would follow from 
doses a month before; but if he still laboured under derange- 
ment of the stomach I should look for violent effects. 

17. Amapzrs Tuuav, examined through an interpreter—I! am A. Thuau 
a clerk in Glasgow, and lodged with Mrs. Jenkins in March last. 
I knew M. L’Angelier, who also lived there. We took our meals 
together in the same room. I identify the photograph as one 
I saw in L’Angelier’s room. It was the portrait of his intended. 

91 


Madeleine Smith. 


A. Thuau I am not sure whether he ever told me her name. I did hear 
it, I think, from the French Consul. I was in the habit of 
speaking with L’Angelier about her. We also spoke about the 
correspondence. I knew, in the end of December last, that he 
was to marry a young lady. I knew of some letters, but read 
none of them. In one of the letters about which M. L’Angelier 
spoke to me the lady claimed back some of her letters. This is 
a@ pretty long time ago. I remember the French transport 
“Neuve” at the Broomielaw, and going aboard with M. 
L‘Angelier to visit some one. I do not remember when exactly. 
I think that on the way there he delivered a letter, but I did 
not know the name of the street. I know Blythswood Square, 
and it was a street close by. When L’Angelier got to the house 
he made a slight noise with his stick on tne bar of the window. 
I was waiting at a short distance. It is the second window from 
the corner, and I have since shown it to a police officer. 
L’Angelier was sometimes in the habit of going out at night. I 
knew that he went on these occasions to his intended’s house. 
I recollect one morning finding that L’Angelier had been out, 
and very ill in the night. I saw him that morning. I asked 
whether he had seen the lady; he said that he saw her the 
night before. I asked if he had been unwell after seeing her. 
He said that he was unwell in her presence. I recollect a second 
illness of his. I do not think he was out the night before that. 
I did not ask him any questions. He insisted to go for a doctor 
—for his own doctor, Dr. Thomson. I went to lodge at Mrs. 
Jenkins’s in the end of December, and all that I have said 
about L’Angelier took place after I went to lodge there. On 
the occasion of his two illnesses he was ill at night. I did 
not see him vomit. It is possible that he told me, but I don’t 
remember. I don’t remember if he said anything on the occasion 
of his illness about the letters. I went for Dr. Thomson at 
L’Angelier’s request. I did 8o on the second occasion. I think 
I remember L’Angelier’s coming home from Edinburgh. I 
recollect getting a letter from him, and I identify that letter. 
[The letter was read in English.] 


My Dear Sir,—I have just regeived yours of Saturday. I thank 
you for your attention. I intend to come to sleep in Glasgow 
to-morrow, so I beg of you to detain my letters after this evening. 

I feel a little better, but it does not go on as I would like. TI 


have no letter from Mr. Mitchell ; I want very much to know what 
he wanted with me. 


Monday, eleven o’clock. 


The date is Monday, eleven o’clock, and the address is to M. 

L’Angelier, at Mrs. Jenkins’s, Great Western Road. 16th March 

is the date of the postmark. L’Angelier came home, and went 

afterwards to Bridge of Allan and Stirling. He left instructions 

to me to send his letters. I identify the letter shown me as 

containing the instructions to me as to his address. Two letters 
92 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


came when he was away; one I sent to Stirling, the other to A. Thuau 


Bridge of Allan. In conversing with L’Angelier about the lady 
I do not think her name was mentioned. The correspondence 
was carried on against the wish of the family. The house where 
L’Angelier delivered the letter was the house where she lived. 
I left town on the Saturday before L’Angelier died. I did not 
expect him to return so soon from Bridge of Allan. A gentleman 
called upon L’Angelier; I think his name was Mitchell. I 
wrote to L’Angelier to say this gentleman had called. 

Crose-examined by the Duan or Facuury—I saw L’Angelier 
take laudanum. I saw him take it several times. I once told 
him that he took too much. L’Angelier said he could not sleep, 
and that he took it because he could not sleep. I do not know 
when this was. L’Angelier once said to me that he had taken 
much (beaucoup) laudanum. He told me that the morning 
after he had taken it. I have seen him take laudanum four or 
five times. 

To the Lorp Justicu-Ciurx—lI mean by saying that L’Angelier 
Be too much laudanum that he did so when suffering a good 

eal. 


18. Aucustz VauverT ps Mean, examined by the Lorp 
Apvooatz—I am chancellor to the French Consul at Glasgow. 
I was acquainted with L’Angelier for about three years. I know 
Miss Smith, and was acquainted with her family. I knew that 
in 1856 there was a correspondence going on between L’Angelier 
and Miss Smith. L’Angelier confided to me, against my wish, 
his relations with Miss Smith. Mr. Smith had a house at Row, 
and I lived at Helensburgh. L’Angelier stayed a night or two 
with me before I was married. When I was asked by him for 
my advice I told him that he ought to go to Miss Smith’s family 
and tell them of their attachment, and ask Mr. Smith’s consent. 
I told him that that was the most gentlemanly way. He said 
that Mr. Smith was opposed to it; that Miss Smith had spoken 
to her father, and that he had been excessively angry, and that 
it would be useless. This was before my marriage, which was a 
year ago. I had no intercourse with him after that. I was 
aware, from what L’Angelier said, that there was a correspond- 
ence going on between them. I remember that L’Angelier came 
to my office a few weeks before his death, and he spoke about 
Miss Smith. I said that Miss Smith was to be married to some 
gentleman—Mr. Minnoch ; and when I mentioned the public 
rumours, he said that it was not true, but that if it was to 
come to this he had documents in his possession that would be 
sufficient to forbid the banns. I don’t recollect whether he 
said that Mr. Smith had written to him on the subject of the 
reported marriage. I did not see L’Angelier again before his 
death; but I thought that, having been received by Mr. Smith 
in his house after L’Angelier’s death, it was my duty to 

93 


A. V. de Mean 


Madeleine Smith. 


A. Y. de Mesn mention to him the fact of the correspondence having been 
carried on between L’Angelier and his daughter, in order that 
he should take steps to exonerate his daughter in case of any- 
thing coming out. I knew that the deceased had letters from 
Miss Smith in his possession. I called on Mr. Smith on the 
evening of L’Angelier’s death, and told him that L’Angelier had 
in his possession a great number of letters from his daughter, 
and that it was high time to let him know this, that they might 
not fall into the hands of strangers; I said numbers of people 
might go to his lodgings and read them, as his repositories 
were not sealed. I went to Mr. Huggins; he was not in, but 
I saw two gentlemen, and told them what I had been told to 
ask. They said they were not at liberty to give the letters 
without Mr. Huggins’s consent. I then asked them to keep 
them sealed up till they were disposed of. I think that was on 
the day of L’Angelier’s death. Having heard some rumours 
meanwhile, one day, I am not sure which, I saw Miss Smith in 
presence of her mother. I apprised her of the death of 
L’Angelier. She asked me if it was of my own will that I came 
to tell her; and I told her it was not so, but that I came at 
the special request of her father. I asked if she had seen 
L’Angelier on Sunday night; she told me that she did not see 
him. I asked her to put me in a position to contradict the 
statements which were being made as to her relations with 
L’Angelier. I asked her if she had seen L’Angelier on 
Sunday night, and she told me she-had not. I observed 
to her that M. L’Angelier had come from Bridge of 
Allan to Glasgow on a special invitation by her, by a letter 
written to him. Miss Smith told me that she was not aware 
that L’Angelier was at Bridge of Allan before he came to 
Glasgow, and that she did not give him an appointment for 
Sunday, as she wrote to him on Friday evening, giving him the 
appointment for the following day—Saturday. She said to me 
that she expected him on Saturday, but that he did not come, 
and that she had not seen him on Sunday. I put the question 
to her perhaps five or six different times, and in different ways. 
I told her that my conviction at the moment was that she must 
have seen him on Sunday, that he had come on purpose from 
Bridge of Allan on a special invitation by her to see her, and 
I did not think it likely, admitting that he had committed 
suicide, that he had committed suicide without knowing why 
she asked him to come to Glasgow. 

To the Lorp Justice-CLerx—Did you know of this letter 
yourself? 

Wirnrss—I heard that there had been such a letter. I said 
to Miss Smith that the best advice that a friend could give to 
her in the circumstances was to tell the truth about it, because 
the case was @ very grave one, and would lead to an inquiry 

94 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


on the part. of the authorities; and that, if she did not say the A. V. de Mear 
truth in these circumstances, perhaps it would be ascertained 

by a servant, or a policeman, or somebody passing the house, 

who had seen L’Angelier, that it would be ascertained that 

he had been in the house, and that this would cause a very 

strong suspicion as to the motive that could have led her to 

conceal the truth. Miss Smith then got up from her chair and 

told me, “I swear to you, M. Mean, that I have not seen 
L’Angelier, not on that Sunday only, but not for three weeks” 

—or for six weeks, I am not sure which. 

The Lorp Justics-CLarx—And the mother was present? 

Wirnzss—Yes. This question I repeated to Miss Smith five 
or six times, as I thought it. of great importance; and her 
answer was always the same. I asked her, in regard to the 
letter by which L’Angelier was invited to come to see her, how 
it was that, being engaged to be married to another gentleman, 
she could have carried on a clandestine correspondence with a 
former sweetheart. I referred to Friday’s letter. She told me 
that she did it in order to try to get back her letters. 

The Lorp Apvocats—Did you ask her whether she was in the 
habit of meeting L’Angelier? 

Wirness—Yes. I asked if it was true that L’Angelier was 
in the habit of having appointments with her in her home, and 
she told me that L’Angelier had never entered into that house— 
meaning the Blythswood Square house, as I understood. I 
asked her how, then, she made her appointments to meet with 
him. She told me that L’Angelier used to come to a street at 
the corner of the house (Mains Street), and that he had a 
signal by knocking at the window with his stick, and that she 
opened the window and used to talk with him. 

The Lorp Apvocatre—Did she speak about the former corre- 
spondence with him at all] 

Wirwuss—I asked her if it was true that she had signed 
letters in L’Angelier’s name, and she told me that she had. She 
did not say 2 

The Lorp Justice-CLuerk—Do you mean that she added his 
name to hers? 

Wirness—I meant whether she signed her letters with 
L’Angelier’s name, and she said, “ Yes.” 

The Lorp Apvocatz—Did she say why she did so} 

Wirness—I did not ask her. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Youna—In the summer of 1855, 
before I was married, I went to live in Helens urgh. M. 
L’Angelier visited me there, and once he came on a Saturday 
to my lodgings there, and on Sunday we went on the Luss 
Road. I went up to my room, and L’Angelier not following, I 
called, and he replied in a feeble voice that he would be 
immediately. I saw him very pale. He had been frightfully 

95 


Madeleine Smith. 


4 ¥. de Mean sick, and had been vomiting all the time he was away. He 
once complained to me of being bilious. This was a year ago. 
He complained of once having had cholera. Last year he came 
to my office and told me that he had had a violent attack of 
cholera ; but I don’t know whether that was a year or two years 
ago. I don’t recollect whether he was unwell when he complained 
to me. I thought he complained sometimes without great cause. 
I did not pay much attention to it. I know that when L’Angelier 
came to my house he always had a bottle of laudanum in his 
bag; but I don’t know if he used it. I once heard him speak 
of arsenic; it must have been in the winter of 1853-4. It was 
on a Sunday, but I don’t recollect how the conversation arose ; 
it lasted about half an hour. -Its purport was how much arsenic 
@ person could take without being injured by it. He maintained 
that it was possible to do it by taking small quantities; but I 
don’t know what led to the conversation. I would be afraid 
to make any statement as to the purpose for which he said it 
was to be taken. I have seen something about it in a French 
dictionary on chemistry and other subjects. I am afraid of 
making a mistake—confounding this book with others I have 
read. L’Angelier stated to me that he had once been jilted 
by an English lady, a rich person; and he said that, on account 
of that deception, he was almost mad for a fortnight, and ran 
about, getting food from a farmer in the country. He was 
easily excited. When he had any cause of grief he was affected 
very much. 

To the Lorp Justics-Cierx—After my marriage I had little 
intercourse with L’Angelier. I thought that he might be led 
to take some harsh steps in regard to Miss Smith; and, as I 
had some young ladies in my house, I did not think it was 
proper to have the same intercourse with him as when I was a 
bachelor. 

The Lory Apvocats—What do you mean by “ harsh steps ”? 

Wirxess—I was afraid of an elopement with Miss Smith. By 
“harsh” I mean “rash.” This was after L’Angelier had given 
me his full confidence as to what he would do in the event of 
Miss Smith’s father not consenting to the marriage with his 
daughter. 

The Lorn Justice-CLerK—Did you understand that Miss 
Smith had engaged herself to him? 

Wityess—I understood so from what he said. 

The Lorp Justice-Cierk—When you used the expression 
“You thought it right to go to Miss Smith’s father about the 
letters, in order that he might take steps to vindicate his 
daughter's honour, or prevent it from being disparaged,” did 
you relate to him her engagement and apparent breach of 
engagement? Had you in view that the letters might contain 
an engagement which she was breaking, or that she had made 
a clandestine engagement! 


96 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


Wirtyuss—I thought that these letters were loveletters, and A. V. de Mean 
that it would be much better that they should be in Mr. Smith’s 
hands than in the hands of strangers. 

The Lorp Apvocatz—What were L’Angelier’s usual character 
and habits? 

The Lorp Justice-CLuarz—Was he a steady fellow 

Wirness—My opinion of L’Angelier’s character at the moment 
of his death was that he was a most regular young man in his 
conduct—religious, and, in fact, that he was most exemplary 
in all his conduct. The only objection which I heard made to 
him was that he was vain and a boaster, boasting of grand 
persons whom he knew. For example, when he spoke of Miss 
Smith he would say—“I shall forbid Madeleine to do such a 
thing, or such another thing. She shall not dance with such a 
one, or such another.” 

The Lorp Justics-CLurx—Did he boast of any success with 
females? 

Wirness—Never. 

The Lorp Justicu-Cimrx—Did he seem jealous of Miss Smith 
paying attention to others? 

Writness—No; of others paying attention to Miss Smith. 

The Lorp Justicze-CLerk—It was not on account of any levity 
in his character that you discouraged his visiting you after 
marriage? 

Wirness—No; I thought that his society might be fit for a 
bachelor, but not for a married man. 

The Dzan or Facuntty—Do you understand the word 
“levity ”? 

Wirness—Yes ; lightness, irregularity. 

The Lorp Justiczs-CLerx—How long was it since you had seen 
him when he came to you a short time before his death? Had 
there been a long cessation of intercourse? 

Witness—Yes; there had been a long cessation. 

The Lorp Apvocars [showing witness No. 180 of inventory}— 
Is that like L’Angelier? 

Wirtness—Yes, it is a good likeness. 

The Lorp Justice-Cterk—About what age was he? 

Witness—Between twenty-eight and thirty, I think. 

The Lorp Justice-CLerK—Did he bring recommendations to 
you, or did you get acquainted with him accidentally? 

Wrirnuss—I think I got accidentally acquainted with him in 
a house in Glasgow, but I do not recollect. 

The Court adjourned shortly after six o’clock till next 
day, under an interlocutor similar to that pro- 
nounced at the close of the first day’s sitting. 


Third Day—Thursday, 2nd July, 1857. 
The Court met at ten o’clock. 


C. O'Neill 19. Cuartes O’NuiL, examined by the Soxicrror-GanBRaL— 
1 am a civil engineer and architect in Glasgow, and I was em- 
ployed by the public authorities to make a plan of the house, 
No. 7 Blythswood Square, which was occupied by Mr. James 
Smith, the father of the panel. The plan, No. 189, now shown 
me is the one I made, and it is an accurate one. The house 
is at the corner of Blythswood Square and Mains Street, entering 
from Blythswood Square. It consists of two floors—a street 
floor and a sunk floor. The lobby, as you go in, runs along 
the side wall of the house, to the left-hand side. There are no 
rooms to that side. On the right-hand side there is, first, the 
drawing-room, then the dining-room, then a space occupied by 
the stairs entering from Mains Street to the houses above, but 
which are no portion of Mr. Smith’s house. The passage takes 
2 turn a little to the right there, and becomes narrower than 
the lobby. After it turns there is a small pantry facing the 
lobby, and beyond that there are three bedrooms. Downstairs 
there is an area door to Blythswood Square, and a door at the 
back of the house, leading into an inner area which opens into 
a lane. Going in at the front area door, on the left-hand 
there is a small bedroom, and to the right is the kitchen. 
Beyond the bedroom, to the left, there is a closet and wine- 
eellar. Beyond the kitchen, to the right, there is another 
bedroom, with two windows looking to Mains Street. That 
is marked “No. 5, Madeleine’s bedroom.” The lower sill of 
these windows‘is about eighteen inches below the pavement of 
Mains Street, and there are iron gratings and stanchions over 
them. The glass of the windows is about six inches from the 
street, so that a person standing in the street, and putting the 
arm through the railings, can quite easily touch the windows; 
and anything let fall inside the railings would fall on a level 
with the sill of the window. Anything so let fall could be picked 
up by a person opening the window. Where the passage passes 
that room there are stairs, then a pantry, and beyond that a 
bedroom, marked on the plan “C.H. 7.” That is the room 
nearest the back door. On the right-hand side of the passage 
there, there are no other rooms in Mr. Smith’s house. The 
height of the room, No. 5, from the floor to the sill of the 
window, is about three or four feet. It is just an ordinary 

98 


Evidence for Prosecution, 


window. The lane at the back of the house leads from and ¢. O'Neill 
opens into Mains Street, so that a person has no difficulty in 
getting from Mains Street to the door of the back area. The 

house next to the lane in Mains Street is occupied by Mr. 
Minnoch and Mr. Douglas. That is a common stair. 

By Mr. Youne—The door in Mains Street, next to No. 14 of 
plan, is the door of the common stair leading to the houses 
above; that is, the door leading to Mr. Minnoch’s house. The 
plan shows six windows altogether in the sunk floor; three look 
into the area in front, in Blythswood Square, two to Maine 
Street, and one into the area behind. I can’t say whether all 
of these windows are stanchioned outside with iron bars; those 
in Mains Street are. I took no note as to the éther windows. 
The sill of the windows in«the bedroom, No. 5, is three or 
four feet above the floor. I did not measure. There are eight 
steps leading up to the front door of the house. I can’t say 
how many lead down to the area. It is an area of about six 
feet deep. I did not measure the distance between the sill 
of the window and Mains Street. Mains Street inclines towards 
the lane; it is lower towards the lane. I did not try the 
gradient. There is a fall of about six feet between Blythswood 
Square and the lane. That is in a distance of about ninety- 
eight feet. There is a wall between the back area and the 
lane. I did not measure its height. 

The Lorp Justicz-CLerk—You might as well have not made 
a plan at all, sir. 

By the Sotscrror-Genzrat—I was only asked to make a 
ground-plan of each floor. 


The Prisongr’s DeciaRaTion was then read as follows. It was 
dated 31st Maroh:—“ My name is Madeleine Smith. I am a 
native of Glasgow ; twenty-one years of age; and I reside with 
my father, James Smith, architect, at No. 7 Blythswood Square, 
Glasgow. For about the last two years I have been acquainted 
with P. Emile L’Angelier, who was in the employment of 
W. B. Huggins & Co., in Bothwell Street, and who lodged at 
11 Franklin Place. He recently paid his addresses to me, and 
I have met with him on a variety of occasions. I learned 
about his death on the afternoon of Monday, the 23rd March 
current, from mamma, to whom it had been mentioned by a 
lady named Miss Perry, a friend of M. L’Angelier. I had not 
seen M. L’Angelier for about three weeks before his death, and 
the last time I saw him was on a night about half-past ten 
o'clock. On that occasion he tapped at my bedroom window, 
which is on the ground floor, and fronts Mains Street. I talked 
to him from the window, which is stanchioned outside, and 
I did not go out to him, nor did he come in to me. This 
occasion, which, as already said, was about three weeks before 


99 


Madeleine Smith. 


his death, was the last time I saw him. He was in the habit 
of writing notes to me, and I was in the habit of replying to 
him by notes. The last note I wrote to him was on the Friday 
before his death, viz., Friday, the 20th March current. I now 
see and identify that note, and the relative envelope, and they 
are each marked No. 1. In consequence of that note, I expected 
him to visit me on Saturday night, the 21st current, at my 
bedroom window, in the same way a8 formerly mentioned, but 
he did not come, and sent no notice. There was no tapping 
at my window on said Saturday night, or on the following 
night, being Sunday. I went to bed on Sunday night about 
eleven o'clock, and remained in bed till the usual time of getting 
up next morning, being eight or nine o'clock. In the course 
of my meetings with L’Angelier, he and I had arranged to get 
married, and we had, at one time, proposed September last 
as the time the marriage was to take place, and, subsequently, 
the present month of March was spoken of. It was proposed 
that we should reside in furnished lodgings; but we had not 
made any definite arrangement as to time or otherwise. He 
was very unwell for some time, and had gone to the Bridge 
of Allan for his health; and he complained of sickness, but I 
have no idea what was the cause of it. I remember giving 
him some cocoa from my window one night some time ago, 
but I cannot specify the time particularly. He took the cup 
in his hand, and barely tasted the contents; and I gave him 
no bread to it. I was taking some cocoa myself at the time, 
and had prepared it myself. It was between ten and eleven 
p.m. when I gave it to him. I am now shown a note or letter, 
and envelope, which are marked respectively No. 2, and I 
recognise them as a note and envelope which I wrote to M. 
L’Angelier, and sent to the post. As I had attributed his 
sickness to want of food, I proposed, as stated in the note, to 
give him a loaf of bread, but I said that merely in a joke, and, 
in point of fact, I never gave him any bread. I have bought 
arsenic on various occasions. The last I bought was a sixpence- 
worth, which I bought in Currie, the apothecary’s, in Sauchiehall 
Street, and, prior to that, I bought other two quantities of 
arsenic, for which I paid sixpence each—one of these in Currie’s, 
and the other in Murdoch, the apothecary’s, shop in Sauchiehall 
Street. I used it all as a cosmetic, and applied it to my face, 
neck, and arms, diluted with water. The arsenic I got in 
Currie’s shop I got there on Wednesday, the 18th March, and 
I used it all on one occasion, having put it all in the basin 
where I was to wash myself. I had been advised to the use 
of the arsenic in the way I have mentioned by a young lady, 
the daughter of an actress, and I had also seen the use of it 
recommended in the newspapers. The young lady’s name was 
Guibilei, and I had met her at school at Clapton, near London. 


100 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


I did not wish any of my father’s family to be aware that I 
was using the arsenic, and, therefore, never mentioned it to 
any of them; and I don’t suppose they or any of the servants 
ever noticed any of it in the basin. When I bought the arsenic 
in Murdoch’s I am not sure whether I was asked or not what 
it was for, but I think I said it was for a gardener to kill rats 
or destroy vermin about flowers, and I only said this because 
I did not wish them to know that I was going to use it as a 
cosmetic. I don’t remember whether I was asked as to the 
use I was going to make of the arsenic on the other two 
occasions, but I likely made the same statement about it as I had 
done in Murdoch’s; and on all the three occasions, as required 
in the shops, I signed my name to a book in which the sales were 
entered. On the first occasion I was accompanied by Mary, 
a daughter of Dr. Buchanan, of Dumbarton. For several years 
past Mr. Minnoch, of the firm of William Houldsworth & Co., 
has been coming a good deal about my father’s house, and 
about a month ago Mr. Minnoch made a proposal of marriage 
to me, and I gave him my hand in token of acceptance, but 
no time for the marriage has yet been fixed, and my object in 
writing the note No. 1, before mentioned, was to have a meeting 
with M. L’Angelier to tell him that I was engaged to Mr. 
Minnoch. I am now shown two notes and an envelope bearing 
the Glasgow postmark of 23rd January, which are respectively 
marked No. 3, and I recognise these as in my handwriting, and 
they were written and sent by me to M. L’Angelier. On the 
occasion that I gave M. L’Angelier the cocoa, as formerly 
mentioned, I think that I used, it must have been known to 
the servants and members of my father’s family, as the package 
containing the cocoa was lying on the mantelpiece in my room, 
but no one of the family used it except myself, as they did not 
seem to like it. The water which I used I got hot from the 
servants. On the night of the 18th, when I used the arsenic 
last, I was going to a dinner party at Mr. Minnoch’s house. I 
never administered, or caused to be administered, to M. 
L’Angelier arsenic or anything injurious. And this I declare to 
be truth. 
(Signed) “Mapsiemsm Sirs.” 


20. Miss Mary Janz Bucnanan, examined by the SoxicrTor- Mary Jane 
Gungrat.—Dr. Buchanan, of Dumbarton, is my father. I am Buchanan 
acquainted with Miss Smith. One day last spring (6th March) 

I went into a chemist’s shop in Sauchiehall Street with her; 
it was Currie’s shop. I don’t remember if she told me 
beforehand what she was going in for, but I heard her ask for 
arsenic. She was told by the shopman that she must sign 
her name to a book. He did not ask her what she wanted 
with it. I asked her that in the hearing of the shopman, 
and she said it was to kill rats. She got the arsenic. I am 
101 


Madeleine Smith. 


Mary Jane not sure, but I think she got sixpenceworth. She brought it 

Buchanan away with her. When I asked what she was going to do with 
it, and when she said to kill rats, the shopman suggested 
phosphorus, but she said she had tried that before and was 
unsuccessful, and she would therefore prefer arsenic; but she 
said that the family was going to Bridge of Allan, and there 
was no danger in leaving it lying about in the town house, as 
it would be put down in the cellars. I think I had no further 
conversation with her about it. I think she asked the shopman 
something about what was a dose, and he said such a quantity 
as she named would kill a great many people. She turned 
to me and said she only wanted it for rats. I said nothing 
more. On leaving the shop I laughed at’ the idea of a younz 
lady buying arsenic ; she said nothing, but laughed too. That 
was on 6th March. I knew she was going that day to Bridge 
of Allan. I was at sshool with Miss Smith at Clapton, near 
London. She came after I was there two years, and [ 
think she was there a year along with me. I have beea 
acquainted with her ever since. I have often seen her write, 
and am well acquainted with her handwriting. I have been 
shown by the Procurator-Fiscal a number of letters, and I 
examined them carefully with the view of ascertaining if they 
were in her handwriting, and I came to the conclusion that 
they were hers. [It was here arranged, as suggested by the 
Lord Justice-Clerk, that witness should go over the letters in 
presence of one of the counsel for each side—the Solicitor 
General for the Crown, and Mr. Moncrieff for the accused ; 
Mr. Hamilton, depute-clerk of Court, being also present.] I 
marked the letters with my initials. I think it was in the 
autumn of 1852 or 1853 that Miss Smith left school at Clapton ; 
it must have been, I think, 1853. Her full name is Madeleire 
Hamilton Smith. In the course of last spring she wrote to me, 
telling me she was engaged to be married. That was in the very 
end of February. She aaid she was engaged to Mr. Minnoch. 
She afterwards: spoke to me on the subject on the 6th and 
3lst March. On both these occasions she spoke of herself ss 
engaged to be married to Mr. Minnoch, and of the marriagee 
as likely to take place in June. She spoke of no doubt or 
difficulty about it at all. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Youna—I stay at Dumbarton, but ] 
had come up to Glasgow on the 6th. I visited Mr. Smith’s 
house at Row, and when I came to Glasgow I called at Blyths- 
wood Square. I called there on 6th March. Miss Madeleine 
was not in when I called, but she came in before I left. We 
went out together. She said she wished to talk to me of her 
marriage. I had no time to wait, and she then said she would 
walk with me so far on the way home. We went out together, 
and went along the street. There had been an old promise 

102 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


at school that whichever of us was engaged to be married first Mary Jane 
should ask the other to be bridesmaid. We went to Sauchiehall Buchanan 


Street, and along that street, which was on my way home. 
Currie’s shop is in that street. When we came to it she said, 
“ Oh, just stop a minute, I want to go into this shop ; will you go 
with me?” I consented, and we went in together. I think 
there were two young men behind the counter. Miss Smith 
asked for arsenic, and the shopman said, “ You must sign your 
name.” She said, “Oh, I'll sign anything you like.” She 
signed “M. Smith,” and asked if that would do. Before this 
I remember Miss Smith asking the shopman how arsenic was 
sold; and I think she asked, “ Would sixpenceworth be a large 
quantity?” I did not sign the book. Everything was done 
very openly. She paid for it. When we were at school at 
Clapton, I remember, whether in a lesson or when reading in the 
evening (I forget which) that an account was given of Styrian 
peasants taking arsenic to give them breath to climb steep 
hills, and about their having a peculiar plumpness and rosiness 
of complexion. I think it was in the course of reading in the 
evenings. I cannot remember who the governess was. I 
remember a Miss Guibilei. She was a pupilteacher. She gave 
her services as a teacher in exchange for being taught other 
things herself. She was there, I think, at the time of the 
reading. I suppose Miss Smith was there ; I don’t remember ; 
but we were always obliged to be present at these readings, 
and so I should think Miss Smith was there. The rest of 
Miss Smith’s family went to Bridge of Allan on 6th March— 
the day I called. 

To the Lorp Justice-CLerk—lI met Miss Smith by appointment 
on that day at half-past one; she had written to me at Dumbar- 
ton, knowing I was to be up. On the 31st I was with her from 
about three to half-past four in her own house. I had been 
visiting in Glasgow at that time for a week or two. I was 
staying with Mr. Dickson, Woodside Terrace. Nothing par- 
ticular led me to call on Miss Smith on the 31st. She talked 
of her marriage, but she did not begin about it—I asked her. 
This was on a Monday, so that it was on the 30th and not the 
31st that I saw her. 

21. Avausta Gurpruer or Watcor, examined by Mr. Mackunziz 
—I was a pupil-teacher at a school at Clapton (Mrs. Gorton’s), 
at which Miss Smith was, in the year 1852. I never advised 
her to use arsenic as a cosmetic, or to apply it to her face, neck, 
or arms, mixed with water, nor to use it in any way. I had no 
conversation with her, that I recollect of, about the use of 
arsenic. I believe I had no conversation with her about the 
use of cosmetics in their external application to the skin. I 
recollect one evening, in the course of reading, it was mentioned 
that Swiss mountaineers took arsenic to improve their breathing 

103 


A. Walcot 


A. Walcot 


W. Murray 


Madeleine Smith. 


in ascending hills, and that those who took it were remarkable 
for plumpness, and a general appearance of good health. I 
believe I had no conversation with Miss Smith about this 
passage. My maiden name was Augusta Guibilei. 

22. Wittiam Murray, a young boy, examined by the Lorp 
Apvocatr—I was servant to Mr. Smith in Blythswood Square. 
I entered his service et November term. I slept in the room on 
the right-hand side going in at the area door, looking into 
Blythswood Square. Miss Smith slept in the room next the 
kitchen, on the right-hand side. That room has two windows 
to Mains Street. There were in the house, besides me, a cook 
and housemaid, Christina Haggart and Charlotte M‘Lean; they 
slept in the room at the other end of the passage from the 
kitchen, close by the back door. Miss Madeleine sent me to 
an apothecary about four months ago. I never heard of M. 
L’Angelier’s death till I was examined by the Procurator-Fiscal. 
I recollect Miss Madeleine being missed from home one morning ; 
it would be six weeks or two months before that that she asked 
me to go to the apothecary’s. I was told to get prussic acid. 
She gave me a line with “a small phial of prussic acid” written 
on it. I took it to the apothecary’s. He did not give it. I 
went back and told Miss Smith. She said, “Very well, never 
mind.” She said she wanted it for her hands. I can’t recollect 
whether I gave her back the line. I think I got it back from 
the man in the shop. I did not know M. L’Angelier by sight. 
I have posted letters for Miss Smith. I have observed some 
letters with an address like L’Angelier, but I never could make 
out what it was. It was my duty to lock the area gate at 
night; sometimes I forgot to do it. I remember Sunday, 22nd 
March. I went to bed at ten or thereabouts. I sleep very 
soundly. I heard no noise before the morning. Miss Smith 
had not gone to her room before I went to bed. The day that 
she was missing was on the Thursday after 22nd March. I 
heard about ten o’clock that she had gone away. Mrs. Smith 
told me. Miss Smith came back that night. On Sunday, 22nd 
March, Christina Haggart was ill. She kept her bed till about» 
six that evening. I parted from her on the stair, after coming 
down from worship, and went into the kitchen.’ Miss Smith 
did not tell me where to get the prussic acid. I went into Dr. 
Yeaman’s surgery in Sauchiehall Street. 

Cross-examined by the Duan or Facuuty—It was the nearest 
shop and at the corner of Cambridge Street. She gave me the 
line at her bedroom door. She called to me. I was in the 
kitchen. She spoke quite loud. I don’t know that anybody 
heard her. The other servants were in the kitchen. They 
could hear her if they were listening. She told me to take 
care of the prussic acid, for it was poison, The shopman 
asked who it was for, and I told him. He said to tell her 

104 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


that she could not get it without a physician’s line, and that it w. Murray 
was rank poison. I had been once or twice in the shop; but 
the boy in the shop knew where I came from. Last winter 
Mr. and Mrs. Smith, Mr. John Smith, Miss Bessie, Miss Janet, 
and Miss Madeleine Smith were members of the family living 
in Blythswood Square. Miss Madeleine is the eldest, Bessie 
the second, and Janet the youngest. Miss Janet looks like a 
girl of between twelve and thirteen. Miss Janet always slept 
with Miss Madeleine—in the same room and bed. I had no 
charge of the back door. I had charge of the area gate and 
the upper front door, not of the area door. I believe the cook, 
Charlotte M‘Lean, generally locked the back door and the front 
area door. On Sunday evening, 22nd March, all the family 
and servants were at prayers. Miss Madeleine was there also. 
Nine o’clock is the usual hour for prayers, and they were 
about the usual hour that night. When I came downstairs 
I went into the kitchen and stopped about five minutes, and 
then went to bed. I waited at breakfast next morning as 
usual. Miss Smith was there just as usual. At this time a 
young man named Mackenzie was visiting Christina Haggart ; 
she is married to him now. Miss Smith and Miss Janet some- 
times got hot water before going to bed. They got it from 
the kitchen in a jug, not in a kettle. I did not see Mackenzie 
that Sunday night. There are several windows in the sunk 
storey—two in the kitchen, one in my room, two in Miss Smith’s 
room, and one in the housemaid’s room—six in all; they are 
all secured with iron stanchions; I am not sure about the 
housemaid’s, but all the others are. 

Reexamined by the Lorp Apvocatze—There are two windows 
in Miss Madeleine’s room. They look to Mains Street. The 
sill of one of the windows of her bedroom is a little below 
the street, nearly flush with the pavement. I heard no noise 
in the house on the night of the 22nd. I heard nobody go out 
or come in. The key of the area gate was sometimes kept in 
my room, and sometimes in the kitchen. There were two 
keys, one of them hung on a nail in the kitchen; very seldom 
both were in the kitchen. The key of the front area door was 
hanging near my room. The key of the back gate was taken 
charge of by the housemaid; any person could have got it. 
There is a gate and a door opening to the lane. I spoke of 
the key of the gate. The key of the door is generally left 
in the door, and also the key of the front door. 

By the Dzan oF Facutty—tThere is no gate at the back ; it 
is a wooden door. There is a wall about six feet high. There 
is broken glass on the top of it. There are two keys for the 
area gate. 

93. Groram YHAMAN, examined by the Lorp Apvocatz—I am G. Yeaman 
a medical man in Glasgow, and have a laboratory in Sauchiehall 

105 


G. Yeaman 


J. Stewart 


G. Murdoch 


Madeleine Smith. 


Street. I remember hearing of M. L’Angelier’s death. It 
was @ day or two after his death. The Glasgow election was 
on 31st March. I heard of it before that. On hearing of it, 
T recollected the circumstance of a paper containing writing 
having been presented to me by my assistant, on which were 
written the words, “ Half an ounce of prussic acid.” I have no 
means of saying, with any degree of certainty, how long that 
would be before L’Angelier’s death. I should say it would be 
from four to eight weeks. I went into the shop when the 
line was brought to me. I saw a boy, who said he came 
from Miss Smith, Blythswood Square. I asked whether he 
knew what he wanted, and he said he thought it was poison. 
I then said that if Miss Smith would call herself I would see 
whether or not she should have it. I did not give it to him. 
Miss Smith did not come, so far as J saw or ‘heard of. 

24. Jamus Stgwart—I heard of Miss Smith being apprehended. 
I was then in Dr. Yeaman’s service. I recollect a boy coming 
to the shop for prussic acid. To the best of my recollection, 
it was six or eight weeks before I heard of Miss Smith’s 
apprehension. 

Cross-examined—I knew the boy Murray. He had often 
been at the laboratory before. 

Miss BucHanan recalled—I have had shown to me a number 
of letters marked with my initials. 1 satisfied myself they 
are in Miss Smith’s handwriting. Mr. Moncrieff (one of the 
counsel for the prisoner) showed me a number of letters and 
envelopes, and I satisfied myself they were in Miss Smith’s 
handwriting, excepting some envelopes. I have initialed a 
sheet of paper containing the numbers of these letters. Except- 
ing some envelopes, all the documents are in Miss Smith’s hand- 
writing. [The said sheet of paper was here handed in.] 

25. Gzoraz Murpocu, examined by the Lorp Apvocars—I 
am partner in the firm of Murdoch Brothers, druggists, Sauchie- 
hall Street. We keep a registry book of the poisons sold by 
us, which I now identify. In it is entered all the arsenic we 
sell by retail. Under date 21st February we have an entry— 
“February 21—Miss Smith, 7 Blythswood Square, 6d. worth of 
arsenic for garden and country-house—M. H. Smith.” This 
is also initialed by me. I recollect that purchase being made. 
It was made by Miss Smith herself. As far as I remember, 
she was alone. I was engaged in one of the back rooms when 
our assistant (Dickie) called my attention to a lady who wished 
to purchase sixpenceworth of arsenic. I went forward and 
saw Miss Smith. She recognised me, and bowed. I named the 
form that was required in the sale of it, and requested to know 
for what purpose it was needed, and she answered, “For the 
garden and country house.” I was aware Mr. Smith had a 

106 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


country house on the Gareloch, and I directed my assistant G. Murdoch 


to put up the arsenic; while he did so I made the entry in the 
book, which Miss Smith signed, and I signed it as a witness. 
I don’t remember seeing the parcel made up; but the usual 
mode is to put it in a double parcel. It was common white 
arsenic, mixed with soot in the proportion required by the 
Act. I think nothing else passed. I saw her again some three 
days after; she called and inquired if arsenic should not be 
white. I said it required to be sold mixed with something 
else. Shoe did not purchase any more on that occasion. Some 
time afterwards my assistant (Dickie) delivered to Dr. Penny 
some arsenic from the same bottle. I was there when Dickie 
gave it. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Youna—My shop is about three or 
four minutes’ walk from Blythswood Square. Miss Smith and 
her family were in the habit of dealing with my shop. Miss 
Smith got 1 oz. of arsenic for the §d. I don’t remember if she 
paid it. I have seen an entry, in Dickie’s handwriting, of sales 
on that day to Mr. Smith—“ Two dozen soda water, 6d. worth of 
arsenic, send and charge,” with a mark that the arsenic was 
sent. The entry is in the daily jotter and posted into the day- 
book and ledger in Mr. Smith’s account—all in the regulat 
course of our book-keeping. I understood the quantity of soot 
used in the arsenic was an ounce to the pound. That is more 
soot than the statute requires, but that was the proportion we 
used. I don’t recollect the date that Dr. Penny got arsenic 
from the same jar. 

Re-examined by the Lorp ApvocaTs—I can’t say with cer- 
tainty if Miss Smith paid for the arsenic. My impression, 
when first called on to speak in reference to this matter, was 
that it had been paid, but on seeing this entry I felt certain 
in my own mind that it had not been paid. 

By Mr. Younc—As soon as I saw this entry in the book I 
communicated the fact to the Fiscal. 

26. Jamus Dicxm, examined by the Lorp Apvooats—I was 
Mr. Murdoch’s assistant last February. I knew Miss Smith 
by sight. I recollect her coming to purchase arsenic. She 
said she wanted to send it to the gardener at the country 
house. I can’t recollect if she mentioned the purpose. She 
got it; and the phial shown me contains arsenic from our 
shop, prepared in the same manner as that furnished to Miss 
Smith. The arsenic sold to her was registered in the registry 
book, and signed by her. I can’t recollect if it was paid for 
at the time; it was entered in the account book as unpaid ; 
the account has not been rendered ; she took the arsenic with 
her. I delivered some arsenic to Professor Penny on 18th 
April; it was from the same bottle as that from which the 
arsenic Miss Smith got was taken. 

‘ 107 


James Dickie 


Madeleine Smith. 


James Dickie Cross-examined by Mr. Youna—I have been six years in Mr. 
Murdoch’s. The Smiths dealt with the shop, and on 21st 
February Mr. Smith had an account standing in our books. 
I made the entry about the arsenic at the time; I entered it 
first in the scroll book at the counter, as unpaid, and though 
I have no recollection on the subject, that satisfies me it was 
not paid. The entry was entered up in the other books. There 
is some soda water entered on the same day for Mr. Smith. 
I have no recollection of Miss Smith giving the order for it. 

George C. 27. Gzoraz CarruTHers Hauipurton, examined by the Lorp 

Haliburton Apvocatz—I am assistant to Mr. Currie, chemist, Sauchiehall 
Street. I identify our registry-book for the sale of poisons. 
Under date 6th March, 1857, I see an entry—“ March 6, Miss 
Smith, 7 Blythswood Square—arsenic, one ounce, kill rats.” I 
signed it, and it is also signed “M. H. Smith.” I knew her by 
sight before that. A lady was with her on that occasion. She 
asked for 6d. worth of arsenic. I asked her what for, and she 
said it was to kill rats. I told her we were not fond of selling 
arsenic for that purpose, because it was so dangerous; I recom- 
mended phosphorus paste, which I said would answer very well. 
She told me she had used it, but it had failed. She said the 
rats were in the house in Blythswood Square. She told me the 
family were going from home next day, and that she would 
be careful to see it put down herself. She got the arsenic. It 
was mixed with indigo. The phial, No. 212, was given by me to 
Dr. Penny in April, and it contains arsenic from the same bottle 
as that sold to Miss Smith. Miss Smith paid for the arsenic 
she got, and took it away. In the registry-book (No. 186) there 
is also an entry under date 18th March. There are no other 
entries this year excepting these two. That entry is—“ Miss 
Smith, 7 Blythswood Square—arsenic, one ounce, to kill rats” ; 
and it is signed like the other. I recollect her coming for that. 
She asked for other 6d. worth, and said the first was so effectual 
—she having found eight or nine large rats lying dead—that 
she had come back to get the dose renewed. Mr. Currie was in 
at that time. He made some objections; he said he never sold 
it except to parties we knew, and to parties of respectability ; 
and he was about to refuse it when I told him that I had given 
her it on a former occasion, from the same bottle. A young 
lady—I suppose her sister—was with her. I never heard of 
arsenic such as I gave Miss Smith being used as a cosmetic. A 
preparation of arsenic is used as a depilatory for taking hairs 
off the face, that is the yellow sulphuret of arsenic. She paid 
for the arsenic. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Youne—Both purchases were made 
quite openly. I don’t know who accompanied Miss Smith on 
the first occasion. They were speaking together while I was 
putting up the arsenic. The young lady with Miss Smith 

108 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


remarked that she thought arsenic was white, and I said we George C. 
had to colour it according to the Act of Parliament. I had Haliburton 


never before seen the young lady who was with her on the 
second occasion. She was a grown-up young lady; not the lady 
who was first with her. I mixed the arsenic myself with the 
colouring matter. It was indigo. I put in the proper quantity 
ordered by the Act. 

To the Lorp Justicu-CLerx—The yellow sulphuret is quite a 
different thing from the white arsenic. t is used as a 
depilatory, because it so affects the skin as to bring out the 
roots of the hair. That is the very opposite action from that 
of a cosmetic. I think any preparation of arsenic as a cosmetic 
would be extremely dangerous; it is not a thing we sell for that 
purpose. Fowler’s preparation is four grains of arsenic to an 
ounce of fluid. 

By the Lorp Apvocatz—Miss Smith said on the first occasion 
that rats were to be killed in the Blythswood Square house; 
and she spoke of these rats on the second occasion. 


28. Joun Currim, examined by the Lorp ApvocaTE—I am 2 John Currie 


chemist and druggist in Sauchiehall Street, Glasgow. I do not 
know the accused by sight. I remember a lady who gave the 
name of Miss Smith being in my shop on 18th March last. 
No. 186 is my registry-book ; in it I see an entry of one ounce 
of arsenic, signed “M. H. Smith,” and also signed by my 
assistant. He was dispensing at the counter; but seeing she 
was not being served I went forward and asked what she wanted. 
He said “ Poison to kill rats.” I suggested phosphorus paste ; 
he said she had got some arsenic before. I said to Miss Smith 
we would much rather give her something else than arsenic. 
She did not insist on having it, but she said she would prefer it. 
I then objected that we never sold arsenic to any one without 
entering it in a book, and that she must sign her name, and 
state the purpose to which it was to be applied. She said 
she had no objection to this, and from her apparent respect- 
ability and frankness I had no suspicion, and told the young 
man to give it to her. She got an ounce of coloured arsenic, 
the same kind that Dr. Penny got. I did not hear her say where 
the rats were. I think she said the former supply of arsenic 
had answered very well, but I could not be positive. She paid 
for the arsenic. I think there was a young lady with her. 

99. Wru1am Campstz—I am in the service of Mr. Smith. He 
has a country house at Rowaleyn, Row. I have been in his 
service since 1855. I never got any afsenic or poison from 
Miss Smith to kill rats. I don’t recollect of having any con- 
versation with her on the subject. I never had any arsenic 
there for that purpose. 

By Mr. Youna—We were very much troubled with rats, and 
we had used phosphorus paste. or some such thing, for them. 

109 


W. Campsie 


W. Campsie 


R. Oliphant 


W.H. Minnoch 


Madeleine Smith. 


We found it to be effectual, and we got quit of them partly, 
but not altogether, 

30. Rosert OuiPHant, examined by the Lorp Apvocate—I 
am a stationer at Helensburgh. I know the prisoner. She used 
to deal in our shop for envelopes and note-paper. I have seen 
her handwriting. I was shown a number of letters by the 
Procurator-Fiscal; they were in Miss Smith’s handwriting. I 
recognised some of the envelopes as being bought at my shop. 
They were stamped wth the initials “M. H. S.” They were 
stamped for her by me. No. 67 is one of these envelopes. 

31. Witt1am Harper MInnocH, examined by the Soticrror- 
GENERAL—I am a merchant in Glasgow, and a partner of the 
firm of John Houldsworth & Co. I live in Mains Street, above 
the house of Mr. James Smith. I have been intimately 
acquainted with his family for upwards of four years. In the 
course of last winter I paid my addresses to Miss Smith, and 
I made proposals of marriage to her on 12th March. She 
accepted. The time of our marriage was fixed between us. 
Previously to that I had asked her generally, without reference 
to any time. That was as far back as 28th January. I did 
so personally. My attentions to her, I understood, had been 
such as to make her quite aware that I was paying my addresses 
toher. She accepted me on the 28th of January, and we arranged 
it more particularly on 12th March. From 28th January to the 
end of March there was nothing which suggested any doubt 
to my mind as to the engagement continuing. I had no idea 
that she was engaged to any other person, and I was 
aware of no attachment or peculiar intimacy between her 
and any other man. The marriage was fixed for 18th June. 
Last season I made Miss Smith a present of a necklace 3 it was 
some time in January, before the 28th. She went along with 
her family to Bridge of Allan on 6th March, and she remained 
there till the 17th. I visited the family while they were there. 
After leaving I received a letter from Miss Smith. I identify 
it (No. 133); it is dated Monday merely. After she came 
home from Bridge of Allan she dined in my house with her 
father and mother; that was on 19th March. I met her at 
dinner again at Mr. Middleton’s on 25th March 3 I was not 
aware of anything wrong at that time. I called on Thursday 
morning, the 26th, at her father’s house. She was not in the 
house ; I was informed she had left the house. With her brother 
I went to Rowaleyn to look for her. We went by train to 
Greenock, and then on board the steamer, and we found her 
on board; it was going to Helensburgh, and then to Row; it 
called at Roseneath, and then returned to Greenock. We found 
her in the steamer a little after two o'clock. She said she was 
going to Rowaleyn. I went thither with her and her brother ; 
and then we ordered a carriage, and drove her up to Glasgow 

1@ fo) 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


to her father’s house. On reaching Glasgow I had no conversa- W.H.Minnoch 
tion with Miss Smith. I saw her again on the Saturday follow- 
ing. I had by this time heard a rumour that something was 
wrong; she told me on the Saturday that she had written a 
letter to M. L’Angelier, the object of which was to get back 
some letters which she had written to him previously. She 
made no further statement at that time. I saw her again 
on the Sunday; there was no conversation on the subject then. 
I saw her on Monday and Tuesday; on Tuesday morning she 
alluded to the report that L’Angelier had been poisoned with 
arsenic, and she remarked that she had been in the habit of 
buying arsenic, as she had learned at Clapton School that it 
was good for the complexion. I had heard a rumour that he 
had been poisoned. She said nothing further, and that was the 
last time I saw her. Before she made these statements to me 
I was not aware that she was acquainted with L’Angelier. I 
was not acquainted with him myself. 

Cross-examined by the Dzan or Facutty—On the evening of 
19th February 7 do not recollect where I was. I remember 
being at the opera about that time—[referring to book}|—yes; 
I was at the opera on that night, and Miss Smith and my sister 
were with me. We called for Miss Smith. We went to the 
opera about half-past seven o'clock; we got home about eleven 
o'clock. Miss Smith returned with us. She had been with us 
all the evening. The cab stopped at her door, and she went 
into her house. I did not observe who received her on that 
occasion; somebody opened the door. On 26th March I sug- 
gested the probability of Miss Smith having gone to Row. Her 
father had a house there, in which a servant was living at the 
time, and I thought she might be there. In consequence I and 
her brother went down. When we met her on the steamer I 
asked her why she had left home, leaving her friends distressed 
about her; but I requested her not to reply then, as there 
were too many people present. I renewed the inquiry at 
Rowaleyn, and she said she felt distressed that her papa and 
mamma should be so much annoyed at what she had done. Mr. 
Smith told me that she had left the house that morning ; and 
I asked him the reason, and he said it had been some old love 
affair. I understood her to refer to that in the answer she made 
to me. She gave me no further explanation. She said not to 
press her, and she would tell me all again. We were only about 
three-quarters of an hour at Row. We took her back to her 
father’s house, and left her there. On 31st March it was 
she who introduced the subject of L’Angelier’s death, referring 
to the report of his having been poisoned; that was about 
half-past nine in the morning. I called and inquired for Mrs. 
Smith; I had heard she was unwell. My meeting with Miss 
Smith was accidental. I have mentioned all that passed on 

1It 


W.H.Minnoch 


M. Clark 


Madeleine Smith. 


the occasion. On the 28th I reminded her of the promise she 
made to me at Row, that she would tell me all by and by. I 
had not heard the name of L’Angelier then. She did not men- 
tion his name. I think she said she had written to a Frenchman 
to get back her letters. I did not know who the Frenchman 
was. On the 25th I called before going to Mr. Middleton’s. 
I called for Mr. Smith, but I did not see him—he was unwell, 
and in bed. I took Miss Smith to Mr. Middleton’s. He is the 
minister of the United Presbyterian Church which they attend. 


32. Mrs. Marcarzt Houston or Cuark, examined by the 
Soxicrror-GunpeRaAL—I am the wife of Peter Clark, curator of 
the Royal Botanic Gardens, Glasgow. The late M. L’Angelier 
lived with us for two years. He went from my house to Mrs. 
Jenkins’s, Franklin Place. I was very intimately acquainted 
with him when he lived in my house. I formed a very good 
impression of his character. He seemed very steady and 
temperate; he never was late out while he lived in my house. 
I was led to believe that he attended church regularly; he 
attended St. Jude’s Episcopal Chapel (Mr. Miles’). His general 
health was good. He occasionally visited my house after he 
went to Mrs. Jenkins’s. I observed that, a month or two before 
his death, his health became affected. He has spoken to me 
about a lady. I don’t exactly remember when he did so; it 
was while he lived in my house—I think in the first year that 
he lived with me. He told me her name; it was Miss Smith. 
He spoke of her by her first name, “Madeleine,” and by 
“Mimi.” He gave me to understand that there was a mutual 
attachment between him and this lady. He said they cor- 
responded by letter, and that they were in the way of meeting. 
He told me of an interruption to the correspondence. I don’t 
remember when that was; it was while he lived in my house. 
He said the intimacy was afterwards resumed. I understood 
that it was interrupted because of Miss Smith’s father’s dis- 
pleasure. I understood from him that the correspondence 
subsisted while he was living at Mrs. Jenkins’s. He told me 
Miss Smith and he were to be married, but he did not say 
when. I last saw him on bth or 6th March. He called at my 
house. He did not speak of Miss Smith that day. He left my 
house about the beginning of July, 1856, and went to Mrs. 
Jenkins’s. Shortly before his death he spoke of a second inter- 
ruption to his intimacy with Miss Smith. That was within 
two months of his death. He told me that he was afraid they 
would not get their end accomplished, as Miss Smith’s father 
was putting stronger obstacles than ever in the way. He 
said nothing further at that time. He afterwards spoke on 
the subject, and said something to the same effect. He spoke 
of no coolness between Miss Smith and himself. Last time 

112 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


he was at the Botanic Gardens he got some gold or silver M. Clark 
fish. That was about 5th or 6th March. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Younc—He came to my house first 
in May, 1854. He complained of the climate not agreeing 
with him. He did not say particularly how it disagreed with 
him. He said that he was occasionally troubled with diarrhoea, 
or with symptoms approaching to that. I understood from 
himself that, on one occasion when he visited Helensburgh, 
he had been attacked with something like cholera. He had 
gone to visit M. De Mean there. He told me he was not in 
the practice of taking a cholera medicine; but he told me that 
he took it at that time. I saw the cholera medicine in his 
room. It was labelled “ Preparation used for cholera.” I under- 
stood from him that he was not acquainted with Miss Smith’s 
family. I understood his correspondence with her was clandes- 
tine. When he said he was to be married to her, he said his 
intention was to have the banns secretly proclaimed—I mean 
by that, unknown to her parents; and that he intended, on 
the Monday following, tv have a carriage ready, and to drive 
to chapel and be married. He did not say that he arranged 
with any particular person to marry them, nor did he mention 
what chapel. 

Re-examined by the Soxicrror-Guwarat—He had a very great 
horror of taking medicine. 

33. THomas Fieminc Kennepy, examined by the Lop T. F. Kennedy 
Apvocatz—I am cashier to Huggins & Co., Glasgow. I knew 
L’Angelier for about four years and a half, during which he 
was in Huggins & Co.’s employment. I was intimately 
acquainted with him. He was in the habit of coming frequently 
to my house. He was a well-behaved, well-principled, religious 
young man. I had a great regard for him. I had ample 
means of judging of his character and conduct. He enjoyed 
general good health while in our warehouse. I never thought 
him very strong. He was not much off duty from bad health 
till latterly. I think his health first became affected in 
February. I am not sure if he was ill in January; but in 
February he was laid up for a week. He got better, and 
came back again to the warehouse; then he got worse, and on 
9th March he got leave of absence. I think it was on the 
morning of 23rd February that he got ill—he came into my 
room and said, “I am ill, very ill, and have been ill the night 
before.” I asked what was the matter, and advised him to go 
home. He said he had fallen down on his bedroom floor at 
night before going to bed, and felt so ill that he could not 
call for assistance. He did not say what he had been doing, 
or where he had been the day before. I must have seen him 
on the 21st (Saturday), as he was at business that day. He 
was confined to the house from 23rd February to Sunday, Ist 


H 113 


Madeleine Smith. 


T. F. Kennedy March. I saw him on Ist March. I think that was the first 
day he was out. He spoke before his death of an attachment 
to Miss Smith, Blythswood Square. He said very little; and 
I knew nothing further than that there was an intimacy till 
shortly before his death. He came to me one morning in 
February and said, with tears in his eyes, that he had received 
a letter, demanding back all the correspondence. I advised 
him strongly to give back the letters, but he would not. That 
would be about a fortnight before 23rd February. He said 
that she wrote that a coolness had arisen, and asking back her 
letters ; I understood she had written that there was a coolness 
on the part of both. He said he would never allow her to 
marry another man as long as he lived. I said it was very 
foolish; he said he knew it «was, that it was infatuation. He 
said, “Tom, she will be the death of me.” That was about 
the last conversation I had with him. The last time I saw him 
was on 9th March, when he left to go to Edinburgh. I knew 
his handwriting well. No. 145 is a letter written by him to me. 


Bridge of Allan 
Friday, 20th March. 

Dear Tom,—I was sorry to hear from Thuau that you were laid 
up. I pane! by this time you are better. Are you well enough 
to come here to-morrow? There is a train at 12.30. 4.15, and 
6.15. I think it would do you good. Plenty of lodgings to be 
had here. If you come, it is of no use writing, as the latest post 
arriving is 10 a.m.; but as the walk to the train is short I shall 
: on the lookout. I am two doors from the station in Union 

reet. 

I am getting short of tin; bring with you, please, two or three 
pounds, or, if not, send them. was in Stirling to-day, but it 
was very cold, so I came back again. I have, I fear, slept in 
damp sheets, for all my timbers are quite sore. I weary b 
myself here, and I long to be back again. The place is wort 
seeing, but as dull as a chimney can. 

Yours very sincerely, 
P. Emmz L’ ANGELIER. 


No. 127 is a letter from L’Angelier to myself— 


Dear Tom,—I arrived safe, and feel a deal better; it is much 
warmer than Glasgow. The wind is south; I never saw finer 
weather. 

I enclose you a P.O. order, which please get cashed for me. 
Pens and ink, also wafers, are very scarce, and not to be had at 
present, ser f 

n expectation of seeing you on Saturday, George M‘Call bough 
a bottle of ickles warranted free from pele, i aren ie ae “eh 
arrival of the train leaving Glasgow at 4.15 p.m. Drop a line 
if you are coming, or else you will have no dinner.—Yours, &c., 

Emits L’ ANGELIER. 

‘There is a P.S. in another hand, by a gentleman named 
M’Call, a friend of mine and L’Angelier. The post-mark is 

Edinburgh, March 13.” There is another post-mark 
“ Glasgow.” , 


114 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


No. 129 is a letter also in L’Angelier’s handwriting— 


Edinburgh, Monday. 

Dzar Tom,—We received your note on Saturday, and were very 
sorry to hear you were unwell and unable to come. In one respect 
it was lucky, as it poured all Saturday afternoon. 

I hear at Bridge of Allan it is very cold, and snow. I think 
I will start for there to-morrow. I don’t feel so well as I did, 
but I think it is the want of sleep. I think the P.O. people 
beautifully ignorant not to know a man’s name from a woman’s. 
I shall write to Oxford about it. 

I suppose I am not wanted yet; if I should be, let me know, 
please. Don’t send any more letters to P.O. here after 10 a.m. 
to-morrow. 

cuse haste, and believe me your sincere friend, 
MILE L’ ANGELIER. 


I received the letters you addressed to me, and another to-day. 


[Shown No. 177, a pocket-book or memorandum-book.] 

I see some memoranda there, beginning 11th February, 1857. 
The entries are all in L’Angelier’s handwriting, except the one 
on 14th March—the last in the book—of which I am not sure. 
That entry is—“Saw the gallery of paintings—dine with 
M‘Call.” I was asked in one of the letters to dine at M‘Call’s 
on that Saturday. 

Cross-examined by the Duan or Facuutr—I never saw that 
book in L’Angelier’s possession, or before I saw it at the 
Fiscal’s. 

The Lorp Apvocatz here proposed to read the whole entries 
in the memorandum-book. 

The Dsan or Facunty objected; and the argument on the 
point was postponed till later. 

Examination resumed by the Lorp Apvocats—I identify the 
three letters and envelope shown me as bearing L’Angelier’s 
writing on them. I have seen letters in a female hand coming 
for him, and I knew from him that they came from Mies 
Smith. I don’t know where L’Angelier put the letters he got 
from her. After his death, Mr. Stevenson gave me a bunch 
of keys belonging to L’Angelier. I knew there were documents 
in his desk. We had gone through them on the Monday of 
his death to try to find his mother’s address. I think we 
read one or two of his letters. Stevenson locked them 
up and gave me the key. I saw them locked up. There was 
nothing in the letters that induced us to take any step as to 
his death. On the Tuesday we again looked more closely 
over them. I did not read them with attention. They were 
again locked up, and I got the key. On the day the Fiscal 
sent for the letters they were all put into a paper box, which was 
sealed. I initialed it. They were all given up. 

Crossexamined by the Dszan or Facutty—In February 
L’Angelier first told me of Miss Smith’s desire to break off 
her engagement with him; I can’t say the exact day. I 

115 


T. F. Kennedy 


Madeleine Smith. 


|. F. Kennedy think that was the only occasion he said so. The conversation 
took place in my room in the warehouse. L’Angelier came 
to me between 10 and 11 a.m. crying; he said he had received 
a letter from Miss Smith that morning asking back her letters, 
and wishing the correspondence to cease, and he said that 
a coolness had arisen. I said, “You ought to give up the 
letters and be done with it,” and I remarked that the lady 
was not worthy of him. He said he would not give up the 
letters; he said so distinctly, determinedly ; he said he was 
determined to keep them, but he threatened, at the same 
time, to show them to her father. I told him he was very 
foolish, and that he had much better give them up. He said, 
“No, I won’t; she shall never marry another man as long as I 
live.’ He also said, “Tom, it is an infatuation ; she'll be the 
death of me.” He was exceedingly excited during the whole 
time. I heard him say on one occasion, I don’t recollect 
when, “I wish I was six feet under the groun .” This was 
before the time I am speaking of. I took no notice of that; 
I never supposed that anything was wrong with him. I think 
his first serious illness was in February; but I think he was 
slightly complaining some time in January. I don’t remember 
what his illness then was. I have heard him say on several 
occasions that he was subject to attacks of bowel complaint. 
Two occasions I recollect of, but I can’t say when—months 
before his death. I don’t remember his saying that he had a 
bad attack of cholera in Belgium. I know he visited a place 
called Badgemore Castle. It was last summer or the summer 
before. 1 don’t recollect his saying he had an illness there. 
I cannot tell the day the letters were taken from the desk 
in the warehouse by the authorities. They were put in a& 
large paper-box; all the letters in the desk were put in. 
Stevenson was present. Our object in reading the letters was 
to discover his mother’s address. We did not find it; it 
was got otherwise. There was no inventory of the letters 
made, I believe. 

Reexamined by the Lorp Apvocats—No one else had access 
to the desk while I had the keys. On Wednesday, I think, 
I gave them to Stevenson. He asked for them, but did not 
say for what. When the letters went away they were, I 
think, in the same state as when I found them ; I think we 
were careful to replace those read in their envelopes. I can’t 
recollect. what letters we read. I did not see any letters 
expressing a coolness on Miss Smith’s part. Those we read 
were old, of date 1855. L’Angelier’s mother lives in Jersey. 

Ropert OvirHant, recalled, examined by the Lorp ApvocaTs 
—I have looked at the letters, and have made a note of the 
result of my inspection of them. 

By the Dwan or Facunrr—I did not get a die made for Misa 

116 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


Smith. The die might suit any person’s name with these 
initials. I had the letters; they are moveable. It is the 
same as if they had been printed. 


34. Jon Murray, examined by Mr. Mackenzrme—I am a John Murray 
sheriff-officer in Glasgow. I got a warrant on 30th March to 
go to the office of Huggins & Co., and Bernard M‘Lauchlin went 
with me. I saw Mr. Stevenson and Mr. Kennedy. I told 
Mr, Stevenson my object in calling—to search the desk. He 
opened the desk, and I took a quantity of letters and papers, 
and the other contents, from it. I put them into a paper box, 
which was then sealed up in Mr. Stevenson’s presence, and I 
left it with instructions to send it to the Procurator-Fiscal’s 
office. It was initialed by Mr. Stevenson and Mr. Kennedy 
in my presence. I saw it afterwards in the Fiscal’s office; 
it was still sealed. I broke the seal the next day in presence 
of the Fiscal and Mr. Stevenson. The box and its contents 
were handed over to Mr. Wilson, assistant in the Fiscal’s office. 
I did not mark the letters at that time, or distinguish them 
in any way. Two days afterwards I did so. I got them 
from Mr. Wilson to mark. I found a portfolio in the desk, 
and a cake of cocoa, which I marked particularly. I don’t 
remember seeing a memorandum book in the desk, but I 
observed it in the box when it was opened. The cake of 
cocoa was given to Wilson. After I hud sealed the box at 
Huggins’s, I went to L’Angelier’s lodgings, and M‘Lauchlin and 
Stevenson went with me. Mrs. Jenkins pointed out his room 
and his repositories. When she left the room we made a 
thorough search. Mr. Stevenson produced the keys and we 
opened the repositories. I found letters in a portmeanteau, 
and also in a desk. We did not open the tourist’s bag. I 
took possession of all the letters. M‘Lauchlin carried them 
away wrapped up in brown paper. I accompanied him. It 
was late in the evening, and he took them to his lodgings by 
my directions. Next morning they were brought to the Fiscal’s 
office. The parcel was not sealed in Mrs. Jenkins’s. I got 
them from M‘Lauchlin next morning. I took them to our 
office, and locked them in a drawer till we marked them. 
After they were marked they were handed over to Mr. Wilson. 
The nineteen letters shown me were among those taken by 
me. I found a small tourist’s bag; it was locked. I delivered 
it to Mr. Wilson. I found also in the lodgings a number of 
bottles; M‘Lauchlin took them away to his lodgings till next 
morning, when he brought them to me, and I locked them 
up in a drawer along with the letters. They were handed 
to Mr, Wilson on Ist April, and Dr. Penny got some. I went 
to the house 7 Blythswood Square on 3lst March, and searched 
the prisoner's bedroom. I found the phial, No. 184, in that 
bedroom. The photograph, No. 180, was found in her bedroom 


117 


Madeleine Smith. 


John Murray in a trunk in @ small recess unlocked. I went through the 


druggists and surgeons in Glasgow to inquire as to the sale of 
arsenic in December, January, February, and March last. I 
found some of them kept no arsenic at all; others kept it, 
but did not sell it; from the registers of those who sold it I 
copied the entries. 

Q. Did you find any sold to a person named L’Angelier? 

The Dan or Facuury objected that this was not evidence, 
and, the witness having been removed, he argued that, although 
this might be a useful and important investigation for the 
Crown to make, it surely could not be contended that a police 
man was to speak to the registers of the sale of arsenie in all 
the shops in Glasgow. 

The Lorp Apvocat#—We only wish to prove that L’Angelier’s 
name is not in these registers as a purchaser of arsenic. 

The Court decided that the question was competent; it was 
simply to prove that L’Angelier’s name was not found in the 
registers ; it did not prove that he had not bought arsenic under 
another name, or in some other place. 

Wirngss recalled—I found in none of the registers arsenic 
as having heen sold to L’Angelier. I extended my inquiries to 
Coatbridge, and along the road between Glasgow and Coatbridge, 
and also at Stirling and Bridge of Allan, and I found no such 
entry anywhere. 

Cross-examined by Mr Youna—lI can’t say how many shops 
I went to in Glasgow. I kept a note of all the places I visited. 
In the note I have there are forty-seven druggists’ shops 
mentioned. I went to other shops; we went to those we saw 
on our way, but which were not in the Glasgow Directory. I 
made that note at the time. I made the visits some days prior 
to 16th May. It took several days to do so. This list was 
not the list I carried about with me. I made it up from 
another list. I examined the statutory registry in each shop 
where a register was kept. I entered in the list all the places 
visited, whether they sold arsenic or not. I did not find a 
register in every place where arsenic was sold. I remember 
four shops where this was the case. I did not visit the shops 
of any drysalters or any manufacturing chemists. I made 
the exarination of deceased’s lodgings on Monday, 30th March. 
It was commenced shortly after five o’clock in the afternoon, 
and we were engaged in it till eight o'clock. Deceased had 
only one room. I think I examined all the repositories pointed 
out by Mrs. Jenkins as belonging to the deceased. We examined 
the press, the wardrobe, a portmanteau, and a desk, and found 
things. We took no note of the things we found in each of 
these places, but I kept them all separate—the letters found in 
the portmanteau in one parcel, and those found in the desk in 
another. The parcels were not labelled. I marked on one 

118 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


of them “trunk,” signifying the letters that were found in John Murray 
the portmanteau. I knew, of course, that the other letters 
were found in the desk. M‘Lauchlin took them to his house, 
and brought them to the County Buildings, to my room, about 
9.30 next morning. I locked them up till I marked them. 
There were so many things that it took us some time to mark 
them. We began to do so four or five days afterwards ; we 
were not continuously at them; it took us for eight or ten 
days. I put “desk, lodgings,” “ lodgings,” and “trunk,” 
according to where they were found—these were our marks. 
M‘Lauchlin was with me when I marked them, and when I 
did so I handed them to him, and he put on his initials. They 
were given to the Fiscal when I had finished marking them ; 
that would be two or three weeks after. 

The Lorp Justice-CLerx—And during all that period no person 
examined the letters to see wha. information could be collected 
from them? 

Wirnass—None. 

The Lorp Justica-CterkK—That was an expeditious way of 
pressing on a precognition in such @ case. 

By Mr. Youne—I labelled the bottles on Ist April in my 
own room, assisted by M‘Lauchlin. He kept them the first 
night. One or two labels on the bottles were not written by 
me. There is nothing on the labels to show when they were 
attached. The date, “30th March,” on them is the date when 
they were found. We searched the desk in Huggins’s before 
going to the lodgings on 30th March. ‘The letters were sealed 
by Stevenson with Huggins’s office seal. I have no doubt the 
letters I got two days afterwards from Mr. Wilson to mark were 
those found in the desk. The handwriting in the letters was 
the same as that in the letters found in the desk. I can’t 
say if they were all one handwriting. Taking the letters from 
the desk, and putting them into the box, I noticed them to 
be in a large, legible hand, and I identified them again when 
Mr. Wilson handed over the box to me. 

Re-examined by Mr. Macxenziz—The two bundles taken by 
M‘Lauchlin to his lodgings were in the same state next morning 
when brought to the office, and they were carefully locked up 
till given to Mr. Wilson. M‘Lauchlin signed all the labels 
along with me. 

By Mr. Youne—I handed the letter I found in Miss Smith’s 
bedroom to the Fiscal, and I saw it in his office. I found more 
letters than I spoke to in the lodgings. I can’t say how many 
I found in the lodgings, or in the desk at Huggins’s. I saw 
a number of letters found in the lodgings put into a box in 
the Fiscal, Mr. Young’s, room. The list found in the desk at 


into a box in the same room. I never 


Huggins’s was also put 1 
saw any list or inventory made out. All the bottles I found 
119 


John Murray 


B. M‘Lauchlin 


Madeleine Smith. 


I handed to the Fiscal. I found in the press in Mrs. Jenkins’s 
house eight bottles. I found a package of powders. i counted 
these bottles, and retained them in my memory. The powders 
were tied together with string. I don’t know if all the powders 
were given to Dr. Penny. fa. 

35. Bernarp M‘LaAvucHuin, examined by Mr. Macxenziz—I am 
an assistant to Murray, sheriff-officer. I remember going to 
Huggins’s on 30th March and taking possession of a number of 
letters which were in a desk. They were put into a box, which 
was sealed. I was present when it was opened in the Fiscal’s 
chambers. I did not see the contents then. I went with 
Murray the same evening to Mrs, Jenkins’s house, and took 
possession of various letters, a travelling bag, and eight bottles. 
The letters were wrapped up in two separate parcels, and I took 
them to my own house, and next morning I took them to 
Murray’s room, County Buildings, in the same state they were 
in the night before, and he lecked them up. I saw them 
marked afterwards. I was particularly careful that the letters 
were put into their proper envelopes. The bottles were taken 
to my house that evening, and delivered up next day to Murray. 
They were afterwards given to Wilson in the same state. I 
took possession at Mrs. Jenkins’s, on 13th April, of a topcoat, 
and, on the 14th, of a Balmoral bonnet—both of which I 
identify. I went with M. Thuau to No. 7 Blythswood Square. 
He pointed out a window in Mains Street—No. 14 of plan— 
one of the windows of Miss Smith’s bedroom. In that room 
we found two bottles and a photograph, and initialed them. 
I went with Mary Tweedle from Terrace Street, St. Vincent 
Street, to Blythswood Square. At No, 4 Terrace Street I 
showed Tweedle my watch ; it wanted five minutes to four. We 
went to Blythswood Square, and when we arrived there it was 
exactly four. We walked at a leisurely pace. Terrace Street 
is on the south side of Blythswood Square. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Youna—The letters found in Mrs. 
Jenkins’s I took to my own room; they were not put in a 
drawer; they were left open. My wife was in that room. 
My family were not in it. I could not say precisely when 
we marked them. We marked the bottles on Ist April, and 
the letters found in the lodgings might be all marked a week 
after that; I daresay we began to mark them about 3rd April. 
I believe they were all marked within a fortnight, but I am not 
sure. I may have omitted to mark some, but not to m 
knowledge ; I was asked afterwards to mark some I had omitted. 
They had Murray’s initials. Murray brought them to me in 
his own office. I cannot speak to the time. 

Re-examined by Mr. Macxanziz—I was in the room with the 
letters all night, and I am satisfied nobody touched them till 
they were delivered to Murray. The letters I omitted to mark 


120 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


were found in the lodgings. Murray and I visited druggists’ B. M‘Lauchlin 
shops, and made inquiries about the sale of arsenic and as 

to the register only; also on the road to Coatbridge, and at 

Baillieston, Bridge of Allan, and Stirling; but we found no 

entries of sale of arsenic to any person of the name of L’Angelier, 

Every shop or house we entered is marked in the list. The 

houses are those of doctors who have shops elsewhere; we 

went to these shops too. 

The Lorp Justice-CLerkK—You say you are an assistant te 
Murray? 

Wirnass— Yes. 

The Lorp Justice-Cuzrx—Are you appointed and paid by 
Murray ? 

Wirtnass—Yes. 

The Lorp Justice-Cusrk—Then you go about and assist 
Murray without any legal authority or character at all. I 
don’t imply that you are not a better officer than Murray, but 
in reality you are not appointed by the Sheriff? 

Wirness—No. 

The Lorp Justicz-Cuzrc—Are you named in any warrant for 
search ? 

Wirness—Not that I am aware of. 

The Lorp Justice-CLerx—Do you execute these warrants your 
self without Murray? 

Witness—I have always Murray or sowe other officer with me. 

The Lorp Justicz-Cierxk—tThis system is perfectly new to me. 

36. Wiu1am Wizson, examined by Mr. Mackanziz—I am w. witson 
assistant to the Fiscal in Glasgow. I remember a box, No. 190, 
being brought to the Fiscal’s office. I saw it first in Mr. Hart’s 
and Murray’s hands. I took possession of its contents, and 
kept them for two or three days, then returned them to Murray, 
with a few exceptions, to mark and label according to where 
he had found them. He returned them with his own and 
M‘Lauchlin’s initials. I went over them and marked the 
envelopes with reference to each other. With one exception 
they remained in my custody till they were so marked. The 
letter in each case was carefully marked with reference to its 
envelope. I labelled them after Murray had initialed them. On 
Wednesday, 25th March, Mr. Stevenson brought me seven letters, 
which I identify. The tourist’s bag was opened on the after- 
noon of the 31st. The letters in it were marked by Mr. Hart 
and myself. Murray handed me a number of letters found 
in the lodgings. I took every precaution to keep the letters 
in their proper envelopes. Murray also brought the bottles 
found in the lodgings, a cake of cocoa, and two bottles found 
in the prisoner’s bedroom. They were handed to Dr. Penny 

mination. ‘ 
re aseaunina by the Duan or Facutty—I am a clerk in the 
121 


Madeleine Smith. 


W. Wilson office of Messrs. Hart and Young. I hold no official appoint- 
ment. I kept the box with the letters two or three days 
before giving them over to Murray. They were locked up in 
a press in Mr, Young’s room. I kept them because the officers 
were actively engaged in inquiring into this case. I took no 
note of the time they were out of my hands, but I think it would 
not be more than one or two days. I might give them away 
on the Friday and they would be returned on the Saturday or 
Monday. I cannot say how long they were in Murray’s posses- 
sion; the steps in the case were so numerous and complicated 
that I can’t recollect. It is not impossible that they might 
have them for a fortnight, but I think they had them only 
two or three days. After they were returned by Murray and 
M‘Laucblin, one letter was sent to Edinburgh on 6th April, the 
others were examined by Mr. Young and myself, and, when 
examined, those which were considered relevant to the inquiry 
were selected by Mr. Young and myself. Those marked by 
rhe were done partly in the office and partly in my house. I 
believe Mr. Young did the same. The selected letters were sent 
to Edinburgh to the Crown Office, and the rest were kept in 
a lockfast place in Mr. Young’s room. The letters sent to 
Edinburgh were not returned. They were principal letters. 
Copies were made of many of the letters, but I cannot say 
whether the selected letters were copied in our office. I can’t 
say whether they were copied in the office or taken home by 
the clerks. I can’t say whether the Fiscal lodged any of the 
letters in the Sheriff-clerk’s hands. There are none of the 
letters, to my knowledge, still in the Fiscal’s office. All the 
non-selected letters were kept in the Fiscal’s office after the 
ease was a second time reported (on 29th April). I was ill 
and laid up for three weeks afterwards, and Mr. Young took 
charge. I cannot say if there are still some letters in the 
office. I know of applications being made for the last two 
months by the prisoner’s agents, which were refused till we got 
instructions from headquarters, and we were desired not to 
exhibit them till we got instructions. 

Re-examined by Mr. Mackxenziz—lI believe it was by order 
of Crown counsel they were sent to Edinburgh. They were 
sent immediately. There was a copy made by the Fiscal’s 
clerk. More clerks were put on. The letters were very difficult 
to decipher. There were 198 envelopes, some containing four, 
and some eight pages, and so difficult to decipher that I had 
to use a magnifying lens. The prisoner’s agents were anxious 
for free access to them, and Mr. Young gave access about the 
beginning of June. Miss Perry’s letters were given to Mr. 
Forbes. 

To the Lorn Justicn-CLurx—The documents, when recovered 

122 


Fvidence for Prosecution. 


under a warrant in criminal cases, are taken charge of by the W. Wilson 
Fiscals. 

The Lorp Justics-Cuerk observed that the Sheriff-clerk is the 
officer of the magistrate under whose warrant these things are 
recovered, and he is responsible for their custody, and ought 
to have an inventory of them made immediately. The prose- 
cutor ought not to have possession of them, without a list and 
initials of the clerk or Jus assistants. He thought, after what 
he had said in a murder case from Aberdeen on this subject, 
that such a thing wotild have been put an end to. 

The Dean or Facuuty having epplied for the warrant issued 
for recovery of the documents, 

The Lorp ApvocaTs said he had been anxious that every 
facility should be given for the defence, but the prisoner had 
chosen to run her letters, and the case had to be prepared in 
a very short time. He ventured to say, however, that more 
facilities had been given for the defence in this case than he 
had ever known in any other. He had even desired that a 
private copy, made for his own use, should be given to the 
other side before he had time to frame the indictment. They 
had given them a manuscript copy some days before the indict- 
ment was served, not only of the correspondence founded on, 
but of all the documents; but he did not think it his duty to 
allow access to the original manuscripts before the indictment 
was served. 

The Dean or Facuuty said he was not attributing any dis- 
courtesy to his learned friend ; but he complained most seriously 
of the conduct of his subordinates, in consequence of which 
they had not had the time they ought to have had properly to 
prepare for this trial, anu even down to this moment they had 
not the slightest satisfaction or certainty that they had got all 
the documents which had been recovered in this: case. 

The Lorp Justics-Cuerk—You could and can apply to the 
Court for the recovery of any documents that may remain. 


The Court then adjourned till next morning. 


123 


Fourth Day—Friday, 3rd July, 1857. 
i The Court met at ten o’clock. 


The Dgan or Facutty called attention to a circular that had 
been printed, announcing that the Scotch Thistle of Saturday 
would contain a report of the trial, and of all the letters between 
the prisoner and L’Angelier. This circular was signed “ Jas. 
Cunningham.” Up to this moment, the Dean stated, the number 
of letters put in evidence was extremely swell, but the number 
to be produced in this case was very large and those engaged 
in the case knew that a considerable number of these had been 
printed for the use of the parties on both sides. He was 
further informed that the letters in print—upwards of 100— 
were being set up in this newspaper office, with the view of 
being published to-morrow. It remained quite doubtful how 
many of these letters might be used in evidence; they were of 
a highly confidential character; they were quite unfit for 
publication; and he was sure the Lord Advocate would only 
use such of them as were essential to his case. In these circum- 
stances it appeared to him that the proposed publication was 
@ gross breach of public decorum, and a most improper misuse 
of materials which had somehow or other found their way into 
the hands of this printer. He was much disposed to leave this 
matter in the hands of the Court, but he must take the liberty 
of urging that some proceedings should be taken for preventing 
the proposed publication. 

The Lorp Apvocats said that if the circular to which the 
Dean referred had fallen into his hands he would have taken 
the decisive course his learned friend had taken. How these 
letters could have got into the hands of any person unconnected 
with the prosecution or defence he was unable to explain, He 
knew that the strongest orders had been given that no copies 
of these letters printed by the Crown or communicated by them 
to the defence should be given to any person whatever, and he 
had every reason to think that these orders had been most 
strictly obeyed. But be that as it might, he agreed with his 
learned friend in the extreme and gross impropriety of this 
publication, and he was perfectly ready to co-operate in any 
proceedings that might be necessary. 

The Lorp Justic-Cimrk said the Court thought that they 
should order the immediate attendance of the person who 
signed this circular. It was important to ascertain whether the 

124 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


publication was to be limited to the letters used in evidence, or 
whether the printers had a copy of all the others, and where 
they had got that copy; because the publication of documents 
of such a character, and indeed of any documents which were 
the property of the Crown, and part of their precognition and 
recovery, was a most improper proceeding and a gross contempt 
of Court. Mr. Neaves would therefore make out an order for 
the immediate attendance of James Cunningham. He ‘cy Lord 
Justice-Clerk) would get the circular from the Dean of Faculty 
to ascertain the address of that person, and order him to attend 
the Court immediately. 

The order was made out, and signed by the Lord Justice 
Clerk. 

37. Wi1am Hart, examined by the Soricrror-Gunzrat—! am 
joint Procurator-Fiscal of Glasgow. Mr. Young is my colleague. 
Both of us have commissions. I heard of the death of L’Angelier 
about the end of the weok in which it happened. It happened 
on Monday. Mr. Young, I think, mentioned it to me. Letters 
were sent, I believe, to my office on the 25th, but I was absent 
at the time, and Mr. Young got them. There was at that time 
no criminal information lodged at the office. I saw one letter. 
There was an investigation going on at that time in regard to 
the death. It was certainly not being conducted in the expecta- 
tion that a criminal charge would result. In the course of the 
investigation I saw a number of letters brought by Stevenson 
and Murray. I saw them the week after L’Angelier’s death. 
On Tuesday, 31st March, I made a criminal charge against the 
prisoner, and got a warrant for her apprehension, which was 
executed the same day, and she was examined that day. Several 
witnesses had been examined on precognition before that. That 
was a precognition generally as to the death. The Procurators- 
Fiscal have instructions to examine into sudden deaths when 
peculiar. In the course of the investigation I read a number 
of letters said to have come from L’Angelier’s repositories. 
They were for the most part in envelopes. I was particularly 
careful to return each letter to its own envelope. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Younc—I first made a charge against 
the prisoner on the 31st, and obtained a warrant to apprehend 
her. There was a warrant obtained the day before; I believe 
it is in Glasgow. It was an application setting forth the death, 
as was suspected, from poison, and praying for an exhumation 
of the body, and for power to take possession of documents, 
&e., in the repositories of the deceased. I think there will 
be no difficulty in getting that warrant. I think the copy now 
shown me is accurate. I am not sure that a precognition was 
taken in presence of the Sheriff before the 31st. It was reported 
to the Sheriff. I could scarcely say that thére was any pre- 
rognition taken in presence of the Sheriff before the 3lst. I 

125 


William Hart 


Madeleine Smith. 


William Hart was from home. Parties may have been examined in the office, 
but I am not sure that this was before the Sheriff. There was 
no written precognition on the 31st before the Sheriff, but 
witnesses were examined before Sheriff Smith on that day. 
Their evidence was not written down; it was, I think, before 
and after the prisoner’s declaration. The prisoner was com- 
mitted for further examination on the 31st. A great deal of 
written precognition was taken in the case before the Sheriff. 
Sheriffs Alison, Bell, and Smith took a great interest in the 
case. [Witness was requested to send for the original of the 
warrant referred to.]} 

Reexamined by the Soxicrror-Genzrat—tThe application for 
the warrant makes no mention of any criminal charge at all. 
Only a small section of the letters was used. These were 
printed. They were copied in MS. either in our office or in 
the Crown Agent’s. A large portion of the letters were copied 
in my office—many of them by Mr. Young himself, to prevent 
them as much as possible fram getting into improper hands. 
It is not usual for the Procurator-Fiscal to make copies himself; 
it was done in this case because the letters were of an unusually 
delicate description. They were extremely difficult to decipher, 
and that made the transcribing of them a very slow and difficult 
process. They were in such a state originally that they could 
not have been used to any extent by counsel in the case. If 
originals were sent to Edinburgh without copies they must 
have been very few. If the letters had been handed to the 
opposite party without copying, it must have taken a long 
time to render them available. Copies were communicated 
to one of the opposite agents in Edinburgh some days before 
the indictment was served. Having these copies in print must 
have saved a great deal of time. I have been Procurator-Fiscal 
for eleven years, and have been connected with the office for 
thirty-six years, and I know of no case in which greater facilities 
have been given to any prisoner. As to the non-selected letters, 
too, there was great pressure from the Crown Office to get 
copies; we found it beyond the strength of our establishment, 
and we were ordered to get them copied at the expense of the 
Crown as fast as possible. The copy was sent to the Crown 
Office, and it was communicated to the opposite party before 
service of the indictment. We got instructions from the Crown 
Office to make the letters not founded on accessible to the 
opposite party. Mr. Forbes, one of the prisoner’s agents, got 
several letters previously, for which he gave a receipt. 

Re-cross-examined by Mr. Younc—Five persons in our own 
office copied the letters, and I think five clerks in the Sheriff- 
clerk’s office. The letters were distributed among these ten. 
They were not allowed to take them home, but I learned that 
one or two of them had done so in the evening to copy. I 

126 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


now speak of the letters not founded on. These were copied William Hart 
by our own clerks and by Mr. Young himself, and none of 

them were given to clerks in the Sheriff-clerk’s office. It was 

about three or four weeks after the letters founded on were 

copied that we began to copy those not founded on. It was in 

June that access was first given to the letters not founded on 

to the prisoner’s agents several days before the indictment was 

served. It appears from the receipt that it was 10th June. 

From 30th March to June they were in the hands of the Crown 
authorities. 

The Lorp Justicz-Cuerk—I suppose there never was such full 
and ready communication as in this case. 

By Mr. Younc—In April and May application was made for 
the prisoner for copies of the letters. They offered to make 
copies at their own .expense, but they did not know what the 
letters contained till June. 

The Lorp Justics-CLerk—You very properly refused to allow 
them to get copies. 

38. Peter TayLor YOUNG, examined by the Souicitor- P. T. Young 
Gunzrat—I am one of the Procurators-Fiscal of Glasgow. On 
Tuesday afternoon, 31st March, Mr. Stevenson called and : 
reported the death of M. es ee as a sudden death. He said 
L’Angelier was a stranger in Glasgow, and that it was thought 
right to let us know of the death. He said there had been a 
post-mortem examination by Drs. Steven and Thomson. Mr. 
Hart was from home. Next morning Mr. Kennedy, of Huggins 
& Co., called, and said their object in ordering the post-mortem 
examination was to find the cause of death, to let his friends 
know, but he said there was 4 love affair in the matter, and 
that there were some letters at Huggins’s, and I said it would 
be material to get some of these letters they possessed. Mr. 
Stevenson brought six or seven of the letters, and we made 
him mark them with his initials, and afterwards laid them 
carefully aside. We then ordered an investigation by sending 
for his landlady, and making inquiries elsewhere. The result 
was that he made an application for exhumation. After Dr. 
Penny had examined the stomach on Monday, the 30th, we 
learned that poison was found; and we ultimately got the letters 
from L’Angelier’s repositories. I perused the whole. There 
were about 300 envelopes and about 500 letters, several 
envelopes containing more than one letter. They were extremely 
difficult to decipher, and I took fully ten days to read them 
all. I made a selection of them with the view of reporting 
the case to the Crown. The utmost care was taken to restore 
the letters to their own envelopes. The conduct of this inquiry 
was a very serious interruption to the ordinary business of our 
office. It might be said to be paramount to all else. 

127 


Madeleine Smith. 


A. Murray 39. Anprew Murray, Jun., W.S.—I was employed by the 
Crown Agent to look over certain letters of the prisoner, in 
order to make a correct print. The printed proof was put into 
my hands. My clerk and I separately read the letters and proof. 
A new proof was taken. It was a tedious task. The letters were 
very difficult to decipher. It took us four days to the original 
letters, and one more to the proof. The print is correct. 

A.8. Hunter 40. AtzxanpER Sovran Hunvzr, clerk to Mr. Murray, cor- 
roborated his evidence. 

Rowland Hill 41. RowLanp Hit Macponatp—I am comptroller of the sort- 

Macdonald ing office, Post Office, Glasgow. I have had shown me a variety 
of letters and envelopes, with a view of reporting on the post- 
marks. [Witness retired, along with an agent on each side, to 
examine the post-marks of various letters. | 

George M‘Call 42, GEORGE M‘CatL, merchant, Forth Street, Edinburgh, 
examined by the Lord Apvocats—I was acquainted with M. 
L’Angelier. I remember his coming to Edinburgh in March 
last. He dined with me on the Saturday week before his death. 
I remember L’Angelier writing a note to Mr. Kennedy. I put a 
postscript to that letter. L’Angelier seemed pretty well. He 
said he had been unwell. He spoke of going to Bridge of 
Allan. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Youna—I saw L’Angelier for the last 
time on Monday, 16th March, in the afternoon. He said he had 
been dining with a Colonel Fraser at Portobello. 

By the Lorp Justicu-Ciurz—L’Angelier was a good-looking, 
pleasant man. I never saw him in the company of ladies. 

R. Monteith 43. Ropsrt Mownresira, Glasgow, examined by the Lorp 
Apvocate—I am a packer in Huggins & Co.’s employment. I 
knew L’Angelier. He had asked me to address a letter for him 
—in the beginning of 1856. The address was “ Miss C. Haggart, 
Rowaleyn, Row.” I afterwards addressed about a dozen letters 
for him to the same person. One was to 7 Blythswood Square. 

By Mr. Younc—He said he did not want his handwriting to 
be known. 


R. Sinclair 44: Rosurt Sivciam, examined by the Lory Apvyocatz—I am 
a packer with Huggins & Co. L’Angelier twice asked me to 
address letters to “ Miss C. Haggart, care of Mr. James Smith, 

India Street, Glasgow.” This was more than twelve months 

before his death. 

By Mr. Younc—He said he did not want his handwriting to 
be known. 


J.M‘Dougall 45. Janet M‘Dovaat, keeper of the Post Office, Row, 
examined by the Lerp Apvocats—I remember in the course 
of 1855 and 1856 some letters coming to the Post Office, 
addressed “Miss Bruce, to be called for.’ There would be 
seven or eight in the course of the season. One of Mr. Smith’s 

128 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


servants at Rowaleyn got these letters. I think the servant’s J. M‘Dougall 


name was Jane Lindsay. I did not know that there was any 
Miss Bruce at Rowaleyn. 


46. CatuzrIneE M‘Donaup, lodging-house keeper, Bridge of 
Allan, examined by the Lorp Apvocarr—I remember Mr. Smith 
and his family coming to me last spring. They came on 6th 
March. Maledeine Smith was with them. They stayed till 
the 17th, and then left for Glasgow. 


47. Ropert Tetrer CorBEett, examined by the Lorp ApvocaTs 
—TI am a physician and surgeon in West Regent Street, Glasgow, 
and one of the senior surgeons to the Glasgow Royal Infirmary. 
I was called in to assist at the post-mortem examination of 
L’Angelier’s body after exhumation. I concurred in the report. 
My opinion was that he had died from irritant poisoning. The 
morbid appearances were of two different characters—the one 
showing the result of recent action, and the other of action 
at a period antecedent to that. The last of these appearances 
I refer to were several small ulcers, with elevated edges, about 
the sixteenth of an inch, at the upper part of the duodenum. 
These might have been characteristic of the effects of an irritant 
poison at the distance of a month, but it is impossible to refer 
them to any precise period. They are such a result as an 
irritant poison administered a month before might have pro- 
duced. They were of longer standing than immediately ante- 
cedent to death. I was not present at the first post-mortem 
examination, and I never saw the stomach. I consider the 
appearances presented by the intestines, viz., the inflammation 
and ulceration, as the results of arsenical poisoning. Jaundice 
is not a common symptom of arsenic, but it is an occasional 
one. Extreme thirst would proceed from irritant poison; this 
symptom shows itself very early. It is not characteristic of 
ordinary British cholera in its earlier stages. A dose of arsenic 
exhibits its effects usually in half an hour to an hour; that is 
the average time; longer periods have been known, but are 
unusual. The period depends more on the state of the stomach, 
apd the mode in which the arsenic has been administered, than 
on the quantity. If the patient had been the subject of repeated 
doses, and had irritability of the stomach, it might produce 
its effect more speedily. I have read of cases where large doses 
were found in the stomach of persons who had been murdered. 
I can’t say how much has been found on such occasions. I ean 
refer to cases where the quantity is said to have been large. 

Cross-examined by the Dan or Facutty—Twenty grains 
would be a large dose to be administered. I can’t refer to any 
homicidal case in which so large a dose was given. When I 
spoke of jaundice as a symptom of arsenical poisoning, I mean 
only as referring to the yellow colour. I have not met with any 
such case of arsenical poisoning in which the jaundice symptom 


; 129 


C. M‘Donald 


R. T. Corbett 


Madeleine Smith. 


R. T. Corbett was seen. I have seen it stated in Dr. Taylor's work—in which 
he refers to Christison. 

The Dean or Facuttr—No, not Dr. Christison; Marshall. 

Wirnzss—I can’t condescend on any particular case. 

The Daan or Facuttr—It is your reading you referred to; 
Tl give you any book you name, afid I ask you to point out 
your authority. 

Witness—I know the fact. 

The Dean or Facutty—Not except from reading? 

Witnsess—No. 

The Dan or Facuury—Well, here is Dr. Taylor’s book, page 
62. If you find anything else there I entreat you to give it to 
me. 

Wirress—I am not aware that it is mentioned in any other 
part of the article than the page to which you allude, but I 
would require to read it over. 

The Dzan or Facottr—But surely, when you come here to 
swear as a man of skill that jaundice is a symptom of arsenical 
poisoning, you are prepared to give me a better answer than 
that. Do you know that there is a life depending on this 
inquiry? Pray, keep that in mind. 

Witness—Yes, I do; and I know jaundice to be a secondary 
symptom of arsenical poisoning frem my reading. 

The Dzan or Facutry—And is there any reading that you 
can condescend on except what I have pointed out to you? 

Witnass—None. 

Cross-examination resumed—The ulcers might be produced 
by other causes than irritant poison. I have never met with 
them in any other case in such a part of the duodenum, but it 
is possible they might arise from some enteric fever; any 
cause of inflammation of the upper portion of the intestines 
might produce them. I have only once before made a post- 
mortem examination in a case of arsenical poisoning. That 
was a case recorded in the Glasgow Medical Journal for 1856. 
Dr. John Crawford, of Glasgow, was engaged in that case with 
me, and Dr. Penny was engaged in the analysis. 

Re-examined by the Lorp Apvocats—From my reading and 
study I know that jaundice is an occasional secondary symptom 
of arsenical poisoning. If I found other symptoms of arsenic I 
should regard that as a symptom. If a person who had taken 
arsenic presented a yellow colour, that might or might not be 
a symptom of the poison. The presence of jaundice would not 
sway me very much one way or the other. 

Dr. Pznny, recalled and examined’ by the Lorp Apvocata— 
I have made some experiments as to the colouring matter of 
arsenic from the shops of Murdoch and Currie, Glasgow—(1) I 
administered Murdoch’s arsenic (coloured with soot) to a dog, 
and I found no difficulty in detecting the soot in the stomach 


130 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


of that dog after death. (2) I administered arsenic coloured 
by myself with indigo to another dog, and I had no difficulty 
in detecting the indigo in that case by chemical tests. (3) I 
administered to another dog a portion of the arsenic sold by 
Mr. Currie, and I detected black particles in the stomach of 
that dog, but I could not undertake to identify the arsenic 
found with the arsenic given. I found carbonaceous particles, 
but I could not undertake to say that these carbonaceous 
particles are of themselves sufficient to identify any particular 
description of arsenic. (4) I could not detect any arsenic in 
the brains of these dogs. (5) I found solid arsenic in the 
stomach as well as in the texture of the stomach. These are 
‘the results of my experiments. 

By the Court—lIs it the fact that there is less arsenic found 
in the brains of animals than in the brains of human beings !— 
I am not aware. In the one case I detected blue colouring 
matter of indigo and in the other carbonaceous particles. 

Cross-examined by the Dzan or Facuttry—I made myself 
acquainted with the colouring matter in Currie’s arsenic before 
administering it. The black particles found in the stomach 
after death bear a close resemblance in their physical appear- 
ance and their chemical properties to the constituents of the 
arsenic given. Their physical appearance and chemical pro- 
perties were identical with those of the arsenic given. 

48. Cnristin4 Hacoarr or Macxsnzim, examined by the C, Mackenzie 
Soxicrror-GengRaAL—In the end of last March I was married to 
Duncan Mackenzie, joiner. I was servant to the family of 
Mr. Smith, and was two years there. I left last Whitsunday. 
The family consisted of Mr. and Mrs. Smith and five children. 
Miss Madeleine was the eldest, about twenty-one years of age, 
and there were Miss Bessie and Miss Janet, about twelve or 
thirteen, The eldest son is John; he is, I should think, between 
sixteen and seventeen. He is in an office. The younger son 
is James. He is two years younger. Till the end of March 
he was at school in Edinburgh. Mr. Smith has a house at 
Rowaleyn, near Row. They lived there during the summer. 
They went about May and came back about November. During 
the first winter I was with them (1855-6), they lived in India 
Street, Glasgow. That was the winter before last. Last winter 
(1856-7) they stayed at 7 Blythswood Square. While they 
lived in India Street, Miss Smith pointed out a French gentle- 
man to me. She did not speak of him by his name. I came 
to know his name when I was examined on precognition at the 
County Buildings, The name was L’Angelier. Miss Smith, 
when she pointed him out, told me he was a friend of hers; 
he was in the street when she pointed him out and we were 
in the drawing-room; he was passing. The photo shown me 
is a likeness of him. I have seen him in the house in India 

131 


Madeleine Smith. 


C. Mackenzie Street. I was asked by Miss Smith once to open the back 
gate to let him in, and I did so. This was during the day; 
I think they were all in church except the youngest sister ; 
it was a Sunday. Miss Smith went in with him to the laundrv: 
the door was shut when they went in. I don’t remember how 
long he remained—I think about half an hour. He came back 
to the house at night oftener than once; I don’t think more 
than three or four times; he came about ten o'clock before 
the family retired to their rooms. As far as I remember, they 
were all at home. On these occasions he stood at the back 
gate. He did not, to my knowledge, come into the house. I 
don’t know if he came in. I opened the back gate to him 
by Miss Smith’s directions. She asked me to open the gate 
for her friend. On some occasions when I went to open the 
gate he was there, and on others he was not. I did not see 
Miss Smith go out to him. I left open the back door of the 
house leading to the gate. There was no person in the 
laundry at the time; the back door was a good piece away 
from the laundry. Miss Smith and this gentleman might have 
gone into the laundry without me seeing them. During the 
season we lived in India Street I pointed this gentleman out 
to Duncan Mackenzie, my husband. I don’t remember men- 
tioning his name. I said he was a friend of Miss Smith’s. I 
have spoken to that gentleman. During the season we were 
in India Street he made me a present of a dress. He did 
not say what he gave it for. When the family were at Rowaleyn, 
I don’t recollect seeing him there, or in the neighbourhood. 
Letters came to me intended for Miss Smith while we lived 
in India Street. Miss Smith said they would be so addressed. 
She said they were from her friend. I thought she meant 
L’Angelier. I can’t say how many letters came so addressed. 
A good many came to India Street, and I gave them all to 
Miss Smith. Letters also came to Rowaleyn addressed to me for 
Miss Smith, but they were very few. I called for letters 
addressed to Miss Bruce at the Post Office, Row; Miss Smith 
asked me to call for them, and I got them and gave them to 
Miss Smith. She has given me letters to post for her, addressed 
to a gentleman. I cannot pronounce the name. Was it 
L’Angelier?—It was. I posted letters for her with that address 
in India Street, in Blythswood Square, and during the two 
summers I was at Rowaleyn. I have delivered a letter with 
that address in Franklin Place; I only delivered one letter so 
addressed ; I left it at the house. In the Blythswood Square 
house there was a back door leading to an area and into a 
lane. She asked me once to open it for her. I don’t know 
when that was. It was a good long time before Miss Smith 
was apprehended—weeks before, and maybe two months. It 
wag at night—I think past ten—that she asked me to open the 

132 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


door. I was in her room when she asked me. Her room C. Mackensie 
was downstairs, on the same floor as the kitchen. I slept in 
a back room next to the back door. The cook, Charlotte 
M‘Lean, slept with me. At the time I speak of, Charlotte 
M‘Lean was in the kitchen. I opened the back -gate into the 
lane. I saw no person there. I left it open and returned to 
the house, leaving the back door open, and went into the 
kitchen. Miss Smith, met me in the passage; she was going 
towards the back door. I heard footsteps coming through 
the gate. I went into the kitchen. JI did not hear where 
Miss Smith went to. I did not hear the door of my room 
shut. I don’t remember how long I remained in the kitchen ; 
I think more than half an hour. Charlotte M‘Lean was there 
with me during that time. I think I remained longer than 
usual in the kitchen that night. Miss Smith had told me to 
stay in the kitchen. She asked if I would open the back door 
and stay in the kitchen a little, because she was to see her friend. 
She did not say where she was to seo her friend. While I 
stayed in the kitchen I did not know where Miss Smith was. 
I did not know she was in my bedroom. I had no doubt 
she was there, but I did not know it. When we heard Miss 
Smith go to her room I left the kitchen. We heard the door 
of her room shut; I did not hear the door of our room open. 
I did not hear the back door of our house shut. I am not 
certain, but I think I found it shut when I went to my bedroom, 
My bedroom is next to the back door. There is a low door 
in the front area. The key was left sometimes in the kitchen, 
and sometimes in the boy’s room. Shortly before her appre-. 
hension I heard that Miss Smith was to be married. Mrs. 
Smith told me of it. I don’t remember the time; it was a 
good while before her apprehension. In consequence of that I 
asked Miss Smith what she was to do with her other friend, 
and she told me then, or some time after, that she had given 
him up. I asked if she had got back her letters. She said 
no, and that she did not care. I recollect refusing to receive 
letters for her in India Street; that was after I had received 
some; in Blythswood Square also I refused; I don’t remember 
her saying anything. She said she would receive letters in 
at the window; that was before I had refused to receive letters 
for her. I have seen L’Angelier in Mains Street, close to the 
house, at night. He was walking slowly. That was in the 
beginning of the winter. At night when we were in bed Miss 
Smith could have passed from: her bedroom to the kitchen, 
or upstairs, without being overheard by me. The stair leading 
up to the dining-room floor is very near her bedroom door. I 
never saw any rats in the house in Blythswood Square. We 
were not troubled with rats. I remember Sunday, 22nd March, 
I was not well that day, and kept my bed. I rose between 


133 


Madeleine Smith. 


C. Mackenzie five and six o’clock in the afternoon. I saw my husband that 


evening. He came between seven and eight o'clock. 
There was family worship that evening at nine o'clock. 
I was present. Miss Smith was present, and _ the 


rest of the family. Mackenzie remained in the house 
when I went up to family worship, and he was there when I 
came down. I left Miss Smith in the dining-room when I came 
down, and I did not see her again that evening. I went to 
bed at ten o’clock. The cook slept with me as usual that 
night. Mackenzie left about ten. I was not aware of anything 
taking place in the house during the night. I heard nothing, 
and was unaware of any stranger being in. I remember Miss 
Smith leaving home suddenly on the Thursday after that Sunday. 
One evening that week Miss Smith was out at an evening 
party. I could not say if she was at home at the usual time 
on the Wednesday evening. The key of the back door was 
kept in my bedroom. On Thursday morning it was discovered 
that Miss Smith was not at home. There was a key to the 
back gate. I had charge of’that gate; it is a wooden gate 
in the wall; it is more than six feet high; it may be twelve 
feet high. The key of the back door of the house always stood 
in the door, in the inside. The back gate was sometimes locked, 
but generally snibbed. A person could open the back door 
by the key in the door, and open the gate in the wall by 
unsnibbing it. The key of the low front door was always 
left in the lock ; I had no charge of the key of the high front 
door, but I think it stood in the lock. I had charge of cleaning 
out Miss Smith’s bedroom. During February or March I never 
observed that the water in her basin was coloured peculiarly 
black or peculiarly blue. I saw nothing unusual of that sort. 
Cross-examined by the Dean or Facuury—It was in India 
Street I first became aware of the correspondence between Miss 
Smith and this:gentleman. I think it was soon after she had 
pointed him out to me. When the family left India Street 
they went to Rowaleyn; that would be in April or May, 1856. 
I became aware of this correspondence weeks before the family 
went to Row, but I can’t say the precise time. After I had 
received some letters for Miss Smith, I declined to take more : 
the reason was that her mother had found fault with me for 
taking them and had forbidden me to take them. The family 
came back from Row in November. It was a good while after 
this that this gentleman came into the house; it might be 
some months. I remember the family going to Bridge of 
Allan ; his visit would be a good long time before that. I don’t 
remember when Mrs. Smith mentioned to me her daughter's 
intended marriage. It was before they went to Bridge of 
Allan. When Charlotte M‘Lean and I were in the kitchen 
the night L’Angelier was in the house, the interview between 
134 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


Miss Smith and him might take place in the lobby. Her C. Mackenzie 
youngest sister slept with Miss Smith; she was in bed by that 
time. My husband was frequently in the house at that time— 
several times in the course of a week. I remember the circum- 
stance of the night of 22nd March. When Mackenzie went 
away, I saw him to the back door and the outer gate. 
snibbed the gate, and I have no reason to suppose I did not 
lock the inner back door as usual. I left Miss Smith in the 
dining-room with the rest of the family after prayers. I did 
not see her again that night. She gave me no reason to 
suppose she had any meeting that night. I don’t know that 
Miss Smith and her youngest sister went to bed that night 
at the same time. The back door makes a noise in opening. 
The lock makes a considerable noise. It is close to my 
bedroom. I don’t know a lady named Miss Perry. She might 
have been a visitor at Mr. Smith’s house. The boy opened the 
door. The window of my room looks into the back area. It 
has iron stanchions like all the other low windows of the house. 

To the Lozp Justic#-Cuunx—When the family went to Bridge 
of Allan the servants were all at home. On the morning of 
the Thursday, when it was found that Mise Smith had left the 
house, I don’t know if it was found that she had taken any of 
her clothes with her. I saw her on her return; a small carpet 
bag, containing things of hers, was brought back with her. 
The bag was not very small. It was such as a lady might 
carry her night things in. This was in India Street. I was 
desired by Mrs. Smith not to receive letters, but I did receive 
some afterwards. ; 

The Lorp Justice-Ciurx—I suppose in reality, a8 Mackenzie 
was coming to visit you, you were anxious to oblige the young 
lady }—(Witness smiled assent.) 

49. Cuartorrs M‘Laan, examined by the Sonicrror-GENERAL C. M‘Lean: 
—J was cook in Mr. Smith’s family. I was there six mouths 
up to last Whitsunday. I have left now. I never saw any 
gentleman visit Miss Smith without the knowledge of her family. 
T was not aware any one did so. She never gave me letters 
to L’Angelier, and I never knew of her receiving such letters. 
I never saw any letters come to Mr. Smith’s house addressed to 
Miss Bruce, at Row. I remember one night last spring remain- 
ing in the kitchen for some time with Christina Haggart, who 
asked me to do so. ‘The reason she gave was that some 
person was speaking with Miss Smith. I can’t say I heard 
Miss Smith in the passage while I was in the kitchen. — I 
afterwards heard her going into her bedroom, and then Christina 
Haggart and I went to our room. I remember Sunday, 22nd 
March. Christina was unwell and kept her bed. 1 was upstairs 
at family worship, and left Miss Smith in the dining-room. I 

135 


C. M‘Lean 


D. Mackenzie 


J. Galloway 


Mary Tweedle 


Madeleine Smith. 


did not see her afterwards. I heard nothing during that night 
to attract my attention. 

By the Duan or Facuttr—I went to bed nearer eleven than 
ten o'clock that night. 

50. Duncan Mackenzim, examined by the Soxricrror-GENERAL 
—I was married to Christina Haggart a short time ago. I 
was visiting her on Sunday, 22nd March. I left her about 
ten o’clock, by back door and back gate. I did not hear 
if the gate was secured after I left. I used to visit Christina 
when the family lived in India Street. Christina pointed out 
a gentleman to me at the back door of the house. She did 
not tell me his name. I never saw him again. 

Cross-examined by the Dzan or Facutty—lI saw him at the 
back door of the house. I was coming up to the house, and 
saw him standing. He asked me if I was going into the house, 
and I said yes. He asked me jf I knew Christina, and if I 
would ask her to come out and speak to him. I asked her. 


and she went.” I was present when they met, but did not hear 


what was said. I saw them talking together, and was not 
jealous about them, although Christina was afraid I might be. 
I received a letter signed “M. Smith,” saying it was her friend 
I had seen, and therefore she hoped nothing would arise between 
Christina and me. 

51. James GauLoway, examined by the Lorp Apvocatr—lI 
live at 192 St. George’s Road, Glasgow. I knew M. L’Angelier 
by sight; he lived next door to a relation of mine, and I saw 
him several times. I remember Sunday, 22nd March. I saw 
L’Angelier that night about nine o’colock. He was in Sauchiehall 
Street, going east, in the direction of Blythswood Square, and 
about four or five minutes’ walk from there. He was walking 
rather slowly. 

52. Mary Tweepin, examined by the Lorp Apvocats—I was 
servant to Mrs. Parr, who keeps a lodging-house in Terrace 
Street, St. Vincent Street, Glasgow. I knew M. L’Angelier, 
who sometimes came to Mrs. Parr’s to see a Mr. M‘Alester who 
lodged there. I remember Sunday, 22nd March; I saw 
L’Angelier that night at twenty minutes past nine o’clock. He 
called and asked for Mr. M‘Alester, but he was not at home. 
He wore a light top-coat and a Balmoral bonnet. Those shown 
me are like them. When he found Mr. M‘Alester was not at 
home he halted for a moment, then went away. I went with 
an officer from Mrs. Parr’s to Blythswood Square, and it took 
us five minutes to go there. 

Cross-examined by the Duan or Facutty—Terrace Street is 
south and east from Blythswood Square. L’Angelier did not 
seem much disappointed M‘Alester was not at home. When he 
halted, he seemed as if he would have liked to come in. I 
did not ask him to. 


136 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


53. THomas Kavan, examined by the Lorn Apvocats—I am T. Kavan 


@ night constable in Glasgow. My beat in March last included 
the north and east sides of Blythswood Square, and included 
Mr. Smith’s house. [Shown photograph.] I have seen this 
person more than once. I first saw him about two months 
before I heard of his death. I did not know his name, but I 
heard of the death of L’Angelier. I saw him in Mains Street, 
as well as I can recollect, about eleven o’clock, or between ten 
and eleven. He was standing near a lamp-post at the end 
of the back lane running from Mains Street. When I came 
along the point of the square, I turned along Mains Street, 
and he said, “Cold night, policeman; do you smoke?” I 
said, “ Yes, sir”; and he put his hand in his breast-pocket, 
and gave me two cigars and passed on. He was then not 
more than the breadth of this Court from the wall of Mr. 
Smith’s house. I saw him again, ten or twelve days after the 
first time. He was passing along the garden side by the railings 
on the north side of Blythswood Square, going east towards 
Regent Street. He was passing opposite 5 and 6 Blythswood 
Square ; he was on the side of the gardens. 5 and 6 Blythswood 
Square are west of No. 7, and he was going east. I saw him 
again about a fortnight, or between a fortnight and three 
weeks, before the time I was first examined before the Fiscal. 
He was then at the corner of Regent Street and Mains Street, 
coming towards Blythswood Square. It was early in the night, 
but I can’t positively say when. I should say between nine 
and ten o'clock. I never saw him again. I cannot swear to 
the date, but it was about a fortnight or three weeks before 
I was examined by the Fiscal, which was on 2nd April. 

Cross-examined by the Duan or Facuurr—I was on my beat 
. on Sunday evening, 22nd March. I did not see him that night. 
I am quite sure of that. 

54. Wiiram Youna, examined by the Lorp Apvocatz—I am 
a photographer in Helensburgh. [Shown photograph.] I made 
this photograph of Miss Madeleine Smith. It was done in 
September, 1856, at her desire. 

Rowianp Hit Macvonatp, recalled, identified post-marks on 
various letters. Some of the stampings being illegible, the 
Lord Justice-Clerk urged upon the Post Office authorities the 
desirability of having post-marks more legibly impressed upon 
letters. 

55. Janz Scott Parry or Towers, examined by the Lorp 
Apvocatz—I am a sister of Miss Perry, who lives in Glasgow. 
I know she was acquainted with L’Angelier. I now live in 
England; but in March last my husband and I were living at 
Portobello. I remember L’Angelier coming to pay us a visit. 
I had seen him a year before. He dined with us on Monday, 


137 


W. Young 


J. 8. Towers 


Madeleine Smith. 


J. 8 Towers 16th March. He talked almost the whole time about his health. 


James Towers 


He said something about cocoa and coffee—that he had been 


getting them, that they disagreed with him, and he had beep 
very ill. He said he was in the habit of taking coffee, but was 
not accustomed to cocoa. He spoke of more than two occasions 
on which he had been ill. He remarked that he thought he 
had been poisoned. This was after telling us of the cocoa and 
coffee. Nothing was said about who had poisoned him, and 
no questions were asked. My husband was present. 

To the Dean or Facuury—One of my daughters, Jemima, 
might also be in the room. I think Miss Murray had gone 
away before that was said. Many circumstances make me sure 
that it was Monday, 16th March. It was after asking what 
was the matter with him that he talked of being poisoned. 

56. James Towers, examined by the Lorp Apvocats—I was 
living at Brighton Place, Portobello, last March. I knew 
L’Angelier slightly. I met him once or twice at my sister-in- 
law’s in Glasgow. I recollect his dining with me one day last 
March at Portobello. The conversation turned on his health. 
He said he had had a very violent bilious attack, or jaundice. 
He did not describe how it affected him. He said he had had 
two attacks after taking coffee or cocoa, and that on one occa- 
sion he fell down in his bedroom, and was unable to go to bed; 
and that on another attack he was able to creep to the door 
and knock through to his landlady. He spoke much of this. 
He said he thought he had been poisoned after taking the 
cocoa and coffee. I remarked who should poison him, or what 
object any one could have in poisoning him. I don’t recollect 
if he said anything in reply. He told us he was going back 
to Glasgow, and thence to Bridge of Allan. He looked tolerably 
well. From what he said I understood he had taken the coffee 
on one occasion and cocoa on another, and that on both ooca- 
sions he had been ill. 

Cross-examined by the Dzan or Facuutry—The day he dined 
with me was the Monday before his death—the 16th. He 
appeared in good spirits, and ate heartily. He was of a talka- 
tive turn. He spoke of his complaints; and when we asked 
about Glasgow society he spoke of that; but he spoke a great 
deal of his own sickness. He was very fond of talking about 
himself. I thought him a vain person. There was not much 
vapouring or rash talking on that occasion. I can’t say he was 
a person who spoke much without thinking. 

By the Lorp Apvocatz—He did not say from whom he got 
the cocoa or coffee. 

Re-cross-examined by the Daan or Facotty—He said coffee 
agreed with him, and that he was in the habit of taking it, 
and that he was not surprised at cocoa not agreeing with him. 
as he was not accustomed to it, p 


138 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


57. Mary Artuur Pzrry, examined by the Lorp ApvocaTs— M. A. Perry 
I live at 144 Renfrew Street, Glasgow, and I was acquainted 
with the late M. L’Angelier. I became acquainted with him 
about the end of 1853. We attended the same chapel—St. 
Jude’s. About the spring of 1855 I came to know him 
intimately; the intimacy went on gradually. At that time he 
heard of his brother’s death. He was in very great distress. 
In the early part of that summer he told me he was engaged 
to Miss Madeleine Smith; and I was aware from him, from 
that time forward, of the progress of his attachment and cor- 
respondence. In August, 1855, I was introduced to Miss Smith ; 
he brought her to call on me. After that I received several 
letters from her, and I identify the six shown me. No. 141 is 
a letter from L’Angelier to me; it is dated “ Bridge of Allan, 
20th March.” ‘The last paragraph ise—“I should have come 
to see some one last night, but the letter came too late, so we 
are both disappointed.” I understood that paragraph referred 
to Miss Smith. L’Angelier was frequently at my house, and 
dined with me occasionally. Down to the beginning of 
February, 1857, he had generally good health, but during 
February he seemed not so well as formerly. In the beginning 
of February he said he had heard a report of another gentleman 
paying attentions to Miss Smith. He said Miss Smith had 
written him on the subject. One time she had denied it, and 
another time she had evaded the question. This would be 
some time during February. He dined with me on 17th 
February, and told me that day when he next expected to see 
her—which was to be on the Thursday. The 17th was a 
Tuesday. I did not see him again till 2nd March. He was 
looking very ill then. When he came in he said, “Well, I 
never expected to have seen you again, I was so ill.” He said 
he had fallen on the floor, and been unable to ring the bell. 
He did not say what day that was, but from circumstances I 
knew it was 19th February. He did not tell me he had seen 
Miss Smith on the 19th. He told me of having had a cup of 
chocolate which had made him ill. He told me of that on 
9th March. He took tea with me on 9th March. On tho 2nd 
he said he could not attribute his illness to any cause. On the 
9th he said, “I can’t think why I was so unwell after getting 
that coffee and chocolate from her.” I understood he referred 
to two different occasions; “her” meant Miss Smith. He was 
talking about her at the time. He did not say that the severe 
illness that came on after the coffee or chocolate was the illness 
he had referred to on 2nd March, but I understood so. On 
9th March he was talking of his extreme attachment to Miss 
Smith ; he spoke of it as a fascination. He said, “It is a perfect 
fascination, my attachment to that girl; if she were to poison 
me I would forgive her.” I said, “ You ought not to allow such 


139 


Madeleine Smith. 


M. A. Perry thoughts to pass through your mind; what motive could she 
have for giving you anything to hurt you! ” He said, “I don’t 
know that; perhaps she might not be sorry to be rid of me.” 
All this was said in earnest; but I interpreted the expression 
“to be rid of me” to mean rid of her engagement. From what 
he said there seemed to be some suspicion in his mind as to 
what Miss Smth had given him, but it was not @ serious 
suspicion. I never saw him again alive. On the 9th he spoke 
of her intended marriage. He said he had heard she was 
to be married, but he said he had offered to her some months 
before to discontinue the engagement, but she would not then 
have it broken. Some time afterwards she wished him to 
return her letters, and she would return his. He refused to 
do this, but offered to return the letters to her father. That 
is what he told me. On 23rd March I received a message—“ M. 
L’Angelier’s compliments; he was very ill at Franklin Place, 
and he would be very glad if I would call.” That was about 
ten in the morning. I went about mid-day, and found he was 
dead. I called on Mrs. Smith, and intimated his death to her. 
I saw Miss Smith, but I did not mention it to her. She recog: 
nised me and shook hands, asked me to go into the drawing- 
room, and if I wished to see her mamma. She also asked if 
anything was wrong. I said I wanted to see her mamma, and 
that I would acquaint her with the object of my visit. I did 
not know Mrs. Smith before. I know Mr. Philpot. He met M. 
L’Angelier on 17th February at my house. He met him on 
another occasion about the same time. I had a warm affection 
for M. L’Angelier, and corresponded with him frequently. I 
thought him a strictly moral and religious man. He was a 
regular attender at church. I was very much agitated by the 
sudden shock of hearing of his death. I saw the body, and 
was very much shocked. 

Cross-examined by the Duan or Facuurr—I was not at all 
acquainted with Mr. Smith’s family. When L’Angelier brought 
Miss Smith to see me I knew the correspondence was clandes- 
tine; he told me that when the first engagement was formed 
he wished to tell her father, but she objected; he then asked 
her to tell her father herself, but she objected to that also, 
and he was very much distressed. I knew that he was not 
acquainted with her father or mother; he knew her sister. In 
August, 1855, when she was introduced to me, I knew the 
engagement had existed for a few weeks, but I don’t know how 
long they had been intimate with each other. L’Angelier told 
me he was introduced to Miss Smith at a lady’s house—at Mrs. 
Baird’s. He said he had met her there. I was aware that 
their intimacy was disapproved of by the family, and that the 
engagement was broken off at one time. In one of the notes 
she wrote me, she says her mother had become aware of it. 


140 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


I never knew that her father or mother had abated their dislike M. A. Perry 
of the intimacy. I wrote on one occasion to Miss Smith advising 
her to mention it to her parents. I advised M. L’Angelier not 
to renew the engagement after it was broken till her parents 
were aware of it. He said he intended to do so, that he renewed 
the engagement provisionally, Miss Smith having promised 
on the first opportunity to make her parents aware of it. I 
knew they met clandestinely. I corresponded with both at the 
time. [Shown No. 11 of third inventory for the prisoner.] This 
is a letter which I wrote to L’Angelier, post-mark 7th February, 
1857; it is as follows :— 


Though you have not told me so, dear L’Angelier, that you 
have received such kind cheering notes from Mimi, that you are 
quite comfortable and fl og least, a great deal less sad than 
you were last evening. felt so sorry for you when .you were 
so ill and miserable, and you are solitary in Glasgow, and yet I 
could do nothing to help to cheer you, my kind friend. To-day 
I saw Mimi, with her mother and Bessie—at least, I think it was 
her mother; Mimi looked very well, and I believe she saw me. 
Are you suffering also from your neck? Best wishes for your 
happiness and Mimi’s.”’ 


[Shown No. 20.] Friday night, no post-mark. [Reads.] 


Dear L’ ANGELIER,—Pray don’t think of taking the trouble of 
calling at my aunt’s. I feel uncertain of the reception that you 
might receive. I ought to have spoken of this yesterday, but 
had such a bad headache that I was quite stupid. I enclose a 
note for Mimi. Among my forgets yesterda omitted to ask 
whether I should take notice of her birthday; but I am very fond 
of all these days, and you are so also, and therefore I wish her 
many happy returns. You are, however, quite at liberty to put 
it in the fire if you are inclined to incendiarism. I shall think 
of you both on the 19th, for I wish you very good news and a 
happy evening. I wish you many happy returns of her birthday.” 


The reception I there refer to has no reference to Miss Smith ; 
it refers to a relative of mine who did not fancy him. [Shown 
No. 15 of same inventory.] This letter has no date, but it was 
written early last January. [Reads.] 

My Dear L’Anor.ier,—As I must be out on Monday forenoon, 
and may be engaged in the evening with a friend from Edinburgh 
who has come to town for a few days, will you defer your visit till 
Tuesday? I had wished to send a message to Mimi last time I 
saw you, but I had no time for a word. You are, I hope, now 
enjoying a very happy interview. I am longing to hear from you. 
Meanwhile, believe me, &c. 6 

Cross-examination resumed—The interview refers to Miss 
Smith. That I knew was a clandestine interview. L’Angelier 
was in the habit of writing to me. Our correspondence went 
on for perhaps two years. Very ofteri my note did not require 
an answer. It might be asking him to come to tea or call ; 
latterly we addressed each other by our Christian names. I 
addressed him by his surname, and he addressed me “ Dear 


141 


Madeleine Smith. 


M.A. Perry Mary” or “My dear Mary,” never “Dearest Mary.” I was 


first introduced to him by a lady now resident in England— 
Miss Philpot. I knew nothing of his relations but what he 
would tell me. I knew his mother lived in Jersey; I never 
inquired what her occupation was. He had two sisters, and a 
brother who died some time before. I don’t know that I ever 
inquired what his occupation was. I don’t think I was in 
the habit of meeting him in other houses in Glasgow than my 
own. I have said that circumstances enabled me to fix an 
illness of his on 19th February. I remember that he said 
he did not go to the office on a certain day after that, but that 
he went on the Saturday; that fixed it for a Thursday, and I 
knew it was not the last Thursday of February. His second 
illness was in the last week of February, therefore the first 
illness was on the 19th. I did not recollect the 19th when I 
was first examined, but it was suggested to me by the Fiscal’s 
amanuensis. I recollect it now, but not from that. The 
amanuensis said the 19th was the date, mentioned in his pocket 
book, of his first illness. That was on 4th June. Till he 
told me, I did not recollect the 19th as the day, but I recalled 
it some days afterwards. When I saw L’Angelier on 2nd 
March, he described the nature of his illness. He said he 
was so ill that he fell on the floor and was unable to call for 
help till next morning; that it was unlike anything he had 
ever felt before; that he was conscious, but unable to move. 
He spoke of his second illness as a bilious attack or jaundice. 
It was before 9th March that he told me of the discontinuance 
of the engagement; it might have been in the latter part of 
January or some part of February. He told me then that some 
months before, imagining Miss Smith rather cool, he offered 
to break off the engagement, but he was not anxious to do so. 
He said this was some months previous. She would not accept 
this. He said that afterwards she proposed a return of the 
letters on both sides. That might be about February. He 
said he refused to do that, but that he offered to give the 
letters to her father. I did not understand the meaning to be 
that he threatened to show the letters to her father. I under- 
stood that to be a consent by him to give up the engagement, 
and he so represeated it. Miss Smith would not accede to that 
proposal, and the engagement remained unbroken at Miss Smith’s 
desire. That was on the last occasion that he referred to it. 

By the Lorp Justicu-CLerx—tThe Sheriff was not present when 
the Fiscal’s clerk suggested the date already mentioned to me. 

The Lorp Justica-CLerxk—lIt turns out, then, that you were 
examined by the prosecutor privately, with no Sheriff present 
to restrain improper interference, and your recollection is cor- 
rected by the prosecutor’s clerk—a pretty security for testimony 
brought out in this sort of way. 


142 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


Mr. Cunningham, for whose attendance a warrant had been 
issued, was here brought up. 

The Lorp Justice-Cizrx—The Court desire to know whether 
you have had a copy of the print of the letters? 

Mr. CunnincHam—lI have had no copy of the letters. 

_ The Lorp Justice-Ciarx—Then we have to ask if your object 
is to publish to-morrow letters, whether they are used at this 
trial or not? 

Mr. CunnincHau—Certainly not; only the letters produced. 

The Lozp Justice-Cierk— You have had no copy of them? 

Mr, CunnincHam—I have no copy, and have had no copy. 

The Lorp Justics-Cisrx—And you are not preparing or 
intending to publish any except what may be read in Court? 

Mr. ConninaHau—Certainly not. 

The Lorp Justics-Ciarx remarked that the circular was very 
incautiously worded, and dismissed Mr. Cunningham. 

The Lorp ApvocatTa then proposed that the letters should 
be read. 

Mr. Youne submitted that it would be unfair and unsafe to 
admit the letters, in consequence of the manner in which they 
had been recovered, and the mode in which they had been 
kept. They were recovered and kept by the Procurator-Fiscal 
jastead of by the Sheriff-clerk. 

The Souicrron-GunzraL held that the practice was different 
from that stated by Mr. Young, and that in this case the 
Procurator-Fiscal had held the documents under the orders of 
the Lord Advocate. 

After hearing the Lord Advocate and Dean of Faculty, 

The Court decided that the objection to receiving and reading 
the letters was aot well founded. 

The Lorp Justice-Cizrx, in the course of his ruling, remarked 
that when, on the application of the Procurator-Fiscal, a warrant 
was entrusted by the Sheriff to officers for execution, a report 
of the execution of the warrant should be made to the Sheriff. 
He should have thought that in this case the Sheriff would 
have asked for the return to the warrant granted, and for an 
inventory of the documents. He was surprised that this had 
not been done, and if it was not done because it was never done, 
then he would say that the sooner such a loose practice was 
corrected the better, and the execution of the warrant for 
recovery returned to the judge from whom it issued. His 
lordship also remarked that the Lord Advocate had in this 
case acted with a degree of anxiety for the interests of the 
defender which he had never known before; for he had given 
copies of all the letters before the indictment was served, and 
in a form which saved all difficulty and loss of time in decipher- 
ing them on the part of the prisoner's agents. 


The Court then adjourned till next morning. st 
4 


Dr. Robert 
Christison 


Fifth Day—Saturday, 4th July, 1857. 
The Court met at ten o’clock. 


Dr. Roszrt Curistison, recalled, and examined by the Lorp 
Apvocate—It would be very unsafe to use arsenic as a cosmetic 
by putting it in a basin of water and washing the face with it. 
I should expect inflammation, particularly of the eyes and nostrils 
and mouth, to follow its use. It would be difficult to keep it out 
of the eyes and nostrils, and once in, it being rather an insoluble 
solid, it would be very difficult te wash out. I never heard 
of its being so used. A preparation of arsenic is sometimes 
used as a depilatory; the old name for it—Rusma Turcorum— 
signifies that it was first used by the Turks; it essentially 
consists of sulphuret of arsenic and sulphuret of lime; but it is 
only used for removing hair, not for the complexion. 

The Lorp Apvocate—In reference to the statistics of murder 
and suicide, you were asked the other day whether or not, in 
the case of a person committing suicide, a greater amount of the 
destructive element is used than is necessary to accomplish 
that object? 

The Dugan or Facutty objected to this as being substantially 
a new examination of the witness, and the question was not 
pressed. 

Cross-examined by the Dzan or Faocutry—The comnion 
arsenic of the shops may be said to be an insoluble solid. It 
is not absolutely insoluble. If put in cold water without 
repeated agitation, the water will dissolve 1-500th part, but 
if the water is boiled with it in the first instance it will retain 
when cold a 32nd part. About 1-500th part is all that cold 
water dissolves, if it is put in cold water originally. It is the 
worst medium to hold arsenic in suspension. If arsenic were 
put into a basin with cold water, the finer part would remain 
some time in suspension, and the coarser part would fall rapidly 
down. Not much would remain in solution without agitation 
of the water. 

The Dran or Facutty—Supposing the water were used to 
wash the face or hands without stirring up the arsenic from 
the bottom? 

Wrrngss—Little would be in suspension, but I can only say 
that I should not like to use it myself. 

The Daan or Facuttry—That is quite a different affair. 


144 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


Wirnass—I think any person who would use it so would do Dr. Robert 
a very imprudent thing. Christison 

By the Lorp Apvocarm—Arsenic is specifically heavier than 
water; the fine part of the powder will remain in suspension, 
but not long. 

By the Dean or Facutty—I can’t tell how long it would 
remain in suspension. Speaking on mere hazard, I should say 
that in the course of three or four minutes scarcely any of 
the arsenic would remain in suspension, but I am speaking 
without experiment. 

To the Lorp Justice-CLerk—There has been a great dispute 
as to whether arsenic has taste, and after the strong observa- 
tions I published on the subject, a much greater authority 
than myself—Professor Orfila—still adhered to the opinion that 
it is acrid. All I can say on the subject is, that experiments 
were made by myself and two others, as far as it was possible 
to make experiments with so dangerous a substance, and we 
found that the taste was very slight indeed—if anything, 
sweetish, and all but imperceptible; and no doubt large quan- 
tities have been swallowed repeatedly without any taste having 
been observed. I and two other scientific men tried it repeatedly 
with great care, and all agreed in that opinion. Orfila, of 
Paris, still maintains that it has an acrid taste. He alludes 
to my observations, and maintains that it has a taste. But I 
think I should add it has always struck me as very strange that 
neither Orfila, nor any others who doubted those observations 
of mine, have actually made the experiments themselves. 
Orfila does not state that he has done so; he merely states 
his belief, notwithstanding what I have stated. Of those, who 
have swallowed arsenic, some have observed no taste, some a 
sweetish taste, some an acrid taste. If there is anything per- 
ceptible in the taste, it is not such that it could be detected 
in cocoa or coffee. I think it very desirable that my observa- 
tions on this subject should be thoroughly understood. It has 
been found that some persons who have taken arsenic largely 
without knowing at the time what they were taking observed 
no taste, some a sweetish taste, others an acrid taste. But in 
regard to the acrimony there are two fallacies—(1) That they 
may describe as an acrid taste a mere roughness, which is not 
properly taste at all; and (2) the burning effects slowly 
developed by the action of the poison afterwards. 

By the Duan or Facuirry—lIn this case last spoken of, the 
arsenic was given sometimes with simple fluids, such as coffee 
and water, and sometimes in thicker substances, such as 
soup, and I think there is an instance where the roughness 
was observed in the case of porridge. But I do not think the 
vehicle, as far as I remember, had any influence on the effect 
produced. 


K 145 


Madeleine Smith. 


Dr. Robert The D#AN OF Facunty—Can you tell me what the quantities 
Christison were in this case? 

Wirness—No. 

The Dsan or Facurry—You have no idea of them? 

Wirtness—Not the slightest. 

The Dzan or Facuuty—Are these cases in which you were 
personally concerned? > 

Wirness—I presume you mean very much as I am now in this 
case; but, strange to say, I have only actually seen two living 
cases of persons who had taken arsenic. 

The Duan or Facurty—You don’t think that in any of these 
cases you saw the patient in life? 

Wirness—In two cases only I did. 

The Dan or Facunty—Two of those which you last 
mentioned? 

Wirness—No; I refer to cages of murder, because in cases of 
suicide persons know very well what they are taking. 

The Duan or Facutty—But you referred to some observa- 
tions in corroboration of your general view. I want to know if 
these cases came under your personal observation, or are merely 
recorded ? 

Wirness—Not one came under my personal observation. 

The Dzan or Facutty—I see the opinion of Orfila is ex- 
pressed in these words—“ The taste is acrid, not corrosive, but 
somewhat styptic.” 

Wrrness—I think that is pretty nearly a correct translation, 
but I doubt the translation of the word “acrid.” The French 
word for acrid is “dere.” Orfila’s expression is “ dpre,” which 
rather means “ rough.” 
~The Duan or Facuuty—lIn the first volume, at page 377, the 
term used is “ dpre.” 

Wirnzss—I think that is mistranslated “ acrid.” 

The Dean or Facuury—In the same volume, page 357, his 
statement is “ dcre.” 

Wirness—That I have not observed, but his observation which 
I quote is expressly in reference to the statement which I myself 
made, and he says that, notwithstanding the statements of Dr. 
Christison, the taste of arsenic is “dpre”—I don’t recollect 
the rest of the sentence. 

The Dgan or Facuuty—Orfila is a very high authority in the 
chemical world? 

Witness—Undoubtedly. 

The Dzan or Facutry—None higher, I suppose? 

Wirness—In medico-legal chemistry, none. 

The Duan or Facutry—You mentioned some experiments you 
had personally made to solve this question, and in combination 
with two other scientific gentlemen. Would you tell me the 


146 


ee ee 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


nature of these experiments? Did you taste the arsenic Dr. Robert 
yours If? Christison 

Wirness—We all tasted it both in the solid and liquid state, 
and we held it as far back along the tongue as we could with 
safety, so as to enable us to spit it out afterwards. We allowed 
it to remain for a couple of minutes, and then spat it out and 
washed the mouth carefully. 

The Dgan or Fiacuttr—Give me some idea of how much 
arseni would be in the mouth? 

Wirness—I think about one or two grains. 

The Dzan or Facutty—Not more? 

Witness—My late predecessor, Dr. Duncan, took three grains, 
and kept it for a long time—about three minutes. I thought he 
was imnprudent; but he agreed entirely with my statement. 

By the Lorp Apvocarz—It had not an acrid taste, un- 
doubtedly. In a very large majority of the cases I have referred 
to the quantity taken was not ascertained even within a pre 
sumption. 

To the Lorp Justice-CLerx—Orfila surrendered his opinion 
that there was arsenic naturally in the bones of the human 
body ; he was not aware, at the time of his earlier statement, of 
one of the materials used in his analysis being subject to 
adulteration. 

To the Dzan or Facutty—lIt is quite new to me that it was 
thought at one time that there was arsenic in the human 
stomach naturally. 

The Lorp Apvocats then proposed that the letters should be 
read; and this was done by the Clerk of Court. A copy of the 
letters read will be found in the Appendix. 

The Lorp Apvocats then proposed to give in the deceased’s 
pocket-book, and to have the entries in it read. He maintained 
that he had now laid a sufficient foundation for these 
memoranda. The handwriting of the entries was proved to 
have been L’Angelier’s, and various circumstances bad been 
proved to have occurred on the very days under date of which 
they were entered in this book. He therefore submitted that 
these entries were statements by L’Angelier himself of what he 
did on these days, and that the pocket-book should be received. 

Mr. Youne argued that the book was irregularly kept, that 
the entry of the occurrence on the 22nd had been proved by 
several witnesses to be inaccurate, and that, though some of the 
matters entered under dates did occur under those dates, there 
was no guarantee that they were all so. So far as he had been 
able to discover, there was no case in which such a book had 
been received as evidence of facts mentioned in it. If such a 
case existed it would no doubt be founded on on the side of the 
prosecution; but if it did not, he submitted that the present 


147 


Madeleine Smith. 


was not a case of the kind in which this Court should begin 
the admission of such evidence. 

The Sozictror-GenzRat said he was not sure whether prisoner’s 
counsel had stated very precisely the principles of law on which 
they contended this document should be excluded. The book 
was founded on as containing indicia bearing with greater or 
less importance on the question before the jury. It was difficult 
to conceive on what principles of law it could be rejected. It 
was truly secondary evidence, and only tendered to the effect 
that a man now dead put certain things on paper. It was 
clearly analogous to secondary evidence of what was said by 
persons now dead. All that the witness deponed to in such 8 
case was that the deceased made the statement, and did so clearly 
and intelligibly. It was contended by prisoner's counsel that 
the book, being irregularly kept, could not be a diary; its 
irregularity, however, did not prevent its being a proper diary. 
The entries in it were made in the shape in which the book 
intended they should be made, +.c., in the spaces ruled off and 
set apart for that purpose. Whether unimportant entries were 
made one day or more important ones another day, still they 
were a written statement by deceased that certain things took 
place on certain days. Such evidence could not be excluded as 
hearsay. The same objections as to falsehood on the part of 
the narrator as had been urged here applied also to hearsay evi- 
dence of what was said by a person deceased. That this 
evidence, if received, would imperil the life of the prisoner 
would be equally applicable to the evidence of L’Angelier him- 
self had he been alive. Where you have not the man himself 
alive, you must take every scrap of his writing that can be 
found. 

The Lorp Jusmce-CierkK—We had an illustration of the con- 
trary in this very case, where Miss Perry was asked whether 
certain expressions nade use of by the deceased were made 
seriously ; that is an answer to the analogy as to hearsay. As 
regards entries of this sort, no one can tell whether they were 
made seriously, or for what purpose. Besides, is there any 
case whatever on record where a book of this sort has been 
admitted as proof against the prisoner with regard to particular 
expressions said to have been made use of by the deceased? 

The Souictror-GeneRat—lIt cannot be said here that these 
entries are not made seriously, or that they are so startling 
and extraordinary as to be incredible. As regards authority, 
thers may be no decided case precisely ruling this point, but 
it is believed to be matter of familiar practice that any writings 
that can be found of dead persons are receivable in evidence. 

The Dzan or Facutty said this was not only a most important, 
but also a new question. It was confessed on the other side 
that there was no direct authority on the point. An argument 


148 


ae et 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


migut be raised on the general principle and on analogous 
cases ; but there was no case of an ordinary pocket memorandum 
book being used against a prisoner to fix his or her presence at 
a particular place at a particular time—to prove, for example, 
that in the present case L’Angelier, on the night of 22nd 
February, was out of his lodgings, and was in Blythswood 
Square. He thought there was evidence to the contrary, and 
so he should argue to the Jury; but at present he put it no 
higher than that there was no evidence that he was out of his 
lodgings on that evening. Now, this book was proposed to be 
put in evidence to show that the prisoner and L’Angelier came 
together on one of the days charged, viz., on that 22nd February. 
Even if the pocket journal had been ever so well kept, it was 
necessary to be very cautious in introducing such a precedent. 
It was impossible fully to argue this case on general principles 
without particular reference to the book itself. It was not a 
regular journal. It began with Ist January, 1857. Now, 
L’Angelier lived eighty or eighty-one days of 1857, and there 
were just twenty-six entries in all. That was not a regular 
journal. It altogether ceased on 14th March. There was 
nothing to bear on any of the events immediately preceding his 
death. The book was kept in the most loose and careless way. 
An entry was made on one day which was clearly the wrong day. 
It was not kept as @ daily journal. When the fancy struck him 
he made an entry, but when it did not he made no entry. But 
the SolicitorGeneral argued—and this seemed his only argu- 
ment—that this was good secondary evidence. Because the 
statement of the man would have been receivable had he been 
alive, therefore,-he argued, these entries ought to be admitted 
now that he is dead. But there was a manifest and important 
distinction. In the one case we had the security of an oath. 
Here (1) we had no oath, and (2) inquiry was excluded as to 
when, and with what object, these entries were made. Both 
these existed in proper secondary evidence. The manner of 
the witness and the impression the statement made on the 
hearer were most important. Secondary evidence was subject 
also to this: qualification, that a statement made for one 
purpose was not inadmissible for another purpose. Even de- 
positions of witnesses examined on oath to support a particular 
purpose will not be available for another purpose, as was held 
in the case of Corrennie. In the case of the so-called Earl of 
Stirling, certain documents and pieces of evidence were founded 
on which purported to be by persons deceased, but that was to 
prove that they had been forged by the prisoner. But it 
was also the bounden duty of the prosecutor to corroborate as 
many of the entries as it was in his power to do. He had not 
done so, but had contented himself with three or four. Further, 
and as showing very strongly the incorrectness of the entries, 
149 


Madeleine Smith. 


reference might be made to one, under date 5th March—“ Saw 
Mimi, gave her a note, and received one.” This was contra- 
dicted by letter 119, which was put in evidence, on the ground 
that the prisoner’s letter of 5th March was an answer to it; 
whereas, according to the entry, they were exchanged one for 
another. 

The Court then retired ; and on their return 

The Lorp Justicz-CLarxk intimated that they would give their 
decision on Monday morning. 

The Lorp Apvoocats stated that, in the event of the memoran- 
dum-book being received, he would close his case, with the 
exception of one witness, named Anderson; but in the event of 
the book being rejected, he would reserve his right to call 
further evidence. 


150 


Sixth Day—Monday, 6th July, 1857. 


The Court met at ten o'clock. 


Their lordships proceeded to give judgment on the admis- 
sibility of L’Angelier’s memorandum-book. The Lord Justice 
Clerk and Lord Handyside held that it was not admissible ; 
Lord Ivory differed. 

The Lorp Jusvice-Cierx said he did not know a point of 
greater importance to have occurred in any criminal trial, and 
the Court unfortunately had no assistance from any authorities. 
The admission of hearsay evidence was an established rule in 
the law of Scotland, but under the restrictions and conditions 
fully stated by him in the case of Gordon*—restrictions and 
conditions which went in many circumstances to the entire 
rejection of the evidence, and were not merely objections to its 
weight and credibility. Certain memoranda made by the de- 
ceased in the present case were proposed to be admitted, in which 
certain things are said to have occurred that went directly to 
the vital part of the charge against the prisoner. Before evi- 
dence could ks received and allowed to go to a jury, it must be 
shown that it was legally competent and admissible; and this 
rule applied to civil as well as criminal cases. In the ordinary 
case of hearsay evidence the testimony of the witnesses exam- 
ined set forth the circurnstances under which the deceased’s 
statements were made—whether seriously or casually; whether 
any motive appeared to be influencing him; whether in answer 
to questions, and, if so, with what purpose the questions were put; 
in short, imperfect as such evidence was, many tests could be 
applied to it, which diminished the risk of error, and by means 
of it important evidence was often obtained. The observations 
just made had reference to statements by the deceased which 
were not part of the res gestae of the crime or transaction. 
There were no such means of testing the entries or jottings 
by the deceased as to meetings with the prisoner, or of facts 
following such meetings, made in pencil, and so short as to 
leave their meaning unexplained or doubtful. It was of vital 
importance, in considering the admissibility of this evidence, 
to ascertain in what circumstances, and if possible from what 
motive, and at what periods these entries were made. It was 
a remarkable fact that there was no entry at all before 11th 


February; and at that very time her purpose of breaking off 
the engagement with him, and of demanding back her letters, 
* Gordon v. Grani (Second Division), 12th November, 1850, Reported. 
in 13 Dunlop, page 1. The Lord Justice-Clerk’s observations on hearsay 
evidence will be Yound on page 11 of the report 
151 


Madeleine Smith. 


had been communicated to the deceased; and his purpose and 
resolution not to give up the letters, but to keep her to her 
engagement, were avowed and made known, as it appeared 
from the evidence before that date. He therefore had a purpose 
in writing these memoranda—obviously to endeavour to 
strengthen his hold over the prisoner, not only by refusing to 
give up the letters at that time and afterwards, but probably 
by holding out that he had a diary as to their interviews and 
communications, so as to try to effect his object of preventing 
her marriage, and of terrifying her into giving up her engage 
ment with Mr. Minnoch. His lordship said he made this 
observation not merely with regard to the weight and credibility 
of these entries, but also as of importance in regard to their 
admissibility, because in the case of hearsay evidence one 
could ascertain from the witnesses tue time when the statement 
was made, all the circumstances and all the apparent motives 
which could be collected as to the statement being made by the 
deceased. But when one could not know with certainty the 
man’s motive in making the entry, or perhaps, as in this case, 
could perceive reasons why he made the entry as against her, 
intending to prejudice her in one way, not, of course, with 
reference to the prospect of such a trial as this, but with refer- 
ence to her engagement, his lordship thought it could not be 
said that this came before the Court as a statement recorded 
by him as to indifferent matters, or as to matters in which he 
might not have had a strong purpose in making the statement. 
Further, it was the record of a past act. But suppose a man 
had entered in his diary—and the point was, whether such an 
entry was legal evidence of what did occur—that he had 
arranged to meet A B at such a place, and he was there found 
murdered, that was a future thing; and his lordship did not 
say that would not be admissible in evidence, leaving its effect 
to the jury. He felt the force of what the Lord Advocate had 
so forcibly stated, that supposing in this book there had been 
an entry that this man purchased arsenic, would not that have 
been available in favour of the prisoner? But he thought a 
sound distinction could be drawn between that case and the 
present. What was proposed was to tender in evidence a thing 
altogether unprecedented according to the research of the bar 
and bench, of which there was no trace or indication in any 
book whatever, viz., that a memorandum made by the deceased 
shall be legal proof of a fact against the panel in a charge of 
murder. It was no answer to say that it might not be sufficient 
proof, but still should go to the jury. The first point was, 
whether it was legal evidence? His lordship said he was unable 
to admit such evidence; it might relax the sacred rules of 
evidence to an extent that the mind could hardly contemplate. 
One could not tell how many documents might exist and be 
152 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


found in the repositories of a deceased person; a man might 
have threatened another, he might have hatred against him, 
and ke determined to revenge himself, and what entries might 
he not make in a diary for this purpose? As the point was 
perfectly new, and as it would be a departure from what his 
lordship considered to be an important principle in the admini- 
stration of justice, he thought this evidence could not be 
received. 

Lord Hanpysive said. that the Crown sought to have a pocket- 
book received, in which certain entries were made opposite to 
certain days of the week—from 11th February to 14th March— 
a period having reference only to the first and second charges 
in the indictment. The special point was whether the entries 
of certain dates—two in number—were to be read and made 
evidence for the prosecution as regarded the first and second 
charges. The general question to be determined was, whether 
memoranda by a deceased person, setting forth incidents as 
having occurred, of particular dates, and connected with the 
name of an individual, were admissible as evidence to support 
a charge in a criminal case? The point was new, and of great 
difficulty. Had the writer of the memoranda been living they 
could not have been made evidence; they might have been used 
in the witness-box to refresh the memory, but the evidence 
would still be parole. What would be regarded would be the 
oath of the witness to facts, time, and person; and, if distinct 
and explicit, though resting on memory alone, the law of 
evidence would be satisfied, irrespective of any aid by 
memoranda or létters, though made at the time. It was the 
oath of the witness to the verity of his oral statement in the 
box that the law required and regarded. But if the writer 
had died, was that circumstance to make such memoranda 
thenceforth admissible as evidence by their own weight? Were 
they, the handwriting being proved, to be treated as written 
evidence? That would be a bold proposition. Death could not 
change the character originally impressed upon memoranda, and 
convert them from inadmissible into admissible writings. As 
private memoranda seen by no eye but the writer's, they were sub- 
ject to no check upon their accuracy, whether arising from inno- 
cent mistakes, or from prejudice or passing feeling. His lordship 
did not say that they were to be supposed to be false and dis- 
honest, for it would be idle to falsify and invent when memoranda 
were intended to be kept secret by the writer. But it was quite 
conceivable that vanity might lead to statements being made 
wholly imaginary, with a view to the subsequent exhibition of 
the book, and were its admissibility as evidence set up by death, 
it might become a fearful instrument of calumny and accusation. 
His lordship was referring to private memoranda, diaries, and 
journals, taken in the abstract ; and as to other writings of a 


153 


Madeleine Smith. 


deceased person, such as letters, he did not say these might 
not become admissible as evidence by reason of death, though 
during life they could not be used. But here the principle sug- 
gested itself that these writings had been communicated. before 
death to at least another person; and they thus became 
analogous to words spoken—to representations made and con- 
versations held—by a deceased person, the proper subject of 
hearsay evidence. It was contended that the principle on which 
hearsay evidence was admitted should extend to anything 
written by a deceased person. It was assumed to be a declara- 
tion in writing of what, if spoken, would have been admissible 
on the testimony of the person hearing it. And on a first 
view it would seem that the written mode was superior to the 
oral, from the greater certainty that no mistake was committed 
as to the words actually used. But this would be a fallacious 
pround to rest on; for words written would require to be taken 
as they stood, without explanation or modification; whereas 
words spoken to another were subject to the further inquiry by - 
the party addressed as to the meaning of the speaker, and to 
a sort of cross-examination, however imperfect, to which the 
hearer might put the speaker in order to a better or thorough 
understanding of the subject of communication, the object of 
making it, and the grounds on which the speaker's statements 
rested. And all these things might be brought out in the 
examination of the witness who came into Court to give his 
hearsay evidence. The value of hearsay evidence, and the 
weight to be given to it, came thus to depend much on the 
account the witness gave of the circumstances under which the 
communication was made to him—as to the seriousness of the 
statement, and what followed upon it in the way of inquiry and 
reply. A mere writing, in the way of memorandum or entry 
in a book, in the sole custody of the writer till his death, could 
be subject to no such tests. Its very nature showed that it 
was not intended for communication. It might be an idle, 
purposeless piece of writing, or it might be a record of un- 
founded suspicions and malicious charges, treasured up by 
hostile and malignant feelings in a moody, spiteful mind. These 
views impressed his lordship strongly with the danger of admit- 
ting a private journal or diary as evidence to support a criminal 
charge. He took up the question as a general point. If he 
were to confine himself to the special and peculiar circumstances 
of this case he would see much perhaps to vindicate the Court 
in the reception of the evidence tendered. There was to be 
found, in the letters which had already been made evidence, 
much to give corroboration or verification to some at least of - 
the entries in the pocket-book. But he felt compelled to close 
his mind against such considerations, and to look, above all, 
to a general, and therefore safe, rule by which to be guided. 


154 


ay 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


_ He had come therefore to be of opinion that the production 
tendered as evidence in the case in support of the first and 
second charges should be rejected. 

Lord Ivory said the opinions just given had relieved his mind 
of a burden of responsibility under which he had laboured, and 
which he was ill able to bear. He had given the most anxious, 
serious, and repeated consideration to this matter. He had 
found little or nothing in the way of authority, and no dicta so 
precisely bearing on this case as to be of any avail. But, 
judging in the abstract, applying the rules as applied to other 
cases, endeavouring to find a principle by a comparison of the 
different classes and categories into which evidence had been 
distributed, and in which evidence had been received, he felt 
himself totally unable to come to a conclusion that the evidence 
of this document should be excluded from the jury. As his 
opinion could not in the least degree influence the judgment, he 
should be sorry to add anything that should even seem to be 
intended to detract from the authority of that judgment now ; 
given ; least of all should he be disposed to follow such a course 
in a capital case, where the judgment was in favour of the 
prisoner. He would content himself, therefore, with simply 
expressing his opinion. It appeared to him that this docu- 
ment should have been admitted valeat quantum, and that the 
jury should have considered its weight and credibility and value. 

The Lonp ApvocaTs then put in evidence the following portion 
of letter No. 79, viz.: 


Monday. 

If P. and M. go, will you not, sweet love, come to your Mimi? 
Do you think I would as sb if I saw danger in the house? No, 
love, I would not. I shall let you in; no one shall see you. We 
can make it late—twelve, if you please, You have no long walk. 
No, my own beloved, my sweet dear Emile. Emile, I see your 
sweet smile. I hear you say you will come and see your Mimi, 
clasp her to your bosom, and kiss her, call her your own pet, your 
wife. Emile will not refuse me. . . . I need not wish you a 
merry Christmas, but I shail wish that we may spend the next 
together, and that we shall then be happy. 

58. Mrs. Javzsr ANDERSON, examined by the Lorp ApvocaTs J. Anderson 
—I am acquainted with the prisoner. I recollect meeting her 
at a party in my house on 5th February. I met her also at a 
party at Mrs. Wilkie’s shortly before she was at my house. 
She had a necklace on. I asked from whom she had got it. 
She said from Papa. I asked if she had got it from Mr. 
Minnoch, and she denied that. I don’t recollect if I spoke of 
this to anybody. I may have mentioned that I thought she 
got it from Mr. Minnoch. 

The Lorp Apvocats then intimated that this closed the case 


for the Crown. 


Robert Baker 


Madeleine Smith. 


Evidence for Defence. 


The Dzan or Facurry stated that in the course of the examina- 
tion of some of the first witnesses, reference would be made to 
affairs of some little delicacy in which L’Angelier had been 
engaged in some previous part of his life; but he was extremely 
unwilling to drag names before the public in this examination, 
and he hoped his learned friend the Lord Advocate would assist 
him in this. 

1. Rosert Baxgr, examined by Mr. Younc—I am a grocer at 
St. Helen’s, Jersey. I lived in Edinburgh at one time, and acted 
as waiter in the Rainbow Tavern. When there I was acquainted 
with L’Angelier. That was in 1851. He lived in the Rainbow 
between six and nine months, as far as I recollect. He was 
there till the time he went to Dundee. We slept together. The 
tavern was then kept by an uncle of mine, Mr. George Baker. 
L’Angelier’s circumstances were then very bad; he was living 
on Mr. Baker’s bounty—waiting there till he got a situation. I 
thought him a quiet sort of person. I did not know much of 
his ways. I was not much out with him. He was very easily 
excited. He was at times subject to low spirits. I have often 
seen him crying at night. Latterly, before he went to Dundee, 
he told me he was tired of his existence and wished himself 
out of the world. He said so on more than one occasion. I 
remember on one occasion he got out of bed and went to the 
window and threw it up. I rose out of bed and went to him, 
and he said that if I had not disturbed him he would have thrown 
himself out. The windows of the Rainbow are about six 
storeys from the ground—the height of the North Bridge, 
indeed. He was in the habit very often of getting up at night 
and walking up and down the room in an excited state, weeping 
very much. I happened to know that he had at that time 
met with a disappointment in a love matter. He did not tell 
me so himself, but I heard my uncle talk of it. I heard 
L’Angelier speak to other people about it. It was about some 
lady in Fife. 

Mr. Youne—You need not mention names. I think we shall 
be able to speak of her as the lady in Fife. 

Examination continued—He was in distress about not having 
& situation in order to enable him to keep to his engagement 
with her. I did not see him weeping on that subject. When 
he said he would have thrown himself over the window on the 
occasion I have spoken of, he was not crying; he was very cool 
and collected, and did not seem at all excited or agitated when 
I spoke to him. I thought he was in earnest; he had talked 
about it so often before. We were in the habit of taking walks 
together in the morning, before business began. We have 

156 


: 


Evidence for Defence. 


walked to Leith Pier, and when there he said he had a great Robert Baker 
mind to throw himself over, one morning, because he was quite 

tired of his ‘existence. I have seen him reading newspaper 

accounts of suicide, and I have heard him say that here was & 

person who had the courage that he should have had, that he 

wished he had the same courage, or something to that effect. 

Cross-examined by the Lorp Apvocats—I believe he was a 
Jersey man; I met him in Jersey once before I was at the 
Rainbow. He did not come there because I had seen him in 
Jersey. He had been living in Edinburgh before I saw him. 
I had seen him on a visit to Jersey. 1 saw him in Jersey in 
1846, I think. 

Re-examined—I received the letter (No. 1 of prisoner’s inven- 
tory) from L’Angelier at Dundee. It has no date. It was 
shortly after he left the Rainbow. In this letter he says, “I 
never was so unhappy in my life. I wish I had the courage to 
blow my brains out.” 

2.. Wrtt1am Prince Larrp, examined by Mr. Youna—I am a W. P. Laird 
nurseryman in Dundee. I was acquainted with the late Emile 
L’Angelier. I knew him when he was in the service of Dickson & 
Co., Edinburgh, about 1843. In 1852 I took him into my own 
employment in Dundee. He had been away from the Dicksons’ 
before that, and had been in France. He came to me between 
the 12th and 20th January, 1852, on Old Handsel Monday ; and 
he remained till the end of August or lst September. He was 
a very sober young man, and very kind and obliging; rather 
excitable and changeable in his temper, sometimes very melan- 
choly and sometimes very lively. When he came to me in 
January he had a kind of cold; he was unwell, and very dull. 
He did not tell me at first, but shortly afterwards he told me 
that he had been crossed in love. He assisted me in the seed- 
shop chiefly; sometimes he wrought at light work in the 
nursery too. It was a fortnight or a month after he came that 
he said he had been. crossed in love. He told me it was reported 
that the girl was to be married te another, but that he could 
scarcely believe it, because he did not think she could take 
another. I understood that that was because she was pledged 
to him. He told me who she was. [Mr. Youne—I don’t want 
her name.] I believe she was in the middle station of life. 
After this I saw her marriage in the newspapers. I got a letter 
from my brother in Edinburgh, asking if L’Angelier had seen 
in the Scotsman newspaper @ notice of the marriage. L’Angelier 
did see that notice. I know William Pringle. He was my 
apprentice at the time. Either Pringle or some other apprentice 
told me something L’Angelier had done about that matter, which 
led me to speak tohim. I told him I was sorry to see him so 
melancholy and sad, and that I was still more so to hear that 
he had taken up a knife to stab himself. He said very little, 

157 


Madeleine Smith. 


W. P. Laird and was very dull. I said whatI could to soothe him. He said 
he was truly miserable, and that he wished he was out of the 
world, or words to that effect. He was in a very melancholy 
state after this. He was gloomy and moody, and never spoke 
to any one. I had frequent conversations with him—several 
times every day. . 

Mr. Youna—From these conversations, and all you had seen 
of him, do yeu think he had any religious principle about him 
to deter him from committing suicide? 

Witwass—He attended church regularly, but did not show 
anything particular about religion ; but at the same time he was 
very moral, so far as I knew. 

Examination continued—He often told me of being in France 
during the Revolution of 1848. He said he was in Paris at that 
time. He told me he was engaged in the Revolution; he said 
he was a member of the National Guard. He was rather a vain 
man. I don’t recollect his wages with me; he came to me as 
an extra hand when he was out of employment. I said I would 
give him bed and board and something more; I think he got 
bed and board, and 8s. or 10s. a week. 

W. Pringle 3. Wittiam Prinaix, examined by Mr. Youna—I was in the 
service of Mr. Laird, Dundee, in 1852. I knew L’Angelier there. 
We both lived in Mr. Laird’s house. I had frequent conversa- 
tions with L’Angelier. I remember telling him that I heard of 
a certain marriage in the newspapers. I said so in the shop. 
I said that such a lady was married, and he seemed greatly 
agitated. 

Mr. Younc—How did his agitation show itself? 

Witvess—He ran once or twice behind the counter, then he 
took hold of the counter-knife. He did not point it at himself, 
but he held it out. When I stepped forward he put it down 
again. I don’t remember what he said. I don’t think he shed 
tears; I did not observe him crying. He was particularly 
melancholy for some time after this occurrence. He slept with 
me. I was a little afraid he might do himself some mischief. 
I was then sixteen years of age. 

A.W.Smith 4. Anprew Watson Situ, examined by Mr. Youne—I am an 
upholsterer in Dundee. _I was acquainted with L’Angelier when 
he was in Laird’s employment in 1862. We were pretty 
intimate. I was then living at Newport, on the other side of 
the Tay from Dundee. L/Angelier frequently visited me there, 
sometimes coming on a Saturday and staying till Monday. 
When he did so, he and I slept together. I had good oppor- 
tunity of observing his disposition and state of mind. I thought 
he was a very excitable sort of character—often in very high 
spirits, and often in very low spirits. He mentioned a dis- 
appointment in love he had had about that time. He mentioned 
the ludy’s name. He told me they had been engaged for a 

158 


27 ey 


Evidence for Defence. 


number of years, and had loved each other very much; but that A. W. Smith 
it had been broken off, and he felt inclined to destroy him- 
self. He showed me a ring he had got from the lady, with a 
name engraved on it. I think it was her name. He spoke of 
destroying himself. He seemed in a very melancholy spirit, 
and declared he could never be happy again, and that he thought 
he would drown himself. I have a faint remembrance, but I 
am not exactly sure, that he once told me he went to the Dean 
Bridge to throw himself over. It was because this lady had 
jilted him. He did not say what prevented him from throwing 
himself over. Self-destruction was a very frequent subject of 
conversation with him. I thought him serious, though I never 
had any serious apprehension that he would do it. That was 
from want of courage. It was only when he was in his low 
moods that he talked of self-destruction. He told me about 
having been in France at the Revolution, and he told me he 
felt very nervous after that, attributing it partly to the excite- 
ment of the time. He said he frequently thought he heard 
a noise behind him, as if a number of rats were running along. 
When he spoke of the lady who had jilted him he was always 
very excited, and once I remember him crying. He appeared 
to be in great grief. That was the first time he spoke of 
destroying himself; he talked of drowning himself. 

5. Wim ANDERSON, examined by Mr. Youne—I had a W. Anderson 
nursery and seed-shop ‘n Dundee in 1852. I then became 
acquainted with L’Angelier. He sometimes came to ny shop, 
and I saw a good deal of him. I had conversations with him 
two or three times. He was rather of a sanguine disposition ; 
he was excitable, I think, and he had the appearance of vanity; 
his conversation had that character. When women were & 
matter of conversation he. spoke much of that. He boasted of 
his success with ladies. I remember on one occasion parti- 
cularly, in my own house at supper, he told me he was very 
intimate with two ladies in Dundee at the time, and that it 
seemed to him his attachment for them was returned, and that 
they were both very beautiful girls, and worth a considerable 
sum of money. 

The Lorp J ustics-CLERK—Did he mean to say that he had 
been successful in seducing them, or what? 

Wirxess—No, my lord, it was that he loved them, and they 
loved him in return. I did not put this down as a piece of 
bragging ; I thought it was in earnest. 

Mr. Younc—He did boast of being successful in getting ladies 
attached to him; but the same subject was not always spoken 
of. He said he did not know very well what he would do if 
he was jilted, and he said something to the effect that he 
would have revenge on them in some shape or other if they 
did jilt him. He was occasionally very irritable in his disposi- 

159 


Madeleine Smith. 


W. Anderson tion, and on some occasions he sat quite dull without speaking, 


William M,D. 
Ogilvie 


and then he got up all at once in an excited state—that was 
when speaking of any particular subject, such as females. His 
manner and disposition had more of the temperament of the 
French, Italians, or Spaniards than Scotch or English. 

6. Witt1ass M‘Dovaat Oaitvm, examined by Mr. Youne—I 
am an assistant teller in the Dundee Bank. In 1852 I was 
secretary to the Floral and Horticultural Society in Dundee. 
Numbers of the meetings of the society were held in Laird’s 
back-shop. In this way I became acquainted with L’Angelier. 
We became very intimate, and frequently conversed together. 
He was variable in his spirits—very remarkably so. His general 
subject of conversation was ladies. He seemed sometimes vain 
of his success with ladies. He talked of ladies always looking 
at him in passing along the street, and that he had considerable 
success in getting acquainted with ladies. He spoke of their 
falling in love with him. On one occasion J heard him say 
what he would do if he met with a disappointment. He was 
standing speaking in the shop about some sweethearts, and he 
said he would think nothing of taking up a large knife which 
Laird used for cutting twine, and sticking it into himself— 
suiting the action to the word. He was not speaking of any real 
case, but generally. He seemed to me somewhat excited. He 
spoke to me about having been in France, and about travelling 
there. He did not mention at what time he had been there. 
He: said he was travelling, as I understood, with some person 
of distinction. He said he had got charge of all their luggage, 
carriages, and horses—everything in fact. 

The Lorp Justics-CLurx—As a courier? 

Witness—He did not say that. He seemed to have a general 
superintendence. 

Examination continued—He said that on one occasion the 
horses were very much “knocked up,” and that he had given 
them arsenic. He was speaking in English at that time. I was 
not acquainted with the effects of arsenic, and when he mentioned 
the circumstance I was interested in it, and asked him about 
it. He said he gave it to them to make them accomplish the 
journey. I asked what effect this had, and he said it made 
them long-winded, and thus made them able to accomplish a 
feat. I asked if he was not afraid of poisoning them; and he 
said, “Oh no.” So far from doing that, he had taken it him- 
self. 1 told him I should not like to try it, and he seemed to 
say he had not felt any bad effects from it, that there had 
been no danger—or expressions to that effect. He mentioned 
another effect of arsenic, which was that it improved the com 
plexion. I inferred from his remarks that he took it for that 
purpose. He did not exactly say so, but I understood that was 
one of the reasons why he took it. He also said that he com- 

160 


Evidence for Defence. 


plained of pains in his back, and had a little difficulty in breath- William M'D. 
ing, and he said it had a good effect in that way. I am not Osilvie 
sure he ever showed me arsenic. I rather think he did on that 
occasion—that he opened his desk and showed me a paper 
containing something white; he either showed it to me or said 
he had it. At the same time he showed me a very fine specimen 
of copper ore. It was that which led to the conversation about 
arsenic. He said he had got it in travelling, and that led to 
the conversation about the journey and the arsenic. I have 
seen him on more than one occasion eat poppy-seeds in large 
quantities—in handfuls—in the shop. I remarked this the first 
occasion I saw him. Some person had come into the shop for 
it, and when they went away he ate some of it. I expressed 
surprise, and he said that, so far from being dangerous, it was 
much better than filberts, and that he took it in large quan- 
tities. He said he had taken the poppy-seeds in such quantities 
that he had got quite giddy with them. He said he had done 
that when he was in Dickson & Co.’s. 

Cross-examined by the Lorp Apvocars—I first became 
acquainted with L’Angelier in the early part of 1852. He 
talked a good deal of ladies, and what he would do if he were 
jilted. He did not say he had been jilted. I heard of his 
having been jilted, but not from him. We had just one conversa- 
tion about the arsenic. He did not say in what shape he took 
it, or in what quantity. He showed me on that occasion a fine 
piece of copper ore. I had begun a collection of minerals, and 
he said he had a number of specimens in his lodgings, and that 
he would bring me a piece of it. It was in that conversation 
the matter of the arsenic came out. I thought poppy-seeds 
dangerous, because opium is extracted from them. 

To the Lorp Justice-Ciurxk—I can’t say whether he said he 
had frequently given the horses arsenic, or only on one day. 
I think he spoke of having accomplished a feat by giving it 
to them on one occasion. I can’t say he spoke like a foreigner. 
I knew he was a foreigner, but he spoke remarkably good 
English. I think I only heard him speak French on one occa- 
sion. I am quite certain it was arsenic he spoke of. I am sure 
he did not use the French word for the common bere. 


7. Davm Hm, examined by Mr. Youne—I am a market David Hill 
gardener in Dundee. I was in Mr. Laird’s employment when 
L’Angelier was there in 1852. Before L’Angelier came I recollect 
finding a small parcel on a Sunday in a wood on the north side 
of Dundee. I thought it was arsenic. I put it in my pocket 
and brought it to Dundee and inquired about it. A party to 
whom I showed it supposed it to be arsenic. I don’t recollect 
how long this was before L’Angelier came. I spoke to him about 
it after he came; I told him of finding it there, and he told 
me that was nothing strange, and that he used it regularly. 


L 161 


Madeleine Smith. 


David Hill I don’t recollect of anything more passing. He did not say for 
what purpose he used it regularly. I have been trying to 
remember, but I ean’t. 

By the Lorp Apvocats—I have been trying to remember 
since I have been asked about this affair. I was asked about 
it on Saturday last. I told it to Mr. Laird, my late master, 
and Captain Miller, of Glasgow, came to me. He was the 
superintendent of police at Glasgow, but he is now a messenger- 
at-arms. No one was with me when I spoke to L’Angelier about 
this; we were passing along the top of Union Street; no one 
heard what passed between us. He said he used it regularly. 
I did not inquire, and he did not say in what way. 

By Mr. Youne—I was cited as a witness on Monday, last 
week ; I have been thinking about the matter since I was cited. 
I was examined again about it on Saturday. I heard of 
L’Angelier’s death when it occurred ; that did not recall the cir- 
cumstance to me; it did not enter my mind soon after; I don’t 
recollect when it came to my mind, but it was before last 
Saturday. 

The Lorp Justice CLurx—lIf you did not recollect this con- 
versation when you heard of L/Angelier’s death, what brought 
the conversation to your mind? 

Wirnzss—lI did not recollect first about this at all. 

The Lorp Justice-CLurz—Was it any conversation of others 
in Dundee that made you recollect this about arsenic? 

Witnsss—No, sir. 

The Lorp Justice-CLarg—What was it then that brought it 
to your recollection ? 

Wirwass—I can’t answer that question; it came to my mind, 
and then I recollected it. 

The Lory Apvocatze—Did you recollect it before Mr. Miller 
spoke to you? 

Witness—Yes, sir. 


E.V. Mackay 8. Epwarp Voxss Maoxkar, examined by Mr. Younae—I am a 
merchant in Dublin. I was in the habit of visiting Edinburgh 
in the course of my business. I occasionally visited the Raih- 
bow. I got acquainted with L’Angelier there. I was intimately 
acquainted with Mr. Baker, who kept the tavern. I first became 
acquainted with L’Angelier in 1846, and I continued to see him 
at the Rainbow till a day or so previous to his going to Dundee. 
I had several meetings and conversations with him. I saw 
quite enough of him to enable me to form an opinion of his 
character and disposition. I formed anything but a good 
opinion of him. I considered him a vain, lying fellow. He was 
very boastful of his personal appearance, and parties admiring 
him, ladies particularly. He boasted of his high acquaintances 
repeatedly, and the high society he had moved in; that was 
when he returned from the Continent, when he became more or 


162 


Evidence for Defence. 


less of 8 man—he was quite a lad when I first saw him. He E. V. Mackay 
mentioned several titled people whom he had known; but not 
believing anything he was saying at the time I did not store up 
in my mind any of their titles. Shortly before he went to Dundee 
I met him one evening in Princes Street Gardens; I could not 
say the date, but he went to Dundee the following day. He 
was sitting in the garden by himself; I came on him accident- 
ally; he had his head in his cambric pocket-handkerchief I 
put my hand on him and said, “L’Angelier” He held up his 
head, and I perceived he had been crying—his eyes had the 
appearance of much weeping. He mentioned that a lady in 
Fifeshire had slighted him; but I made light of the matter. 
He made a long complaint about her family, and was much 
excited. He said ladies admired him very often. I remember 
one occasion particularly, when he came in when I was reading 
the papers in the Rainbow. He told me he had met a lady in 
Princes Street with another lady, and she had remarked to her 
companion what pretty little feet he had. I had said he was 
a rather pretty little person, and he had gone out and con- 
cocted the story of the lady's remark. I never believed any- 
thing he said afterwards. 

The Lorp Justice-CLers—Am I to understand you to say 
that he heard the lady say what pretty feet he had? 

Witness—Yes. 

By Mr. Youne—It was a common thing for him to speak 
of ladies admiring him on the street. 

By the Lory Apvocatg—I live in Dublin. I have a counting- 
house in Dublin at the Lower Quay. To a certain extent I 
believed the story about the Fife lady. I believed there was 4 
lady there, and that he was after her, for I had seen him weep 
about it. When I saw him weep I believed there was a some 
thing. 

9. Janet B. Curistm, examined by Mr. Youna—Some years J. B. Christie 
ago I was acquainted with a Mrs. Craig, in St. George's Road, 
Glasgow. She had a son in Huggins & Co.’s employment. I 
visited at her house. I have occasionally met L’Angelier there. 
I remember on one occasion hearing him say that the French 
ladies used arsenic to improve their complexions. This was 
about four years ago. 

By the Lorp» Apvocara—lI can’t recollect on what occasion 
this was. I have not the slightest recollection if it was at a 
dinner party or an evening party, or who was present. 

To the Lorp Justicu-CLerk—I thought he was rather a for- 
ward man, and ful! of pretension. 

10. Arexanper Mruugr, examined by the Dzan or Facuttry— A. Miller 
I am in the employment of Huggins & Co., and I was acquainted 
with the late M. L’Angelier. He was there before me. I 
remember him telling me several times that he was going to 

163 


Madeleine Smith. 


A. Miller be married ; about nine months before his death he told me he 
intended being married at a certain time, and at other times he 
told me he was to be married by a certain date. These dates 
passed, and I gave it little credit ; in February, however, he told 
me he was to be married, and IJ said that this would pass like the 
other dates, but he affirmed it would not, and that it would take 
place in about three months. He told me who the lady was. 
This was in the beginning of February. He looked very sensi- 
tive ; he was easily depressed and easily uplifted. I don’t recollect 
him talking to me of suicide. On one occasion he said he 
wished he was dead. He once said he did not consider there 
was any sin in a person taking away his own life to get out of 
the world, being tired of it—“ having lost all happiness ” was his 
expression. I objected to that, and said that as our life was 
not our own, we had no right to do what we chose with it. 
He did not acknowledge, so far as I recollect, having abandoned 
his opinion. When he said he wished he was dead I had com- 
menced to say something to him when a party came into the 
room, and the subject dropped. I intended to remonstrate 
with him. He seemed to be talking nonsense. I said, “ You 
certainly don’t think what you say,” and he said he did. I 
then said, “Then you don’t mean it,” and he said he did. Then 
I was going to remonstrate with him, when some one came into 
the room. He seemed serious. He complained several times 
of having diarrhoea, and about the middle of February about 
having an affection of the stomach and bowels; his eyes were 
watering very much, but I thought that was from cold. He 
had complained of attacks of diarrhoea on several occasions 
before that. Almost since I saw him he complained of that, 
but more latterly. I went to Huggins’s in September, 1853, 
and I became acquainted with him there. He appeared to 
receive @ great many letters. I knew he had letters from some 
one, but not till the beginning of February did I know whom 
they were from. He had several other female correspondents. 

By the Soxicrror-Guyzrat—We had the impression that he 
was a young man of very regular habits. He was a worthy 
young man. The occasion in February to which I have alluded, 
wher his eyes were suffused, was, I think, about the 13th. 
About the 19th or 20th he complained again. That was in 
the warehouse. He came in at one o'clock, and had not been 
there the day before. He came late. There was a sort of 
“)blaeish” appearance round the eyes, and there was a small 
red spot on his cheek. I asked what was wrong with him, and 
he said he was nearly dead last night. I then asked what had 
been the matter with him, and he said he had been rolling on 
the floor all night, and that he was so weak that he could not 
call for assistance, he had just to remain quiet. He said he was 
so sick that he was like to vomit his inside out, I asked what 


164 


Evidence for Defence, 


he had vomited, and he said it was yellow stuff, and of a very A. Miller 
bitter taste. I suggested it might be bile, and he said his 
landlady had suggested the same. At from four to six o’clock 

in the morning he said he had called for his landlady and asked 

for a cup of tea. I believe it was on the 19th or 20th he told 

me this. He said he was very much pained in his bowels and 
stomach. He felt very weak when speaking to me. He did 

not say if he had been anywhere the night before. He was not 
regularly in the office after that; he was almost entirely absent 

after that from illness. 

11. Acnzs M‘Mmuay, examined by Mr. Youno—I was at one A. M‘Millan 
time in Mr. Smith’s service as tablemaid. I was there for a 
year. It is three years last May since I left. Miss Madeleine 
Smith was at home when I was there. The second daughter, 
Elizabeth, left home to go to school near London while I was in 
the house. I understood Miss Smith had returned from the 
same school some time before. On one occasion she spoke to 
me about arsenic. I cant remember what brought on the con- 
versation, but I perfectly remember her saying that she believed 
arsenic was used for the complexion, or that it was good for the 
complexion—I don’t recollect which. I can’t tell anything 
more about it. 

12. James Grrpwoop, examined by Mr. Youna—I am a surgeon J. Girdwood 
in Falkirk, and have been about forty years in practice. I have 
frequently, since the publication of an article in Chambers’s 
Journal, been asked by females as to the use of arsenic ay a 
cosmetic. That is about two years ago. 

By the Lorp Apvooatz—Many of my friends consulted me, 
and I told them it would be highly injurious and ought not 
to be taken. 

13. Joun Ropsertson, examined by Mr. Younae—I am 4 J Robertson 
druggist in Queen Street, Glasgow. I remember, some time 
ago, of an application being made in my shop for arsenic by a 
manservant. That was in the beginning of last May. A young 
man came in, from seventeen to nineteen years of age, and asked 
for sixpence worth or one shilling’s worth of arsenic. I asked 
him for what purpose it was to be used. He said it was for a 
lady, who was waiting outside. I asked for what purpose, and 
he stated that she was going to use it for her complexion. I 
did not see any lady waiting outside. I did not give it. 

The Lorp Justicn-Cumrx—This is very loose; it is after 
universal rumours were circulated about this case. 

The Lorp Apvooats (to witness)—You did not ask the lady’s 
name} 

Wirnass—No. 

14. Purar Gurarim, examined by the Duaw or Facoirr—l! Peter Guthrie 
am the manager of Frazer & Green's establishment in Sauchie- 


165 


Peter Guthrie 


William D’E. 
Roberts 


Charles Baird 


Madeleine Smith. 


hall Street. We sell arsenic, among other things. I remem- 
ber a lady coming to our shop and asking about a particular use 
of arsenic. That was in the beginning of 1856. She came into 
the shop alone, and produced a number of Blackwood’s Maga- 
ze containing an article on the use of arsenic for improving 
the complexion, and asked me if I had seen it. I said I had, 
and she asked me to give her arsenic. I declined to do so. She 
still expressed a strong desire to have it, but I did not give it 
to her. 

By the Lorp Apvocars—I did not know the lady. I had 
seen her several times before. There was no one with her. I 
mentioned it to several persons in the shop, and to Johnston, our 
senior assistant. I could not say if I did so the day it happened. 

15. Wruu1am D’Esterre Ropsrts, examined by Mr. Youna— 
I am a merchant in Glasgow. I became acquainted with 
L’Angelier about the year 1853, and he once dined with me— 
on Christmas Day of that year, a Sunday. After dinner he 
became very ill; there were a few friends at dinner. When 
the ladies retired he got ill, and wished to leave the room. 1 
went with him, and came back to the dining-room, and remained 
some time. I wondered why he did not come. I opened the 
dining-room door, and heard @ groan, as of some person 
vomiting. I found him very ill—vomiting and purging. A 
good many gentlemen came out of the room and saw him. I 
sent for cholera mixture, and gave him a good deal of it. He 
nearly emptied the bottle. I got very much frightened, as 
cholera had been in the town shortly before. After a time one 
of the gentlemen took him in a cab to his lodgings. He called 
on me the next day or day after that, to apologise for his illness. 
He was nearly two hours ill in my house. 

By the Lorp Apvocatr—I knew L’Angelier pretty well. I 
always thought him a very nice little fellow. He sat in the 
same pew with me in church three years; at that time I would 
not have hesitated to believe his word. 

To the Lorp Justice-CLprx—I had occasion to change my 
opinion of him, not from anything I observed, but from what 
I have been told since this trial was talked of. 

16. Cuartus Barrp, examined by Mr. Youne—I am a gon of 
the late Mr. Robert Baird, writer, Glasgow. I have an uncle 
in Huggins’s warehouse. Through him I became acquainted 
with L’Angelier, I should say about two years ago. After that 
I frequently met with him, and sometimes went to his lodgings. 
I remember on one occasicn finding him very unwell in his lodg- 
ings. He was then living in Franklin Place, at Mrs. Jenkins’s. 
I think the occasion I refer to was either in the last fortnight 
of September or the first. fortnight of October last. I went to 
Spain immediately after that, and it was just before I left, When 
I went up in the evening he said he had returned straight from 

166 


Evidence for Defence. 


the office. He ordered some tea. He took very ill suddenly, Charles Baird 


and put his hand on his stomach, and, as it were, doubled himself 
up; he lay down on the sofa, screaming with pain. This con- 
tinued for about fifteen minutes. I advised him to send for a 
medical man, and left him, and I believe he did so. He was 
going to bed when I left. It was about ten o’clock when I 
went, and about eleven when I left. I saw him the following 
morning between nine and ten. I asked him how he was, and 
he said he had a very bad night of it, that he had sent for a 
medical man—I believe a Dr. Steven, Great Western Road, who 
had been employed by him before. He said he had vomited a 
great deal during the night. He has been in my mother's house, 
but never at a party. He never met Miss Smith there to my 
knowledge. My family knew the panel. 

By the Lorp Apvooats—Mrs. Jenkins was with L’Angelier 
when he was so ill. He said Dr. Steven had seen him that 
evening after I left. I could not say Mrs. Jenkins was present 
when he told me se. 

By the Duan or Facurrr—I remember this because it was 
before I went to Spain. I went there on 6th November. 

By Lorp Hanprsips—I returned on bth April. [Consults 
note-book.] I find I arrived in the Clyde on 6th April. 

17. Rosser Baran, examined by the Daan or Facotrr—I am 
brother of the last witness. I was acquainted with L’Angelier. 
I can’t say when I got to know him; it is not less than two 
years. I recollect him asking me to introduce him to Miss 
Smith. I cannot say how long ago this ie; I think it is about 
two yeara ago. He several times asked me to introduce him, 
and he seemed very pressing about it. I believe I asked & 
gentleman to introduce them, thinking it would be better to 
come from him than from me, but he declined. It was my 
uncle I asked. I think I then asked my mother to ask Miss 
Smith some evening, that I might ask L’Angelier, and introduce 
him. She declined to do so. They certainly never met in my 
mother’s house. I introduced them in the street. L’Angelier 
did not ask me to introduce him to Miss Smith’s father, but he 
expressed an anxiety or determination to be introduced to him. 
When I introduced him to Mias Smith her sister was with her. 
I am now nineteen years old. 

Cross-examined by the Soxiorror-GanzraL—L’Angelier once 
asked me to go with him to Row, and I understood his purpose 
was to go and see Miss Smith. He might have said he wished 
to call at Rowaleyn, but I don't recollect. He frequently ex- 
pressed a desire to be introduced to her father. I have been 
in her father’s house. 


Robert Baird 


18. Euizapsra Wautacs, examined by Mr. Youne—I keep E. Wallace 


lodgers in Glasgow, and have done so for a number of years. M. 
L’Angelier lodged with me for some time when he first came to 
167 


Madeleine Smith. 


E. Wallace Glasgow. He came in the end of July or beginning of 


Robert Fraser 


Dr. C. Adam 


August, 1852, and remained till the middle of December, 1853. 
He told me he had come to be in some mercantile office. He 
said he had been a lieutenant in the navy at one time. I don’t 
know whether he meant the British or French navy. I under- 
stood it to be the British navy, but I may have been wrong. 
He did not say he had sold his commission. He spoke of having 
lived in Edinburgh before he came to me. He did not say 
anything of being in a situation in Edinburgh; he said he had 
been long out of a situation. He said nothing about having 
been in Dundee. He told me he had been frequently in Fife, 
and mentioned that he knew some families there. 

Mr. Youna—The Balcarras family? 

Wirnnss—I asked if he knew that family, and he said he did, 
or that he had heard of them. 

Cross-examined by the Lorp Apvocats—He was a well-con- 
ducted young man. He kept good hours, and no company. 
One day that he came in he said he had met an old sweetheart 
going on her marriage jaunt. He had a great aversion to 
medicine, and I never knew him take it. He was very cheerful. 
He played the guitar in the evenings, and sang occasionally. 

19. Lieutenant-Colonel Rosmrr Fraser, examined by Mr. 
Youne—I reside at Portobello. I was not acquainted with the 
late M. L’Angelier. I never saw him in my life, to my know- 
ledge. He never was in my house, and never dined with me. 
At the time of his death I received a note from Mr. George 
M‘Call mentioning the fact of his death. He mentioned him as 
a mutual friend; but I was very much surprised at it, never 
having seen M. L’Angelier or Mr. M‘Call. There is no other 
Colonel Fraser in Portobello. 

By the Lorp Apvocatr—There is a Captain Fraser, R.N. 

20. Dr. Cartes ApaM, examined by Mr. Youne—I am an 
M.D. at Coatbridge, and keep a druggist’s shop there. On 
Sunday afternoon, 22nd March, I was in my shop. I remember 
a gentleman coming into the shop that afternoon. He asked 
at first twenty-five drops of laudanum, which I gave him. After 
he got the laudanum he asked for a bottle of soda water. I 
said we had no soda water, but I would give him a soda powder, 
which I did. He mixed it and took it. This was about 
half-past five o’clock. I took him to be a military man; there 
were several about Drumpellier at the time. He wore a 
moustache. [Shown photograph of L’Angelier.] This has a 
resemblance to the person, but I could not be quite certain 
it is the same ; it is like the gentleman. My shop was dark at 
the time, s0 I could scarcely observe, because we don’t take 
off the shutters on Sunday. We get the light in by the glass 
door. I suppose that he had on a dark brownish coat and a 

168 


Evidence for Defence, 


Balmoral bonnet. The bonnet was like the one shown me. Dr. C. Adam 
I remember seeing a handkerchief sticking out of his outside 
breast-pocket. 

By the Lorp Apvocats—He came in as if he had left off 
speaking to some one at the door, but I did not observe any 
one. I am very seldom in the shop on the Sunday afternoon. 
A girl came into the shop after he had been in—whilo he was 
there. It must have been some trifling thing she wanted—I 
think castor oil. I don’t know who she was. I have seen 
military gentlemen frequently there. 

The Lorp Apvocarze—Can you swear that that picture is 
not one of them? 

Wirngss—I am not certain. 

The Lorp Apvocatr—Is it like any of the military men that 
you have seen? 

Wirnzess—Not to my knowledge. 

The Lorp Apvocats—When did you first mention this fact? 

Witness—Three or four weeks ago. 

The Lerp Apvocatze—Who was it to? 

Wirnass—To Mr. Miller. 

The Lorp Apvocats—Was he the first. person you mentioned 
it to? 

Witness—He was. 

The Lorp Apvocatz—You saw Mr. Miller the first time two 
or three weeks ago? 

Witnuss— Yes. 

The Lorp Apvocatz—When you first saw him did you tell 
him this? 

Wirnnss— Yes. 

The Lorp Apvocate—Did you tell him that the man got 
laudanum the first time you saw him? 

Witness—No; I told him he had got cigars. I knew he 
had got some other thing besides the powder. 

The Lorp Apvocatz—You recollected that afterwards! 

Wirtnass—Yes; and I wrote Mr. Miller to that effect. 

The Lorp Apvocatzs—Tell me what. made Mr. Miller come 
to you. 

Wrrnuss—I did not know his object. 

The Lorp Apvocatzs—What questions did he put when he 
first came? Was anything said about arsenic? 

Wrrnuss—Yes, he inquired if I had given arsenic; and I 
found that I had not. 

The Lorp Apvocats—wWere you asked to recollect anything? 

Wrrnzss—Yes ; I was asked to recollect if a person had called 
that Sunday, and got any medicine at all. After a few minutes 
I recollected about the laudanum. 

The Lorp Justics-CuerK—Is that laudanum entered in your 


book ? 
169 


Dr. C. Adam 


Dr. J. Dickson 


Madeleine Smith. 


Wrirness—We never enter it. 

The Lorp Justicz-Cierx—Why not? 

Wrrnzss—It is not required. 

The Lorp Justicz-CLerk—I don’t mean in your register. 

Wrrnzss—We never put it down in any book. 

By Mr. Youna—We enter no medicines bought and paid across 
the counter except arsenic. It is not the practice to do so 
in any other druggist’s shop with which I am acquainted. I 
was not precognosced on the other side. I was examined by 
the Procurator-Fiscal on Thursday last. I was not examined in 
any different way by Mr. Miller from what I was by the Pro 
curator-Fiscal on Thursday. 

The Lorp Justics-CLerkK—The photograph might be a re- 
semblance of any of the moustached gentlemen that walk about 
the streets. What is peculiar about it? Have you any feeling 
of assurance that that is the man you saw in your shop? 

Wrrness—No ; I could not be certain. 

The Lorp Justicg-CLerK—Were you able to give a description 
of the man to Mr. Miller? 

Wirwzss—In a great measure. 

The Lorp Justice-CLerkK—Was he a short man? 

Wirnass—Rather, if anything, less than I am. 

The Lorp Jusricz-CLerkK—When did you see this photograph ? 

Wrrness—I think on Friday last. 

21. Dr. Jamas Dickson, examined by Mr. Younae—I keep a 
druggist’s shop in Baillieston. That is on the road between 
Coatbridge and Glasgow—five miles from Glasgow and two 
and a half from Coatbridge. I remember, on a Sunday evening 
in March last, a gentleman coming into my shop; it was some 
time in the end of March, sbout half-past six. He appeared 
to be unwell; he was holding his hand over his stomach, and 
complaining of pain; he wanted laudanum. I gave him some 
at the counter—from twenty to twenty-five drops. He said 
he came from Coatbridge, and was going to Glasgow. He was 
about five feet seven in height, so far as I recollect, and what drew 
my attention to him particularly was his wearing a moustacho— 
a thing we seldom see about our locality. His age would be 
about twenty-five; he was not of a very dark complexion; he 
was dressed in a coat buttoning up tight—I recollect that very 
distinctly. He had a Glengarry or Balmoral bonnet on his 
head. I was originally precognosced by Mr. Miller for the 
defence, and I gave him a description of this man. I was 
brought here as a witness, not having seen a portrait till I 
came to the Court here. When I came here I was shown a 
photograph. This now shown me is extremely like the person 
who called at my shop. I think he had a white pocket-hand- 
kerchief in the outside breast-pocket of his coat. 

Cross-examined by the Soxicrror-Gmunsrat—I fix on the end 

170 


Evidence for Defence. 


of March, because one or two Sundays about that time I was Dr. J. Dickson 
at home because of the absence of my assistant; on others 
I was out visiting. It might have been in April. I don’t 
think it could have been in the beginning of March. I cannot 
say distinctly as to the time; as to the Sunday I can’t say. 
distinctly. I was asked by the Procurator-Fiscal about the 
time, and I said it was from two and a half to three months 
ago. I think his coat was of a darkish colour, but I could not 
say. There was no person with him in my shop. I did not 
see him in the street, or if any one was with him. It struck 
me he spoke in a slightly foreign accent. 

To the Lorp Justica-CLurx—If a person wanted medicine on 
the road he would require to come to my shop, there is no 
other medical man there; he might have left a companion on 
the high road—my shop is 200 or 300 yards off it—and returned 
to him. 

Dr. Apam was recalled, and asked by the Lorp Jusmica-CLark 
—Did this person complain of anything? 

Wrrness—No, my lord. 

The Lorp Justica-Cizrx—Did he swallow the laudanum? 

Wrrnass—Yes. 

The Lorp Justice-Cierz—Did you not ask him what he 
wanted it for? 

Wrrnzss—No, my lord. 

22. Mies Jawa Ksrx, examined by Mr. Youne—I am a sister of Jane Kirk 
Dr. Kirk, who keeps a druggist’s shop in the Gallowgate, Glasgow 
—on the north side. I know Abercromby Street. It is west 
of the Gallowgate. I remember a gentleman coming into the 
shop on a Sunday night some time ago ; I can’t remember the 
date ; I think it was in March, but I can't say what day of the 
month ; I think it was about the end of the month. It was a 
little before or after eight o’clock. He wanted medicine, but 
I don’t remember what medicine. He got it, but did not take 
it at the counter. He took it away with him. I think it was 
a powder he got, but I can’t say what. I served him. I can’t 
well describe him. He was a young man about thirty, not tall, 
but rather to the little side. He was not very thin. He had 
a fresh and rather fair complexion. “He wore a moustache. 
He had on a Glengarry bonnet, but for the rest of his dress I 
could not say what it was. The photograph now shown me is 
as like him as anything I have seen. I was struck by his ap- 
pearance at the time, and I noticed it particularly. He paid 
for the medicine, taking the money from a little purse. [Shown 
No. 1 of second inventory for prisoner.] This is the purse. 

Cross-examined by the Lorp ApvocaTs—I think this happened 
in March. The gentleman was alone. He was about five 
minutes in the shop. I think that is the purse. I can’t 
remember what the medicine was. I did not enter it in my 

171 


Jane Kirk 


R. Morrison 


G. Simpson 


Madeleine Smith. 


book, or the money received. We don’t enter the money got 
over the counter. There was nobody else in the shop selling 
anything. There was a woman in, but I don’t know who she 
was. I was asked if a gentleman had called buying medicine. 
I had not said, before I was asked, that there was anybody 
buying medicine. I was asked about a fortnight or three 
weeks ago. 

Re-examined by Mr. Youne—There was @ woman in the shop 
at the time; she spoke of the appearance of the gentleman at 
the time. The remark was about his dress. She spoke of the 
hair about the lower part of his face—his beard. That was 
after he went out. He did not seem a foreign gentleman, such 
as Ihave seen. There was gaslight in the shop. 


23. Ropart Morrison, examined by Mr. Youna—I am em- 
ployed by W. & R. Chambers, publishers and editors of 
Chambers’s Journal. The four numbers of Chambers’s 
Journal shown me were published in the usual way of the dates 
they bear. The present-circulation is about 50,000. The first 
of these numbers is December, 1851; the second is 11th June, 
1853; the third, 9th February, 1856; and the fourth, 19th 
July, 1856. There is an article in each of these numbers on 
the use of arsenic. I am not aware that they excited a con- 
siderable sensation. 


24. Guoran Smrpson, examined by Mr. Youna—I am employed 
by W. Blackwood & Sons. The number of Blachwood’s Maga- 
zine for December, 1853, was published by us. The circulation 
then was about 7000. Messrs. Blackwood were-also the pub- 
lishers of “The Chemistry of Common Life,” by Professor 
Johnston. It was published in 1855, buc it had before been 
published in numbers, which had a very large circulation, vary- 
ing from 5000 to 30,000. The circulation of the separate 
volumes, I suppose, has been about 10,000. In chapter 23, 
“The Poisons we Select,” the first part is entitled, “The Con- 
sumption of White Arsenic.” The number containing that 
article sold to the extent of 5000, and the sale altogether to 
the present time of that number and the volumes is about 16,000 
or 17,000. There was a larger sale of the first volume than of 
the second. 


The Dran or Facutrty then put in two letters, which he read. 
The envelope of the first is dated 18th September, 1855— 


Brtovep Exmz,—I have just received your note. I shall meet 
you. I do not care though I bring disgrace upon myself. To 
see you I would do anything. Emile, you shall yet be happy; 
you deserve it. You are young; you who ought to desire life 
wishing to end it! Oh! for the sake of your once-loved Mimi, 
desire to live and succeed in this life. Every one must meet with 
disappointment. I have suffered from disappointment. I long 
to, see you and speak to you. 


172 


Evidence for Defence. 


The second letter bore the post-mark 19th October, 1855. It 
is as follows: — 

Brtovep Emiz,—Your kind letter I received this morning. 
Emile, you are wrong in thinking I love you for your appearance. 
I did and do admire you, but it was for yourself alone that I loved 
you. I can give you no other reason, for I have got no other. Tf 
you had been a young man of some Glasgow family, I have no 
doubt there on | be no objection to you. But because you are 
unknown to him, he has rejected you. Dear Emile, explain this 
sentence in your note—‘‘ Before long I shall rid you and all the 
world of my presence.”? God forbid that you ever do. My last 
letter was not filled with rash promises. No; these promises 
written in my last letter shall be kept—must be kept. Not a 
moment passes but I think of you. 

An extract from a third letter, not dated, was read as 
follows :— 

I am almost well to-day, if the weather would only get warm. 
I have lost my appetite entirely. It is just anxiety and_ sadness 
that is the matter with me, but I am better to-night. Darling, 
if I were with you. I have laughed at the recollection of a con- 
versation of yours. What queer creatures you must think young 
ladies at: school! For a moment do you think their conversations 
are what you said? Believe me, I never heard a young lady, 
while I was at school nearly three years, speak of the subject you 
mentioned. But perhaps it was different with me when at 
school. I had always a bedroom at school, and I was a parlour 
ere a Do you really think they are so bad? Some may, but 
not all. 

26. Dr. Rosurt Parsrson, examined by the Daan or Facutty 
—I am a physician in Leith, and have practised there for several 
years. I have seen several cases of suicidal poisoning by 
arsenic. They were chiefly young females connected with mills 
and colour works. In many cases they had obtained the arsenic 
about the works; in others it was purchased. I was called in 
to prescribe for them while they were suffering from the effects 
of the poison. I saw seven cases in all. They all died, with one 
exception. I used all the remedies I could think of. In the 
six cases they submitted to medical treatment without attempt 
ing any hindrance. Not one of them disclosed before death 
that they had taken poison. I asked several whether they had 
taken arsenic or some other poison, but they all denied it. The 
seventh case was a recovery, That person did not at first 
admit she had taken poison. After she had almost recovered 
from the secondary effects of it, she admitted it. She was then 
aware that she was recovering. In previous stages of her illness 
she was sullen and morose, and would not speak. Arsenic is 
largely used in colour manufactories, and was used to a larger 
extent at that time. These cases occurred several years ago. 


The people about the works had great facility at that time in 
taking away arsenic. 


Dr. Robert 
Paterson 


Cross-examined by the Lorp Apvocats—They were not at all 


about the same time. These seven cases occurred in the space 
of about eighteen years. The symptoms were nearly similar 
173 


Dr. Robert 
Paterson 


John Fleming 


R. Townsend 


Janet Smith 


Madeleine Smith. 


in all. They were characteristic of poisoning by arsenic. They 
vomited matter of various colours, depending on what had been 
previously eaten. The sickness and vomiting ceased in some 
cases an hour or two before death, but in most instances con- 
tinued till death. They were all known cases of suicide. I 
can’t say if any of them asked for a medical man to see them. 
I had no precise means of ascertaining what time elapsed 
between taking the poison and the commencement of the 
symptoms: Death resulted in thirty-six hours, and one in 
twelve hours, from the commencement of the symptoms. 

To the Lorp Justice-Ctzerg—In cases of suicide the early 
symptoms are not seen. There is less facility in obtaining 
arsenic now; there is less of the pigment made now. 

26. Jonn Fismine, examined by Mr. Youna—I am store- 
keeper to Todd & Higginbotham, printers and dyers in Glasgow. 
I have been so eleven years. I take charge of the whole 
chemical substances used in their printing and dyeing opera- 
tions. Arsenic is one of the substances used in large quantities. 
We generally get from three to four hundredweight at a time 
from Charles Tennant & Co. in its pure, white state. It is used 
by us for mixing with other substances in making colour. It 
is put fin barrels. The arsenic barrels are put into the store 
among the other things, quite open. When any of it is taken 
out of the barrel the lid is loosely laid on again. Three men 
and a boy work in the store with me; their duty is to weigh 
out the different substances as they are wanted by the colour- 
makers. From 80 to 90 Ibs. are generally given to the colour- 
makers at a time. They get that quantity several times a 
month. No person gets into the store except those engaged 
in it. It is taken from the store to the colour-makers in open 
wooden pails. I can’t say how many workmen are employed 
about the works. I would not miss three or four ounces of 
arsenic if it were taken away. I would miss more. 


27. Ropsrt Townsznp, examined by Mr. Youna—I am 
manager to my brother, Mr. Townsend, manufacturing chemist 
in Glasgow. He deals largely in arsenic, and we have always 
large quantities at a time on hand. We have from one to ten 
tons at a time; it is kept in a private office in the counting- 
house. During the night it is locked up—not during the day. 
It stands in casks, as meal in a meal shop. One cask only is 
kept open for use. We employ from 100 to 140 people. I 
have no doubt they might take arsenic away if so inclined. 
I have never known it taken away. 

28. Janet SuiTH, examined by the Daan or Facutty—I am 
® sister of Madeleine Smith, and thirteen years of age. I was 
living in my father’s house in Blythswood Square last winter 
and spring. I slept downstairs in the same bed with Madeleine. 
I generally went to bed before her. We botb went at the same 

174 


Evidence for Defence. 


time on Sunday, as a rule. I remember Sunday, 22nd March. Janet Smith 
We went to bed at the same time that night. I am quite sure. 
We went at 10.30, or after that. We went downstairs together 
from the dining-room. I don’t remember which was in bed 
first. We were both undressing at the same time, and got 
into bed about the same time. We usually take about half an 
hour to undress. We were in no special hurry that night in 
undressing. My sister was in bed with me before I was asleep. 
I am sure of that. She was undressed as usual, and in her 
night-clothés. I cannot say which of us fell asleep first. It 
was not long after we went to bed that I fell asleep. I don’t 
remember papa making a present of a necklace to my sister 
lately, but I remember him doing so about a year ago. 

Cross-examined by the Lorp Apvocatz—I have seen my sister 
take cocoa. I never saw her make it in her room. She kept 
it in a paper in her room. We had a fire. We went to bed 
that night at the same hour as usual on Sunday night with 
us. I remember the morning Madeleine went away. I suppose 
she had been in bed that night. I was asleep before she came 
to bed. She was away when I awoke. 

Reexamined—I have seen my sister taking coooa in the 
dining-room. I don’t know she had been recommended to take 
it. No other body in the house took it. She kept it in her 
room, and took it in the dining-room. On Monday morning, 
23rd March, I found my sister in bed when I awoke about 
eight. 

99. Dr. Jamas Apam Lawrim, examined by the Duan OF Dr, James A. 
Facouty—I am a physician in Glasgow, and have been in prac- Lawrie 
tice for a good many years. I have not made arsenic a par- 
ticular study, but I have had my attention recently directed 
to its effect on the skin if it were mixed with water. I tried 
it on myself. I put in water a quarter of an ounce of arsenic 
from Currie’s shop, mixed with indigo, and washed my hands 
with it I also mixed half an ounce of the same arsenic with 
water, and washed my face quite freely, but I washed my 
face afterwards with cold water. I found no disagreeable effects 
from it. I tried the washing of the face on Saturday. I had 
tried the washing of the hands previously. The effect of the 
washing on the hands was as if I had used a ball of soap with 
sand ip it; the effect was not great, but, if at all, it had a 
softening effect. I don’t think that increasing the amount of 
the arsenic would make any difference, on account of its insolu- 
bility. I made"the experiments in a common-sized hand basin. 
I recollect treating one case of arsenical poisoning which pre- 
sented some remarkable peculiarities. The history of the case 
was this, avoiding names, places, and dates—It occurred during 
the prevalence of cholera some years ago in the west. I waa 
asked to see a gentleman about seven or eight in the evening. 
I found he had been ill from three or four o’clock in the after- 


175 


Madeleine Smith. 


Dr. James A. noon. I was in the habit of attending his family. I inquired 


Lawrie 


why I had not been sent for sooner, and I was told that the 
symptoms had not been sufficiently clear to call for my attend- 
ance. I found the patient labouring under the premonitory 
symptoms of cholera.. I prescribed for him as for a case of 
cholera. I then left, and returned about ten o’clock, when I 
found the symptoms very much aggravated ; there was vomiting 
and purging, and cramp of the limbs. Some points in the case 
struck me as peculiar; his voice was not in the least affected, 
which it usually is in cholera, and almost uniformly in the later 
stages. The appearance of the matter vomited was also peculiar, 
in the colour especially, which was of a reddish yellow. In 
cholera we expect the rice-water discharges. It occurred to 
me that this might not perhaps be a case of cholera. I there- 
fore asked the gentleman if he had taken anything, or 
had had anything given to him. He said he had not taken any- 
thing that day excepting his ordinary food; he said, I think, 
that he’had taken some chicken soup. The symptoms went on, 
and it struck me more that it was not a case of cholera. I 
therefore asked him if he had taken anything to account for 
the peculiar symptoms, and he said he had not. I called a 
medical friend in consultation, and being satisfied that some- 
thing was wrong, I again put it to the patient, in presence of 
the other medical man, whether he had taken anything, and 
he solemnly declared he had taken nothing. The symptoms 
went on till I became convinced he was dying, and then I put the 
question to him as a dying man to tell me whether he had taken 
anything. His answer a short time before he died was that he had 
taken nothing. He died, I think, about two in the morning, and 
the symptoms had commenced about three or four in the after- 
noon. The occurrence had nearly passed out of my mind, when 
next day, about two in the afternoon, I was informed that a 
gentleman was anxious to see me. I found he was connected 
with one of the druggist establishments in town. He said, “ You 
attended so-and-so last night, and he died of cholera.” I said 
I did. He said, “I think it is my duty to tell you that I sold to 
him, about two o’clock on the day he died, half an ounce of 
arsenic.” I cautioned him not to mention the circumstance. I 
immediately went to the house, got the matter vomited, put 
it into a bottle, and got it analysed by an eminent chemist. 
He told me next day that he had found a large quantity of 
arsenic. I then had the body opened, and the stomach taken 
out and given to the same eminent chemist, and he found that 
it contained a large quantity of arsenic. The quantity was not 
determined; the stomach was full of arsenic. That patient 
received medical treatment very quietly, just as he had done 
on previous occasions. He took the prescriptions readily. He 
was living with his relations. I have a large family practice. 

By the Lorp Apvocars—In making the experiments as to 

176 


Evidence for Defence. 


washing my face and hands with arsenic, I filled a basin with a Dr. James A. 
quantity of water, and washed my face and hands. I put in Lawrie 
the arsenic without allowing it to subside; a large part, of 
course, fell to the bottom. It is a practice I would have no fear 

in repeating. I don’t think one experiment would justify me 

in saying it is a safe practice. I felt no smarting of the eye, 

and no unpleasant feelings, and I would readily repeat the 
experiment. If I had a case requiring it 1 would readily order 

it to be done. I would not advise it to be made a practice of. 

If there were vermin on the skin it might require to be done. 

I would not hesitate to prescribe it for that. I never did pre- 
scribe it, but I would have no fear in doing so. Extreme thirst 

is an early symptom in cholera, and in poisoning by arsenic. In 
cholera it is more towards the later stages. 


30. Dr. Dovenas Macnacan, examined by the Duan oF Dr. Douglas 
Facutty—I am a physician in Edinburgh. I have had some Maclagan | 
experience in cases of poisoning by arsenic, and I have devoted 
a good deal of attention to chemistry. From what I know of 
the properties of arsenic, I think that so very little of it is 
dissolved in cold water that I could not conceive it would do 
any harm to wash the face or hands with it. If agitated with 
cold water it dissolves one part, I think, in 400. That is so 
minute a quantity that I don’t think it could do harm to the 
entire skin. If kept long in contact with the skin it might 
produce bad effects; but I should think very little effect would 
be produced on the hands by washing them in cold water in 
which a quarter or half an ounce of arsenic was put. Arsenio 
will dissolve more readily in hot water. The quantity dissolved 
by simply putting it in boiling water is not very great. In 
order to make boiling water a sufficient solvent of arsenic, you 
must continue the boiling of the arsenic for a considerable time ; 
it you want to dissolve a pretty large quantity of arsenic, you 
require to boil it violently for half an hour. I think a fortieth 
part is held in solution after the water is cool. I don’t recollect 
how much it retains at the boiling point. As a general rule, 
the preseuce of organic matter in a fluid impairs its power of 
dissolving arsenic. There does not appear to be a great differ- 
ence in the case of tea or coffee poured on arsenic from what 
I have stated as to water. They dissolve but a small quantity. 
I can’t say how much cocoa or chocolate will hold in solution, 
because you cannot filter them so as to determine the quantity. 
There is a great deal of organic matter in cocoa or chocolate. 
Suppose a solution of arsenic applied to the skin, it would not 
have any poisonous effect; I don’t think it would have any 
effect one way or another. If kept sufficiently long in contact 
with the skin, or rubbed in, arsenic might prove poisonous. 
There are cases in which arsenical ointment has proved 
poisonous. I remember a case of a person named Davidson who 
took arsenic, and I published an account of that case. She took 


Mu 177 


Dr. Douglas 
Maclagan 


Hugh Hart 


Madeleine Smith. 


it by accident. She was not a very strong-minded person ; she 
was a hysterical and weak creature. She took it thinking it 
an effervescing powder, and she did not discover what she 
had taken till she saw a dog pulling about the room a paper 
on which “ Arsenic” was marked. I have paid attention to the 
symptoms of arsenical poisoning. In cases of slight quantities 
of arsenic being taken, the symptoms very often resemble those 
of bilious or British cholera attacks; in very severe cases of 
arsenical poisoning, terminating fatally, there is a very remark- 
able resemblance to persons labouring under malignant or 
Asiatic cholera. Witness stated the symptoms of arsenical 
poisoning. He never saw jaundice as a symptom. In all the 
published cases it is only mentioned once, viz., in the case 
quoted by Taylor from Marshall. Irritation of the throat was 
a symptom. It does occur in cases of British cholera, but then 
it is generally caused by muscular soreness from severe 
vomiting. 

By the Lorp Apvooats—It is possible that jaundice might 
accompany arsenical poisoning; it is difficult to deny a possi- 
bility in regard to physiological action. But in arsenical 
poisoning there is no jaundice. Jaundice is the absorption of 
bile into the blood. The most probable hypothesis is that the 
absorption of the arsenic stops the secretion of the liver as it 
does that of the kidneys, and then there is no bile secreted, 
and no jaundice. The presence of organic matter interferes 
with the holding of arsenic in solution, but it might be held 
in suspension. A viscous fluid would hold more in suspension, 
and the more viscous the more it would hold. Great thirst 
is a symptom of poisoning by arsenic. I do not think water 
in which arsenic had been mixed would produce any effect 
on a person washing in it, if he kept his mouth and eyes shut, 
as most people do, but I would not recommend the practice. 

By the Duan or Facuttr—I could not say how much arsenic 
could be held in suspension in a cup of cocoa; it would depend 
on the thickness of the cocoa. In this country cocoa is very 
thin. In France chocolate is as thick as porridge. 

31. Huan Hart, examined by the Duan or Facutty—I am a 
druggist in Glasgow. The Bridge of Allan is between two and 
three miles from Stirling. The distance from Alloa to Stirling 
is seven to eight miles. 

By the Lorp Apvocats—Coatbridge is eight miles from Great 
Western Road, Glasgow. 


A copy of the Glasgow Post Office Directory, with a plan of 
the city, was then put in. 


This concluded the evidence for the defence, and the Court 
adjourned. 


178 


Seventh Day—Tuesday, 7th July, 1857. 
The Court met at ten o’clock. 


The Lorp Apvocatm then addressed the jury as follows:— Lord Advocate 
Gentlemen of the: jury, after an investigation which for its 
. length has proved unexampled, I believe, in the criminal annals 
of this country, I have now to discharge perhaps the most 
painful public duty that ever fell to my lot. I am quite sure, 
gentlemen, that in the discharge of that duty I shall meet with 
that attention which the deep importance of this case requires, 
and which you have paid to its details from the commencement. 
Gentlemen, it is impossible, whatever impression may have been 
produced in your minds—it is impossible that, during this long 
and protracted trial, in which we have laid before you so many 
elements, some of them minute elements, of proof, necessarily 
to a certain extent disjointed and unconnected—I say, whatever 
moral impression may have been produced on your minds—and 
I fear there is little doubt of what that impression must have 
been—it is impossible that you can have rightly appreciated 
the full bearing of those details on the proposition which this 
indictment contains. It is now my duty, as clearly and as fully 
as I can, to draw these details together, and to present to you, 
if I can, in a connected shape, the links of that chain of evidence 
which we have been engaged for the last week in constructing. 
Gentlemen, I could have rejoiced if the result of the inquiry 
which it was our duty to make, and of the laborious collection 
of every element of proof which we could find, would have 
justified us on the part of the Crown in resting content with 
the investigation into the facts, and withdrawing our charge 
against the prisoner. Gentlemen, I grieve to say that so far 
is that from being the result to which we come, that if you give 
me your attention, for I fear the somewhat lengthened trespass 
on your patience which I shall have to make, you will arrive 
at the conclusion that every link is so firmly fastened—that 
every loophole is so completely stopped—that there does not 
remain the possibility of escape for the unhappy prisoner from 
the net that she has woven for herself. 

Gentlemen, the indictment charges three separate crimes, or 
rather it charges two separate crimes, one of them having been 
committed twice, and the third once. It is an indictment 
which charges two separate acts of administering poison with 

179 


Madeleine Smith. 


Lord Advocate intent to kill; and the third charge is the successful administer 


ing of poison with intent to kill, viz., murder, They are changes 
to which, in some respects, different parts of the evidencs 
apply; but they hang together; they throw light upon each 
other; they are not unconnected acts of crime Our case Is 
that the administration with intent to poison was truly part 
of a design to kill; on the other hand, the facts conneoted with 
the death reflect and throw back light on the previous aots of 
administration. In stating to you the evidence on which we 
think that these charges must be found proved, I shall avoid, 
as far as possible, travelling into a region which this oase affords 
too great materials for—I mean the almost incredible evidence 
which it has afforded of disgrace, and sin, and degradation— 
the dreadful social picture which it has revesled—the fearfal 
domestic results which must inevitably follow—those feelings 
of commiseration and horror which the age, the sex, and the 
condition of the prisoner must produce in every mind—all 
these are things into which I shall not travel. They might 
unnerve me for the discharge of my painful public duty. 
Besides, no language of mine—no language of my eloquent and 
learned friend—can convey to the mind one-tenth of the Impres- 
sion which the bare recital of the details of this oase has already 
created throughout the whole of this country. I shall only 
say that these matters weigh on my mind, as I am sure they 
do on yours, with a weight and an oppression which neither 
require nor admit of expression. The only other remark of 
that kind which I shall make is this, that while a prisoner in 
the position of this unfortunate lady is entitled—jusily entitled 
—to say that such a crime shall not be lightly presumed or 
proved against her; yet, gentlemen, if the charges im the 
indictment be true, if the tale which I hava to tell and have 
told be a true one, you are trying a case of as cool, premeditated, 
deliberate homicide as ever justly brought its perpetrator 
within the compass and penalty of the law. 

Gentlemen, the first fact on which I found is one into which 
it will not be necessary for me to go in any great detail, It 
is a very important fact in the inquiry, but it is one on which 
you can have ro doubt whatever: this unfortunate man, 
Emile L’Angelier, died of arsenic. There can be no doubt 
about that. The symptoms which he exhibited on the night 
of the 22nd and morning of the 23rd March were in all raspeots 
the symptoms of poisoning by arsenic. I may have ooaasion, 
in the course of my remarks, to come back upon this; I do 
not stop for the present to demonstrate it. His body was 
opened, and the stomach was analysed by Dr. Penny, who 
found an immense quantity of arsenio in it; the other parts 
of the body which were taken out at the exhumation were 
analysed by Dr. Christison, and he found traces of arsenic in 

180 


ry, - 
tcl 


Addresses to Jury. 


every one of them ; and therefore, gentlemen, I think you will Lord Advocate 
come to the conclusion—and it is not a conclusion on which 

it is necessary for me to dwell—that the inquiry starts with 

this ascertained and certain fact, that L’Angelier died on the 

morning of the 23rd March in consequence of the administration 

of arsenic, whether given him by another, or taken by himeelf, 

in whatever way he swallowed it. The cause of his death was 
unquestionably arsenic. 

The next question which arises is, by whom was that poison 
administered? That truly constitutes the inquiry which you 
have now to answer. In passing from the corpus delicti, so 
to speak—in passing from the cause of L’Angelier’s death—I 
do not allude to a theory which barely crossed my mind during 
the leading of the evidence yesterday as a possible case to be 
made in the defence, that, notwithstanding the arsenic found 
in the stomach, his death was to be attributed to other causes, 
and that, in truth, it arose from biliary derangement or from 
cholera. Gentlemen, that is a theory which it is impossible 
to maintain. I pass from that at present, and I shall assume, 
during the rest of my argument, that L’Angelier died from 
the administration of arsenic. Passing from that, then, I 
now proceed to inquire, what is the evidence that connects the 
prisoner at the bar with the death of L’Angelier? And before 
I state to you in detail—and I must do it with very great and 
anxious precision—the evidence on that point, which appears 
to me conclusive of the guilt of the prisoner, I must, after the 
course which the trial has taken, and the remarks which have 
been incidentally made in the course of it, set you right in 
regard to some matters which have been raised respecting the 
conduct of the prosecution. A great deal was said while we 
were leading our evidence, especially as regarded the documents 
—a great deal was said on the course that was followed when 
this inquiry first began after the death of L’Angelier. Those 
matters that were alluded to were no doubt of considerable 
importance; but you must draw the distinction carefully be- 
tween remarks intended to apply to the general system of 
conducting prosecutions of this kind, and those applicable to 
matters in which the prisoner can state any interest, or in 
regard to which her defence could in any way be affected. 
Gentlemen, I said at first, and I say still, that as far as regards 
the productions in our hands, I know of no case in which any 
prisoner has had more facilities than the prisoner at the bar; 
not too great facilities, for everything which we did in the 
matter had a tendency to elicit the truth, which is the only 
object of this inquiry. Nor do I think that in so rare and 
singular a case as this, we in the slightest degree departed from 
our public duty in enabling the prisoner more easily to conduct 
her defence. But as far as the proceedings have gone, whatever 

181 


Madeleine Smith, 


Lord Advocate remarks may be made as to the conduct. of particular officials, 
I think I shall show you most clearly that the prisoner has 
suffered nothing in that respect, and that, in truth, if the 
matters referred to in these observations have any effect on 
the case at all, it has not been against the prisoner that that 
effect has been produced. On the death of L’Angelier a great 
quantity of documents was left by him in various of his reposi- 
tories. His death was sudden and unexplained. Dr. Thomson 
and Dr. Steven made a postmortem examination; but they 
could not state what the cause of death was. His employers, 
who took an interest in him, grew anxious. They examined 
his repositories, and they found that in his desk in the office, 
and in his lodgings, there were a variety of letters. The first 
examined were those that were in the desk in the office, which 
were examined by Stevenson and Kennedy; and the reading 
of some of them gave them a misgiving as to what the truth 
of this case might be. L’Angelier died on the 23rd, and on 
the 25th Mr. Stevenson made a communication to the Procurator- 
Fiscal, not charging anybody with a crime, or implicating 
anybody in the death, but simply calling his attention to the 
fact that L’Angelier had died under these circumstances, and 
stating that there were letters left in the desk which might 
be of importance as throwing light upon the mystery of his 
decease. The result was that Stevenson himself brought six 
or seven letters to the Procurator-Fiscal on that day, and those 
letters were marked by himself and clearly identified. The 
investigation went on. By the 30th Dr. Penny made his 
medical report. A warrant was that day issued by the Pro- 
curator-Fiscal, not against Miss Smith, or in a criminal charge 
at all, but as in the case of a sudden death, to search the 
repositories of the deceased. Gentlemen, that was done. The 
letters in the desk were sealed up in the presence of Kennedy 
and Stevenson. They were sent to the Procurator-Fiscal or 
to the Fiscal’s office. They were found with the seals unbroken 
by Stevenson when he went there, and I think the box was 
opened in his presence. Wilson, the Procurator-Fiscal’s clerk 
or assistant, received the box in that state in the presence of 
Mr. Hart. He swears that he locked it up at that time, that 
he delivered it some days afterwards to the officer Murray in 
the state in which he got it The officer Murray swears that 
he marked the letters there, and delivered them back in the 
state in which he got them; and from that time forward their 
identification is complete. In the lodgings letters were found 
in the portmanteau, in the desk, and in the tourist’s bag. The 
letters in the portmanteau and in the desk were made up into 
bundles by Murray and his assistant M‘Lauchlin. They were 
carried by M‘Lauchlin to his own house on the night of the 
30th. He swears that they were not touched during that 

182 


Addresses to Jury. 


might—that they remained in his own room. — Murray got Lord Advocate 
them next day, in the state in which he left them the night 
before, from M‘Lauchlin. They two set to work and marked 
the documents, keeping them all under lock and key during 
the process, and they handed them over to the Procurator-Fiscal, 
who marked them himself. Therefore, gentlemen, if you believe 
these officers, the history of these letters is also complete. 
And as regards the letters in the tourist’s bag, the tourist’s 
bag was opened in the presence of Stevenson and Hart; and 
there can be no doubt, therefore, of what the letters were that 
were contained in that repository. 

Now, it has been said this is a very loose and improper mode 
of conducting this business. It has been said that these 
letters should have been handed over to the Sheriff-clerk, and 
that he was the proper custodier of these documents. Now, 
I am very far indeed from saying that the proceedings in the first 
instance were what I should wish them to have been; because 
I think it right to say that I know no excuse for an officer in 
the execution of a warrant, when he recovers documents under 
the authority of that warrant, not identifying them completely 
at the time. But, on the other hand, that is a question not, 
as I think, relating in the least to the interest of the panel 
at the bar, because, if you shall be satisfied that the chain 
of evidence is complete—that these documents have truly come 
into the hands of the public prosecutor in the state in which 
they were found—why, gentlemen, if these persons had not 
been officers of the law at all, if they had been private individuals 
dealing with articles found in the repositories of a deceased 
relation, and we had the same amount of evidence in regard 
to their custody and transmission, that evidence would have 
been perfect and complete. But it is said they do not know 
yet what documents were recovered by the Procurator-Fiscal. 
Gentlemen, they are not entitled to say so; for this plain reason, 
that they had it in their power at any period, if they pleased, 
to ascertain exactly what documents had been recovered by 
the Procurator-Fiscal. It seemed to be said that the public 
prosecutor was in & position in which it depended entirely on 
his will and pleasure what facilities should be given to an 
accused party—to a party acoused of a crime before the Court. 
I am happy to say, gentlemen, that no such law exists in this 
land. If documents were in the hands of the Procurator-Fiscal, 
or of the public prosecutor, which the prisoner was entitled 
to have access to, the Courts of law were open, and an applica- 
tion to the Court of Justiciary would at once have prevented 
the public prosecutor from keeping back a single document to 
which the prisoner was entitled. And if they had really wished 
to know what documents were recovered by the Procurator- 
Fiscal, and really thought that any documents were retained 

183 


Madeleine Smith. 


Lord Advocate by him, why did they not before this trial—why did they 


not when the trial began—make an application to the Court 
to ascertain that fact in a proper and legitimate manner? 
Gentlemen, I will tell you. Because every scrap of paper 
that passed between the prisoner and the deceased L’Angelier 
has in one shape or other been produced in this process. 
It is not now in the mouth of the prisoner to say, by cross- 
examination, as to matters over which obscurity may in words 
be thrown—it is not in the mouth of the prisoner to say that 
one single document has been retained that she or the agents 
for her defence might, if they chose, have taken the proper 
means to ascertain. There was a complaint made that we had 
refused access to the original documents. Gentlemen, I did 
so—we did sc—on our own responsibility; and that we did 
rightly there can be not a shadow of doubt. You have seen the 
mass of this correspondence; you have heard it explained in 
what state the repositories were; you have seen already, and 
you will know much more, before this case is concluded, how 
vital every scrap may be that we have produced, to the justice 
of this case. It was absolutely necessary that we should have 
the use of documents to identify the handwriting, to trace 
the letters, to ascertain their dates, to ascertain their import ; 
and it was necessary that we should take care that under no 
circumstances should those important elements of evidence run 
the slightest risk of being lost to justice. Gentlemen, the 
prisoner used the right which the law gives to @ person accused 
in this country, among the many other safeguards with which 
our system above all others surrounds a person accused—I say 
the used the privilege of what is called “ running her letters ” 
immediately after the time when she was apprehended ; and 
the effect of running letters is this, that it compels the public 
prosecutor to bring the accused to trial within a certain time, 
otherwise the prisoner must be set free; and accordingly it 
was absolutely necessary that within a limited time the case 
for the prosecution should be prepared ; but the prisoner might 
have delayed the trial at any time. No doubt to a certain 
extent she would have lost the benefit of the haste with which 
the prosecutor otherwise was compelled to complete his case ; 
but if her advisers in such a case as this had really thought 
that there was injustice done—that there had been improper 
obstacles placed in the way of her defence—do you imagine 
that for a fortnight here or there they would have refrained 
from applying for a delay of the trial, which they would have 
got at once from the indulgence of the prosecutor without any 
further proceedings, but which, if the prosecutor had been 
unwilling to grant, the Court, as a matter of course, would 
have given? Gentlemen, I have made these remarks because 
I think that an undue impression may have rested upon your 
184 


Addresses to J ury. 


minds in regard to those matters during the discussions that Lord Advocate 
arose on the trial. To what extent the Sheriff ought personally 
to superintend precognitions, or whether the Sheriff-clerk is 
the proper depositary of these documents, are matters relating 
to the general administration of the criminal law, upon which 
different opinions may subsist, and which may be modified 
by practical difficulties. I am glad to think that I speak in 
the presence of two of the learned judges who have themselves 
been in the position of Sheriffs, and they know well that I 
am right when I say that whatever may be the theory, it has 
not been the practice in any county im Scotland for the Sheriff- 
clerk to be the custodier of documents under circumstances 
such as these; and that, in regard to the taking of precognitions, 
although the Sheriff is responsible unquestionably for precogni- 
tions that are taken, it is not possible in all cases that he shall 
personally superintend a precognition taken, nor is it, I think, 
a subject for observation on the part of my learned friend 
that any particular witness has been precognosced on my 
account without the Sheriff having been present. It is per- 
fectly certain, gentlemen, that any such rule as that would in 
truth paralyse the whole machinery of justice, and this very 
case is an illustration of what would have been the result if 
every precognition in which there were important statements 
bearing on the case had only been taken in the presence of 
the Sheriff. I verture to say that the result would have been 
that this case must have been delayed until it was impossible 
for the public prosecutor to bring the prisoner to trial, or that 
the important public interests which in the great community of 
Glasgow are committed to these important and learned officials 
would have been unnecessarily injured. I do not say this for 
the purpose of in the least questioning the assertion that the 
Sheriff ought as far as possible to be present at the precognition 
of witnesses, especially in a case like this; nor do I say, in 
one way or other, whether in this particular case this duty 
was or was not sufficiently discharged, for I have no means 
of judging of this. What I have said relates to the general 
administration of the criminal law of this country, and has 
no bearing whatever on the interests of the panel in this 
particular case, and is not I think a subject for observation in 
any way, so far as the prisoner at the bar is concerned. 

It has been said that we should not have produced only a 
partial correspondence. I feel it is very unfortunate only to 
have a partial correspondence produced; but I have produced 
all the correspondence to which the prosecutor had access. For 
the most part there was only one side of the correspondence, 
and we had none of the other. We had nearly 200 letters, or 
more than 200 letters, from the prisoner at the bar to deceased 
—we have only one copy of a letter from deceased to prisoner. 


185 


Madeleine Smith. 


Lord Advocate There were other writings in the handwriting of the deceased, 


but these it seems cannot be used in evidence. I regret that 
in a case of such importance, while you have on the one hand 
innumerable letters of the prisoner, you have, on the other hand, 
only one copy of a letter of deceased. How came that? You 
will see in the correspondence that the letters of L’Angelier 
were not destroyed till a very recent date. You could not 
have been much surprised if it had been otherwise. That a lady 
should not preserve letters of that description would not be in 
the least degree remarkable, but there is evidence that down 
to the 7th or 8th February last that correspondence was in 
existence, and we have heard no explanation of any kind as to 
what has become of it. This we know, and this only, that not 
one single scrap in the handwriting of L’Angelier has been 
discovered in this case, excepting those four documents, three 
of which have not been admitted in evidence; therefore, in 
the matter of this correspondence, we have done all we could. 

The only matter in which the prisoner has a legitimate 
interest as regards this question is, no doubt, one of very great 
importance. She has an interest that these letters shall be 
shown to be properly arranged, because it is very often the case 
that letters bear no date except the postmark upon the 
envelopes; and you must be satisfied that each letter was in its 
proper envelope. Let me make this observation, in the first 
place, upon this very important point—that that is a difficulty 
that necessarily occurs in every case where the evidence consists 
of letters sent in envelopes, and the lettera themselves bear 
no date. It has been a misfortune, in the way of tracing the 
fact of letters being sent in that way, that there never was any 
means of connecting the envelope with the letter, except the 
fact of its being found there. Most people, not intending to 
keep their correspondence, and not of very methodical habits in 
that way, constantly leave sometimes the letter and envelope 
apart, sometimes the letter in the wrong envelope; and if the 
officers in this case had gone to work with the most scrupulous 
nicety, and if you had it beyond all question that the letters 
found were produced in precisely the same siate as found, the 
remark of my learned friend would have been equally well 
founded if he had said—‘“ What evidence is there that these 
letters so found in these envelopes were sent in them; and how 
can we know, when letters are found tossing about in a desk 
in an office, not made up with regularity, that this person waa 
in the habit of keeping his letters in a manner which would 
make the envelope proper evidence?” That, I say, is a remark 
which occurs in every case of the kind, and which my learned 
friends are quite entitled to make here. I do not say that the 
envelopes afford conclusive evidence of the dates, but I do 
say that the envelopes in which letters are found form an 

186 


—s 


Addresses to Jury. 


element to enable you to arrive at the truth, and if you find Lord Advocate 
in a series of letters that, in the first place, when a letter is 
dated on a particular day, the post-mark plainly corresponds 
to that particular date—if you can find that a letter bears 
“Monday night,” and the post-mark bears the morning post- 
mark of Tuesday, the 28th, or supposing a letter be dated 
“Monday night,” while there is no day of the month, and the 
next day is Tuesday, the 28th, and that is the post-mark ; or 
that a letter bears date “Monday morning,” and you find that 
the post-mark is Monday, the 20th February—all that, I think, 
will necessarily lead you to conclude, if you find it in a uniform 
series of letters, that these letters have been kept in their 
proper envelopes. I do not say that that even is the case, but 
it is a matter you will judge of as regards the general position 
of the letters; and if you find this to ocour uniformly through- 
out the series of letters, one after the other, you can have no 
‘reason to doubt that these letters have been put in their proper 
envelopes. But I do not rest the proof of the date of the letters 
upon that. There is scarcely one letter the date of which I could 
not prove, if there had been no post-mark or envelope at all, 
by the facts they tell, and by their relation to each other. In 
the laborious investigation which I shall have to make into this 
matter, you will find that thie is very clearly and distinctly 
brought out; and I think you will be satisfied that, although 
these post-marks afford a strong presumption in regard to 
the letters being in the same state as when originally sent, the 
evidence of their dates does not depend on that circumstance 
alone—I think their dates can be proved with absolute 
certainty, so far as we can produce certainty on the human 
mind. 

After this somewhat long digression I come back to the details 
of the case. My story is short. This young lady returned from 
a London boarding-school in the year 1853. She met L’Angelier 
somewhere, I believe, about the end of 1854. L’Angelier’s 
history has not been very clearly brought out. It is plain, 
unquestionably, that in 1851 he was in very poor and destitute 
circumstances. Of his character I say nothing at present but 
this, that it is quite clear that by energy and attention he had 
worked his way up to a position that was at least respectable— 
a position in which those who came in contact with him plainly 
had for him a very considerable regard. It is no part of my 
case to maintain the character of the unhappy deceased. The 
facts in this case make it impossible to speak of him in any 
terms but those of very strong condemnation. Nor am I at all 
inclined to say that from first to last his conduct was that of 
a man of honour. But still it is plain that, when Miss Smith 
became first acquainted with L’Angelier, he was a man moving 
in a respectable position, bearing a respectable character, liked 

187 


Madeleine Smith. 


Lord Advocate by all those who came in contact with him spoken of by the 
‘three landladies with whom he lodged in the highest possible 
terms—a man of whom the chancellor of the French Consulate 
spoke as respectable and steady—a man spoken of by his 
employers and by his fellow-clerks in Huggins’s warehouse also 
in the highest terms. I do not say anything of that at present, 
but such is the fact. These two persons met; they were intro- 
duced, I assume, clandestinely. After a time, it seems, an 
attachment commenced, which was forbidden by her parents. 
It is only right to say that the earlier letters of the prisoner 
at that time show good feeling, proper affection, and a proper 
sense of duty. Time went on; the intercourse was again 
renewed, and in the course of 1856, as you must have found, 
it assumed a criminal aspect. From that time down to the end ( 
of the year, not once or twice, but, I have evidence to show, 
repeatedly, acts of improper connection took place. It will f 
be necessary for you to take into your consideration that she | 
had so completely committed herself by the end of 1856, 
that she was, I will not say in L’Angelier’s power (he was in ; 
her power), but she belonged to him, and could with honour 
belong to no one else. But her affection began to cool; another 
suitor appeared; she endeavoured to break off her connection 
with L’Angelier by coldness, and asked him to return her 
letters. He refused, and threatened to put them into the hands 
of her father; and it seemed to be said that this was a kind of 
dishonourable threat. There is much that is dishonourable in 
this case, but not in that. It would not have been honourable 
to allow the prisoner at the bar to become the wife of any other 
man. It was then she saw the position she was in—she knew 
what letters she had written to L’Angelier—she knew what 
he could reveal—she knew that, if those letters were sent to 
her father, not only would her marriage with Mr. Minnoch be 
broken off, but that she could not hold up her head again. 
She writes in despair to him to give her back her letters; he 
refuses. There is one interview—she attempts to buy prussic 
acid ; there is another interview—she has bought arsenic; there 
is a third interview—she has bought arsenic again. Her letters 
—instead of being cold, instead of demands for the recovery of 
her letters being contained in them—again assume all the 
warmth of affection they had the year before. Qn the 12th of 
March she has been with Mr. Minnoch making arrangements for 
her marriage in June—on the 2Ist she invites L’Angelier, with 
all the ardour of passion, to come to see her—she buys arsenic ' 
on the 18th—and I’Angelier dies of poison on the morning of | 
the 23rd. The story is strange, in its horrors almost incredible; 
and no one can wonder that such a story should carry a thrill | 
of horror into every family in the land. Well may my learned 
friend require me to bring strong proof of it; for certainly, 

188 | 


Addresses to J ury. 


without clear proof, no one would believe it. The prisoner is Lord Advocate 
well entitled to every presumption of innocence which law and 

reason can give her; but if, as I am certainly bound to do, I 

bring before you such proof as to carry conviction to your 

minds that no reasonable man can doubt—that no reasonable 

ray of doubt can penetrate the judgment—then, incredible as 

the story is, and fearful as the result of your verdict must be, 

we have no alternative, in the discharge of our public duty, 

but myself to ask, and you to give, that verdict which the 

facts of the case, if proved, demand. 

But what that proof is to be you must consider very seriously. 
In cases of this kind—in occult crimes especially—the ends of 
justice would be perpetually defeated if you were to say you 
shall not convict a man unless you find some person who saw the 
crime committed. But in the case of administration of poison, 
that remark applies with peculiar force. In truth, the fact of 
administering poison before witnesses is so far from affording, 
in the first instance, a presumption of guilt, that it. sometimes 
is the strongest proof of innocence. I remember a case which 
attracted as much attention in a sister country as this has 
done in ours. The culprit there sat by the bedside of his 
victim, surrounded by medical attendants—gave him the poison 
in their presence—sat and witnessed its effect—saw his dying 
agonies with a coolness that could hardly be believed. There 
could hardly be a stronger presumption of his innocence than 
that; and the result was that he very nearly had entirely 
escaped suspicion from the fact that the thing was done openly. 
And, therefore, in the case of the administration of poison, the 
fact of there being no eye-witness to the administration is not 
an element of much weight in the inquiry. You may assume 
that if it was done with a guilty intention it was done secretly. 
The question is, whether we have evidence to trace the crime 
from the course of the circumstances. 

Now, having thus given you an outline of the nature of the 
evidence, I go on to consider that evidence in detail; and I 
shall endeavour to do that in a manner which shall bring clearly 
before you how these facts, in their order, bear upon the crime 
alleged. We have to take the links of different parts of this 
chain of evidence somewhat out of the order in which the evidence 
has been led. I shall now proceed to look at them exactly in 
the order of time, beginning with April, 1856. The first letter 
which it is necessary for me to refer to is the letter dated 29th 
April. I have already given you an outline of the nature of the 
connection that began between the prisoner and the deceased at 
that time; and I intend to read a few passages from the cor- 
respondence between 29th April, 1856, and the end of that year, 
in order to show you—first, how far the prisoner had committed 
herself at that time; and, secondly, the moral and mental state 


189 


Madeleine Smith. 


Lord Advocate to which she had reduced herself. You will then be better able 


to appreciate the course which ultimately she was led to pursue. 
That letter of the 29th April, 1856, is one of the few letters 
which bear a date. It has also a post-mark, “ Helensburgh, 
April 30, ’66.” In that letter she says—‘“ Dearest, I must see 
you; it is fearful never to see you; but I am sure I don’t know 
when I vhall see you. P. has not been a night in town for some 
time, but the first night he is off I shall see you. We shall 
spend an hour of bliss. There shall be no risk; only C. H. shall 
know ”—this C. H. being Christina Haggart, who was made the 
confidante of this amour since its commencement, and the 
vehicle through whom the letters were transmitted. That was 
on the 29th of April. On Friday a letter without a date is 
written, and enclosed in an envelope which bears the post-mark 
of Saturday, “May 3rd, 56.” In this letter, dated Friday, the 
prisoner says—“ P. has been in bed two days. If he should not 
feel well and come down on Tuesday, it shal] make no difference. 
Just you come; only darling, I think if he is in the boat, you 
should get out at Helensburgh. Well, beloved, you shall come 
to the gate—you know it—and wait till I come. And then, 
oh happiness, won’t I kiss you, my love, my own beloved Emile, 
my husband dear? I don’t think there is any risk. Well, 
Tuesday, 6th May—the gate—half-past ten; you understand, 
darling.” The next letter is dated “Wednesday morning, five 
o’clock,” and bears the post-mark, “ Helensburgh, 7th.” There 
are two post-marks, but the year and month are not legible, 
though the month appears from one post-mark to be May, and 
the year 1856. In this letter, dated “ Wednesday morning, five 
o’clock,” and found in an envelope bearing the date 7th May, 
you have these words—“ My own, my beloved husband—I trust 
to God you got home safe, and were not much the worse of 
being out. Thank you, my love, for coming so far to see your 
Mimi. It is truly a pleasure to see my Emile. Beloved, if we 
did wrong last night, it was in the excitement of our love. 
Yes, beloved, I did truly love you with my soul.” Then she 
says further down—“ Am I not your wife? Yes, I] am. And you 
may rest assured, after what has passed, that I cannot be the 
wife of any other but dear, dear Emile.” Then after referring 
to a journey to Lima, which L’Angelier had proposed making, 
she goes on to say—“I shall write dear Mary soon. What 
would she say if she knew we were so intimate? She would 
lose all her good opinion of us both—would she not?” That 
letter speaks language not to be mistaken. From that period 
dates the commencement of the criminal intimacy between the 
parties. The letters between that date of 7th May and the 
end of the year are written in a strain that really I do not 
think 1 should comment upon. I can say this, that the expres- 
sions in these letters—the language in which they are couched 
190 


Addresses to J ury. 


-——the matters to which they refer—show so entire an overthrow Lord Advocate 
of the moral sense—the sense of moral delicacy and decency— 
as to create a picture which I do not know ever had its parallel 
in an inquiry of this sort. That is the character of these letters 
from May, 1856, down to the end. Where the prisoner had 
learned this depraved moral state of thought and feeling it is 
not for me to say. If my learned friend means to say that 
L’Angelier had his own share in corrupting her moral sense, 
I shall not much dispute it. It does not matter to this inquiry 
whether that was so or not. There is scarcely one of these letters 
down to the end of December, 1856, or beyond that period, 
that does not allude in direct terms to such things as are 
alluded to in the letters already quoted from. I next refer to a 
letter dated “Friday night,” enclosed in an envelope bearing 
the post-mark “ Helensburgh, Friday, 27th May,” from which I 
take the following as a specimen of the letters which passed 
at this time. In that letter she says—“I think I would be wish- 
ing you to love me, if I were with you, but I don’t suppose you 
would refuse me, for I know you will like to love your Mimi” 
—three scores being made under “love.” In a letter, which 
has no date, she swears she will never marry any one else, and 
in another letter, enclosed in the same envelope, she says—“ Our 
intimacy has not been criminal, as I am your wife before God.” 
Then she says—“I promise to you, you shall have it (my like 
ness) some day, so that promise won’t be broken. If I did not 
sign my name, it was for no reason. Unless it is to a stranger, 
I never do put Smith, only Madeleine.” The conclusion of that 
letter is in the same strain as the rest. The correspondence 
proceeds, and we have a letter dated Saturday night, and 
bearing the Helensburgh post-mark, “July, ’56.” The dates are 
really not material, as the letters are evidently written in 1856, 
and I need not stop to demonstrate the precise time. If there 
were more doubt about the post-marks it would make no differ- 
ence, as the relations between the parties in 1856 are sufficiently 
established independent of that evidence. But in that letter 
she says—“I shall not see you till the nights are a little darker. 
I can trust C. H. She will never tell about our meetings. 
She intends to be married in November; but she may change 
her mind.” In point of fact, C. H., or Christina Haggart, was 
married in May last, and the references in the letter sufficiently 
determine the period when it was written. The next letter I 
refer to is one dated on Thursday evening, in which the prisoner 
says—“I cannot see you ere you go, for which I am sorry. 
You forget that my little sister is in my bedroom, and I could 
not go out by the window, or leave the house, and she there. 
It is only when P. is away I can see you, for then Janet sleeps 
with M.” She then refers to his visit to Badgemore. My 
learned friend requested that the last passage in that letter 


19K 


Madeleine Smith. 


Lord Advocate should be read, for the purpose of showing that she had read an 
article in Blackwood’s Magazine about arsenic. That shows 
plainly, at any rate, that it was written in the month of 
September. At the bottom of the page is this passage—‘“I did 
tell you at one time that I did not like—(William is first 
written, but scored out)—Minnoch, but he was so pleasant that. 
he quite raised himself in my estimation.” That must have 
been in September, 1856, and you will see that in the corre 
spondence to the end of the year there are constant allusions 
to Minnoch, by way of preparing L’Angelier for something in 
connection with that man. And it turns out. in point of fact, 
that L’Angelier did become extremely jealous of his attentions. 
The next letter has the post-mark, “ Helensburgh, 29th Septem- 
ber.” She begins by saying—“I did not write you on Saturday, 
as C. H. was not at home, so I could not get it posted. ath 
I don’t think I can see you this week. But I think next Monday 
I shall, as P. and M. are to be in Edinburgh. But my only 
thought is Janet; what am I to do with her? I shall have to 
wait till she is asleep, which may be near eleven o'clock. But 
you may be sure I shall do it as soon as I can.” Further on she 
goes on to say—“ Mr. Minnoch has been here since Friday. He 
is most agreeable. I think we shall see him very often this 
winter. He says we shall, and P. being so fond of him, I am 
sure he will ask him in often.” You will recollect that Mr. 
Minnoch’s house is next to Mr. Smith’s in Blythswood Square. 
In illustration of what I have said that these letters do not 
require post-marks to prove the dates, I may remark that the 
last letter is clearly written some time after the end of August, 
1856, and clearly written just before the family left Helens- 
burgh to go, for the first time, to the Blythswood Square house, 
referring, as it does, to Mr. Minnoch’s vicinity to the family. 
In the next letter, writing from Helensburgh on Tuesday—post- 
mark illegible—she says—“I forgot to tell you last night that 
I shall not be able, of an evening, to let you in. My room is 
next to B., and on the same floor as the front door. (This refers 
to the Blythswood Square house, which he had never yet seen.) 
I shall never be able to spend the happy hours we did last 
winter.” You will find by and by that she got over that diffi- 
culty. The next letter to which I refer is one dated Sunday 
evening, with the Helensburgh post-mark of Monday, 20th 
October, in which she says—“ Papa is very busy with some 
election matters.” This refers to the civic elections in 
November, and fixes the date of the letter beyond 
question at the end of October. On the Sunday evening, 
then, before Monday, the 20th October, she says— 
“Janet is not well; she has a bad cold. Do you know I 
have taken a great dislike to C. H. I shall try and do without 
her aid in the winter. She has been with us four years, and 


192 


Addresses to Jury. 


I am tired of her, but I won’t show it to her.” The next letter Lord Advocate, 
is dated “ Friday night, twelve o’clock,” and is posted in Glasgow 
on the 18th November. In this letter she says— Sweet love,— 
You should get those brown envelopes; they would not be so 
much seen as white ones put down into my window. You should 
just stoop down to tie your shoe, and then slip it in. The back 
door is closedg M. keeps the key, for fear our servant boy 
would go out an evening. We have got blinds for our 
windows. . . .” She had so arranged that, instead of having 
her room on the same floor with the front door, she should have 
it on the same floor as the low front door, so that the window 
of her room, being on a level with the pavement, might be a 
depository for their correspondence. This is the first letter, 
then, in which instructions are given as to how the correspond- 
ence is to take place at the Blythswood Square house. I shall 
now wish you to look at the plan of the house. [After referring 
to the various apartments in the front and back floors, and to 
their connection with each other, his lordship continued} This 
letter, among other things, contains this passage—“ I saw Robert 
Anderson ; he was speaking of the Huggins’s, but did not speak 
of you. I am so fond of any one speaking of you, beloved 
L’Angelier.” Then, after some expressions of the kind I have 
alluded to, the letter ends thus—‘“I have been ordered by the 
doctor, since I came to town, to take a fearful thing, called 
peasemeal—such a nasty thing. But I don’t think I can take 
this meal. I shall rather take cocoa.” And you have it wm 
evidence that she did so. [His lordship, in again referring to 
the plan of the house, said|—I make a remark to this just now 
for the purpose of stating that a person coming into the front 
door could get into the dining-room without attracting any 
attention whatever from those occupying the bedrooms at the 
back of the house. It is also apparent from the plan that any 
one could go to the kitchen from Miss Madeleine’s bedroom on 
the sunk floor without attracting attention; and what is more, 
a person going out from Miss Madeleine’s bedroom could go 
up the inner staircase without attracting the attention of those 
occupying the bedrooms in the back of the house, or any of 
the other bedrooms. I think you have here the position of 
these rooms; and now, gentlemen, I will call your attention to 
a letter dated Monday evening, having no post-mark, but 
stating that it is “the first letter I have written in Blythswood 
Square house.” In this letter there are various repetitions of 
matters mentioned in former letters that I have referred to 
This, then, brings them to the house in Blythswood Square, 
and now you will see the course that the correspondence takes 
In one letter she says—“I don’t think I can take you in as 
I did in India Street,” plainly showing that she had taken 
him in there. Then she says in the next letter, which is dated 


N 193 


Madeleine Smith. 


Lord Advocate “ Thursday evening, eleven o’clock,” and bears the post-mark 


of “Friday, November 21,” and which was evidently written 
in the Blythswood Square house—“ Now, about writing, I wish 
you to write me and give me the note on Tuesday evening next. 
You will, about eight o’clock, come and put the letter down 
into the window—(just drop it in—I won’t be there at the time) 
—the window next to Minnoch’s close door. There are two 
windows together with white blinds. Don’t be seen near the 
house on Sunday, as M. won’t be at church, and she will watch. 
In your letter, dear love, tel] me what night of the week will 
be best for you to leave the letter for me. If M. and P. were 
from home I would take you in very well at the front door, 
just the same way as I did in India Street, and I won’t let a 
chance pass—I won’t, sweet pet of my soul, my only best-loved 
darling.” I have told you, gentlemen, that she could perfectly 
well take him in at the front door. She could leave her own 
room, go upstairs, and she had only to open the hall door 
sufficiently to enable L’Angelier to get into the drawing-room, 
so as to prevent the possibility of being heard from any of the 
back rooms of the house. And this letter proves that it was 
not a mere theory, but what she proposed to do. The next 
letter bears no date, but it is posted 6.23 p.m. on Friday, the 
26th December, 1856. Gentlemen, I only allude to this letter 
for the purpose of making an observation with regard to dates. 
She says she is going out on Wednesday night, but that she 
will try and write on Thursday. There is a postscript to the 
letter, which bears this—“ Thursday, 11th December, six or 
eight o’clock.” Now, this you might at first take:for a date, 
but it is simply the date of an assignation. And this proves 
two things—first, that the letter was written before Thursday, 
and after the Thursday of the preceding week, as the post-mark 
bears Friday. Then the next letter is on a Tuesday 
morning, and bears the post-mark of the 14th of the month. 
Gentlemen, it seems plain that there was at this time a serious 
intention on the part of these persons to make an elopement. 
You had it proved by many witnesses. You had it proved by 
the landlady, Mrs. Clark, as to the intention to have the 
banns proclaimed on Sunday, and the marriage to take place on 
Monday. There are, besides, various allusions in the letters 
to getting married by a Justice of the Peace. The letter No. 71 
I only refer to for the purpose of showing that on a particular 
occasion the proclamation of the banns was spoken about ; and 
you will find mention of it otherwise. No. 73 bears the date 
of Thursday night, and the 16th December was Friday ; the 
post-mark bearing date the 17th of a month which is not 
legible. In the next letter she says—“I am going to a concert 
to-morrow, but it is the last one. I don’t know if Minnoch is 
going. Janet and Jack (her sister and brother) have sent out 


194 


Addresses to Jury. 


fifty invitations for the 29th. James is to be at home on Friday.” Lord Advocate 
That is dated Tuesday, and the next letter is dated Thursday. 
Now, Thursday was the 18th December, and it bears the post- 
mark of the 19th. Now, you see, gentlemen, that in almost 
every instance in the letters which I have read to you, the day 
of the week precisely corresponds with the post-mark on the 
envelope. It has been proved that this was one of the letters 
found in the desk of the deceased, and taken to the Procurator- 
Fiscal’s office, where it was marked by Mr. Stevenson. No. 75, 
which is the next of the series I have to allude to, was plainly 
written after the last letter I read, and I mention this 
to show how the dates correspond, because in this letter she 
says she was going with Mr. Minnoch to a concert, and she 
says— You say you heard I took M. to the concert against his 
inclination, and forced him to go. I told you the right way 
when I wrote. But from your statement in your letter of tonight 
you did not believe my word. Emile, I would not have done 
this to you. Even now I would write and tell you. I would 
not believe every idle report. No; I would not. I would, my 
beloved Emile, believe my husband’s word before any other. 
But you always listen to reports about me if they are bad. 
You know I could not sit a whole evening without talking, but 
I have not flirted.” Gentlemen, there is evidence here, which 
you have under the hand of the prisoner further on, that after 
the first. paroxysms had subsided, her affection towards 
L’Angelier had cooled. The reason of that it is not necessary 
that we should discern. He seems to have been rather exacting ; 
but whatever the reason might be, it is quite plain that a 
ehange came over her affection about this time. I have now 
brought. them down to the 18th December, 1856, and she says 
herself in a subsequent letter that her coolness began in 
November, when they came to Glasgow. Not only so, but she 
begins to do what L’Angelier called flirting with Mr. Minnoch. 
Mr. Minnoch bas told you that at this time and during the whole 
of this winter there was a tacit understanding between them 
that they were lovers. She alludes to this in her letter when 
she refers to the reports about her, and denies that there is 
any truth in them. On the next day she says—* For your 
sake I shall be very cold to everybody. I am rather more fond 
of C. H. She is very civil. I will trust her.” Gentlemen, there 
is in the rest of this letter what I will not read, but there is 
a plain and obvious reference to the possibility of her becoming 
a mother, which, under the circumstances, it is impossible not 
to see the force of. Then the next letter occurs on Thursday. 
Thursday was the 25th of December, and it is posted on the 
26th or 28th of the month. But the one following, No. 79, 
is one of great consequence, because it refers to the meetings 
in the Blythswood Square house. It is dated Monday. Monday 


195 


Madeleine Smith. 


Lord Advocate was the 22nd of December, but there is no date, or the post- 

mark has been obliterated. I think, however, there is internal 
evidence that it was written on that Monday. She says— 
“Beloved Emile,—We must meet. If you love me you will 
come to me when P. and M. go to Edinburgh, which will be 
the 7th or 10th January,” and then she goes to speak of 
Christmas dinners, and says that they are “great bores.” She 
then goes on to say—“ Will you give me a letter on Friday 
at six o’clock, as I have promised to go with Jack to the pan- 
tomime,” and at the top of the page she speaks about James 
giving a party. You remember, with reference to Janet and 
James giving a party two days preceding, and as this letter 
alludes to the party, it proves unquestionably that it must have 
been written about the date I have assigned to it. And as it 
bears the date of Monday night, I think I am right in assuming 
it to be Monday, the 22nd. There is the further allusion to a 
merry Christmas, and to going to Sauchiehall Street, which 
shows it to have been about that time. It was plainly written 

e before Christmas, 1856. You will find a reference in a subse- 
quent letter to her having gone to the pantomime. She says— 
“P. and M. thought of going to Edinburgh,” and then she 
continues—“ If P. and M. go, will you not, sweet love, come to 
your Mimi? Do you think I would ask you if I saw danger 
in the house? No, love, I would uot. I shall let you in; no 
one shall see you. We can make it late—twelve, if you please. 
You have no long walk. No, my own beloved. My sweet, dear 
Emile. Emile, I see your sweet smile. I hear you say you will 
come and see your Mimi, clasp her to your bosom, and kiss her, 
call her your own pet, your wife. Emile will not refuse me. 
aes I need not wish you a merry Christmas, but I shall 
wish that we may spend the next together, and that we shall 
then be happy.” This means that he shall come into the house 
as he had done before, and it speaks of his clasping her to his 
heart. The next letter bears the date of the 27th, and keeping 
in mind what was said about the pantomime—and that Saturday 
is the date of the letter—the post-mark shows that it must 
have been posted on the 24th of December. In this letter she 
says—“ Now, I must tell you something you may hear. I was , 
at the theatre; and people, my love, may tell you that M. was | 


there too. Well, M. was there, but he did not know of my 
going. He was in the Club Box, and I did not even bow to 
him. To-day, when B., marnma, and I were walking, M. joined 
us, took a walk with us, and came home. He was most civil ; 
and kind. He sent Janet such a lovely flower to-night, to wear : 
on Monday evening. Now, I have told you this, sweet pet, I 
know you will be angry; but I would rather bear your anger 
than that you should perhaps blame me for not telling you, as 
some one will be sure to inform you of me.” Then she says— 
196 


Addresses to Jury. 


“ Will you drop me a note at six, eight, or ten o'clock? I hope Lord Advocate 
you may be happy, but what are you to do on New-Year’s 
Day?” This proves beyond all possibility of question that it 

was after the letter in which she had proposed to go to the 
pantomime. There is an interval between the 27th of December 

till Friday evening, 9th January. 

And now, gentlemen, having traced the correspondence down 
to this date, proving the greatest intimacy between the parties, 
proving the correspondence to be of such a character that no 
eye could see it without her character being utterly blasted, 
proving also vows, over and over repeated, that, after her 
intimacy with him, she could be his wife and that of no other, 
as to be so would be a sin—having intimated in as strong 
language as she could that for Mr. Minnoch she had no affection 
whatever—that she had at no time whatever flirted with him 
or any one else, being his wife—having proved all this down 
to the end of 1856, we now come to the crisis, and I must 
ask you to keep the dates in mind from this time forward. 
The next act in this tragedy begins, you will see, on the 9th 
January, 1857. This is one of the few letters that bear a date, 
and it is dated “Friday, 9th January,” and was posted in the 
receiving office of Glasgow, 10th January. The envelope there- 
fore shows the correspondence, with the date. In this letter 
she says—“It is past eleven o'clock, and no letter from you, 
my own, ever dear, beloved husband. Why this, sweet one? 
I think I heard your stick this evening. Pray, do not make 
any sounds whatever at my window. If it were possible, sweet 
one, would you not leave my notes at six as at ten o’clock? The 
moon is up, and it is light. I hope, my own, ever dear, beloved 
one, you feel better, and that you are in better spirits. Sweet, 
dear Emile, I do truly and fondly love you with my heart 
and soul. But you, I know, think me cool and indifferent.” 
And then she goes on to say—“ How do you keep yourself warm 
in bed? I have Janet beside me; but I often wish you were 
with me. Would you not put your arms round your Mimi, and 
fondly embrace her and keep her warm? Ah, yes, I know you 
would.” Then she wonders if the time would ever come, and 
then at page 2 she has an observation which I think you will | 
find of some consequence. She says—‘I wish I could see 
you; but I must not even look out of the window, so just leave 
your note and go away.” This was a general intimation, as 
much as to say, “If you come to my window, and I don’t look 
out, you must assume there is some reason why I pretend not 
to see you, so just leave my note and go away.” The next letter 
ig dated Saturday night. Saturday was the 10th of January, 
and it bears the post-mark of 11th January It. says—“ My own 
dear, beloved Emile, I cannot tell you how sorry I was last 
night at not hearing from you. . . - If you would risk it, 

197 


Madeleine Smith. 


‘Lord Advocate my sweet, beloved pet, we would have time to kiss each other 
and a dear fond embrace; and though, sweet lovey it is only 
for @ minute, do you not think it is better than not meeting 
at all?” Observe that the preceding day was January the 
9th. In the next letter there is nothing material. She tells 
him that her father wished they had a larger place than Row, 
and that they would not likely go back there again. Now, at 
this very time Mr Minnoch has told you that a few days after- 
wards he asked the prisoner to be his wife, and yet she writes 
to L’Angelier on Monday night—“ Sweet love, come if you can.” 
The next letter is dated Monday, and this must be Monday the 
12th. It seems that they had been in the habit of having 
interviews under the windows—sometimes, as appears from 
one instance, he left a letter at the window, and got, I suppose, 
an answer to it in the same way. This letter was posted on 
the 14th, and there is nothing material in it, excepting that 
she says in a postscript that she does not hear of their going 
from home, that she is afraid there is no chance for them, and 
that she does not see how they could be married in Edinburgh. 
She also speaks of Mr. Minnoch, and that if L’Angelier saw him 
she thinks he would like him, as she liked him better than she 
used to do. Then, gentlemen, came a letter dated Friday 
afternoon, and posted the same day, because, when she writes 
during the day, she posts her letter the same day, and, if at 
night, not till the day after. In this letter she asks L’Angelier 
if his cold is better, and wishes he would- get well as soon as he 
could. There is also a reference to Sir Edward Bulwer Lytton, 
who was about that time made Lord Rector, and she wishes, 
“if she should go to Edinburgh, that a note should be left for 
her on Sunday at six o’clock, or on Monday at the same hour. 
The next letter is dated Monday, five o’clock. Now Monday 
was the 19th January, and it bears the post-mark of Glasgow, 
19th January. It is one of those that were found in the desk 
of L’Angelier, and taken to the Fiscal by Mr. Stevenson. In 
this letter she says—“ My sweet Emile, I hope you are well.” 
Gentlemen, let me make this remark, that though the expres- 
sions from this time forward are much the same in effect, there 
is a manifest chill in them—the letters are shorter and curter 
and colder than before. “TI did not sleep all night thinking of 
my pet. I went to Govan with M., and when I got home I 
was looking so ill M. made me go and take a walk to get some 
colour, so B. Pattison and I took a long walk on the Dumbarton 
Road. When I told you, love, to write me for to-night I forgot 
I am to be out.” This is on Monday, 19th January, and she 
writes further—* As we go at nine o'clock your letter will not 
be here, but I shall tell C. H. to take it in. Dearest Emile. all 
this day I have wished for you one moment to kiss you; to lay 
my head on your breast would make me happy. I think 7 
198 


Addresses to J ury. 


shall see you Thursday night. I think P. is not at home. But Lord Advocate 
you shall hear. Adieu, my loved one. My husband. My own 
little pet. Adieu. God bless you. I am your wife. Your own 
Mimi L’Angelier. P.S.—I don’t think I should send you this 
scroll but I could not help . . .” She goes on to say in 
it—“I am your wife; I did love you so much when you were 
at the window last night.” And so, he was at the window on 
Sunday the 18th January. Now, gentlemen, go back to the 
letter of the 9th January; you will see that it contains this 
passage— When we shall meet again I cannot tell.” In the 
letter of the 10th January she says—“ My sweet, dear pet, I 
should so like to spend three or four hours with you just to 
talk over some things; but I don’t know when we can meet, 
not for ten days. I might say Monday, same as last.” This 
proves that they had met. “If you would risk it, my sweet, 
beloved pet, we would have time to kiss each other, and a dear, 
fond embrace; and though, sweet love, it is only for a minute, 
do you not think it is better than not meeting at all?” In 
the course of ten days they were to meet; they had met before, 
but their meeting was postponed for the present. I have been 
reading to you previously from the letter of Monday, 19th 
January. Now, there is a letter, No. 97, enclosed, bearing the 
date Glasgow, January 27, and written on Friday; this letter 
was shown to the prisoner, and she recognises the envelope. 
But in this envelope there is another letter, bearing no date 
but “Sunday night.” At first it is not easy to say how it was 
enclosed in the envelope of Friday the 23rd January, but that 
letter is written in pencil, and in all probability was never in 
an envelope at all. It says—* Emile, my own beloved, you’ 
have just left me. Oh, sweet darling, at this moment my heart 
and soul burns with love for thee, my husband, my sweet one. 
Emile, what would I not give at this moment to be your fond 
wife. My nightdress was on when you saw me; would to God 
you had been in the same attire.” Now, I think it plain that 
the true date of this letter is Sunday the 18th, because the 
letter of Monday the 19th says—“I did love you so much last 
night when you were at the window.” The next date is 
“Wednesday forenoon, five o'clock,” the post-mark “ 21st 
January, 1857,” and Wednesday was the 21st of January, 1857. 
This is a very short letter. It says—‘I have just five minutes 
to spare. Why no letter, et? On Monday night it was such 
a disappointment to your imi. I cannot see you on Thursday 
as I hoped.” The next letter is dated “Thursday, twelve 
o'clock”; the envelope bears the post-mark of 23rd January, 
and Friday was the 23rd of that month. The letter, therefore, 
was written on Thursday. She had said in the former letter— 
“J cannot see you on Thursday as I hoped.” Then she writes 
in this letter—“ I was so very sorry that I could not see you to 


199 


Madeleine Smith. 


Lord Advocate night. I had expected an hour’s chat with you; but we must just 
hope for better the next time.” That letter also was found in 
the desk, and was spoken to by the prisoner in her declaration. 
She says in it—“M. is not well enough to go from home; and 
my dear, sweet, little pet, I don’t see we could manage, in 
Edinburgh, because I could not leave a friend’s house without 
their knowing it. So, sweet pet, it must at present. be put off 
till a better time. I see no chance before March, but rest 
assured, my dear love, Emile, if 1 see any chance I shall let 
you know of it.” That that was written about the 23rd there is 
no question, because she iderttifies it in her declaration. Now, 
gentlemen, mark this—On the 28th of the month of January 
the prisoner accepts Minnoch. The two next documents are two 
envelopes, and they bear date the 24th and 26th January. 
You will immediately see why there are no letters in them. 
I will pass them over in the meantime, and I now come to two 
letters of the deepest possible consequence. They are enclosed 
in envelopes, and the post-mark is “ Glasgow —————. 1857.” 
They are deliverable in the morning. Just before I read them 
let me refer to the evidence of Mr. Kennedy upon this most 
material period of time. She had, as I have told you, accepted 
Mr. Minnoch on the 28th January. Kennedy says that on a 
morning in February—he thinks a fortnight before the 23rd— 
L’Angelier had come to the counting-house with tears in his 
eyes, and said that Miss Smith had written to him for her 
letters, and breaking off the engageme1..; that she said there 
was coolness on both sides; that he had got the letter that 
morning; that he would not give up the letters; and that she 
should not marry any one else while he lived. L’Angelier tells 
this to Kennedy on the day that the letter came ; you can have 
no doubt, therefore, that the two letters I am about to read 
to you were sent to L’Angelier. She says—“T felt truly 
astonished to bave my last letter returned to me, but it will 
be the last you shall have an opportunity of returning.” There 
are two envelopes produced, I have said, and one of the letters 
which they contained must have been returned to Miss Smith 
by L’Angelier. “TI felt astonished,” she says, evidently because 
the letter from him was not couched in the ordinary language 
of affection. There is a “2” on the postmark, and that it was 
written on the 2nd is beyond all question; and of course it 
arrived on the 3rd. It says—* When you are not pleased with 
the letters I send you, then our correspondence shall be at an 
end; and as there is a coolness on both sides, our engagement 
had better be broken.” Now, these are the very words that 
Kennedy told you L’Angelier repeated to him on the morning 
when he entered the counting-house so much distressed. She 
says—“ You have more than once returned me my letters, and 
my mind was made up that I should not stand the same thing 

200 


Addresses to Jury. 


again. And you also annoyed me much on Saturday by your Lord Advocate 
conduct in coming so near me; altogether, I think, owing to 
coolness and indifference (nothing else) that we had better for 
the future consider ourselves strangers. I trust to your honour 
as a gentleman that you will not reveal anything that may 
have passed between us. I shall feel obliged by your bringing 
me my letters and likeness on Thursday evening at seven. 
Be at the area gate, and C. H. (Christina Haggart) will take the 
parcel from you. On Friday night I shall send you all your 
letters, likeness, &c. I trust that you may yet be happy, and 
get one more worthy of you than I. On Thursday at seven 
o'clock.” She says that she had found coolness and indifference 
on both sides, and for that reason, and as she affirms for nothing 
else, the engagement had better be broken off. But remember, 
gentlemen, four days before that letter was written she had 
been engaged to Mr. Minnoch. She was to return L’Angelier’s 
letters to him; therefore she had them. On the 2nd of 
February, 1857, she had his letters; she was to return them 
on the Friday; and she was also to return L’Angelier’s likeness. 
It was found in her chamber. What became of these letters 
we have no explanation of whatever. There is a postscript to 
this important letter. She says—“ You may be astonished at 
this sudden change, but for some time back you must have 
noticed a coolness in my notes. My love for you has ceased, 
and that is why I was cool. I did love you truly and fondly, 
but for some time back I have lost much of that love. There 
is no other reason for my conduct, and I think it but fair to 
let you know this. I might have gone on and become your 
wife, but I could not have loved you as I ought. (She was 
engaged at this time to another man.) My conduct you will 
condemn, but I did at one time love you with my heart and 
soul. It has cost me much to tell you—sleepless nights—but 
it was necessary that you should know. If you remain in 
Glasgow or go away, I hope you may succeed in all your 
endeavours. I know you will never injure the character of 
one you so fondly loved. No, Emile, { know you have honour, 
and are a gentleman. What has passed you will not mentiou. 
1 know when I ask you that you will comply. Adieu.” 
Gentlemen, what a labyrinth of bewilderment this unhappy 
girl, first by her lapse of virtue, and then by her want of truth, 
was driving herself into! She tries to break off this engage 
ment because she says there was coolness on both sides, which 
I daresay on her part was not affected. She says she has no 
other reason for her condret but that she has lost her love 
for L’Angelier—she says this when she knows that the actual 
reason’ is that she has pledged her word to another. She tells 
L’Angelier that her affection was withdrawn, in the hope that 
his indignant spirit would induce bim to turn her off, when 
204 


Madeleine Smith. 


Lord Advocate she would be free to form another engagement. But, gentle 
men, she had the dreadful recollection of the existence of the 
correspondence. She probably did not know how much 
L’Angelier had preserved of it, but she knew that she was 
completely in his power. Gentlemen, she did not hear from 
L’Angelier for more than a week. She accordingly wrote this 
second letter, which bears the post-mark of the 9th February ; 
and its contents prove that it was then written. “I attribute 
to your having cold that I had no answer to my last note. 
On Thursday evening you were, I suppose, afraid of the night 
air. I fear your cold is not better. I again appoint Thursday 
night first—same place—street gate—seven o’clock.—M.” Now, 
gentlemen, the first Thursday in February was the 5th, and the 
next consequently was the 12th, therefore this letter was written 
after the 5th, and some days before the 12th. She adds in the 
same letter—“ If you bring me the parcel on Thursday, please 
write a note saying when you shall bring it, and address it to 
C.H. . . . Send it by post.” She had heard nothing, got 
no answer to the demand for her letters, and she writes this 
cold letter in the tone of the former, saying everything is 
broken off, and making a second appointment for the delivery 
of her letters. Gentlemen, L’Angelier refused to give up the 
letters. He refused to give them up to her. He told Miss 
Perry, and he told Mr. Kennedy, and J think he told others, 
that he would not give up the letters, but that, on the contrary, 
he would show them to her father. Now, gentlemen, in other 
circumstances, and had matters not gone so far between these 
unfortunate persons, it might have been considered a dis- 
honourable and ungenerous thing in a man in L’Angelier’s 
position to take that line of conduct. But whether it was or 
no is not material to the matter in hand. I must say, however, 
that in the position in which the prisoner and L’Angelier stood, 
I do not see how he, as a man of honour, could allow this 
marriage with Mr. Minnoch to take place and remain silent. 
It may be doubted whether they were not man and wife by the 
law of the land. It is needless to discuss this question. There 
certainly were materials in that correspondence to show that 
this view might be maintained by L’Angelier had he chosen 
to do it, and that he considered the prisoner his wife though 
they had not been married in a regular and respectable manner. 
He considered her his wife, and so thinking, he hed a right not 
to give up the letters. I do not think, therefore, that much 
can be said about L’Angelier not giving up these letters. It 
matters not. The fact is he refused, and the fact is you will 
find he made the threat to herself, as he said to Kennedy he 
would do, as well as tu Miss Perry and others. Gentlemen, 
just listen to this. It is a letter dated Monday night; Monday 
night was the 9th February; it is posted in Glasgow on the 

202 


Addresses to Jury. 


10th, the month illegible; the appointment is made for the Lord Advocate. 
13th, and recollecting the strain of the letters that went before, 
listen to this—“ Monday night—Emile,—I have just had your 
note. Emile, for the love you once had for me do nothing till 
I see you. For God’s sake do not bring your once loved Mimi 
to an opeu shame. Emile, I have deceived you. I have 
deceived my mother. God knows she did not boast of any- 
thing 1 had said of you, for the poor woman thought I had 
broken off with you last winter. I deceived you by telling you 
she still knew of our engagement. She did not. This I now 
confess, and as for wishing for an engagement with another, 
I do not fancy she ever thought of it. Emile, write to no one 
—to papa or any other. Oh do not till I see you on Wednesday 
night. Be at the Hamiltons’ at twelve, and I shall open my / 
shutter, and then you come to the area gate, and I shall see 
you. It would break my mother’s heart. Oh, Emile, be not 
harsh to me. I am the most guilty, miserable wretch on the 
face of the earth. Emile, do not drive me to death. When 
I ceased to love you, believe me it was not to love another. 
I am free from all engagement at present.” The course of 
deliberate falsehood into which this unhappy girl had brought 
herself is, unhappily, now one of the least of her crimes. 
“Emile, for God’s sake,” she continues, “do not send my 
letters to papa. It will be an open rupture. I will leave the 
house. I will die. Emile, do nothing till I see you. One 
word to-morrow night at my window, or I shall go mad. Emile, 
you did love me. J did fondly, truly love you too. Oh, dear 
Emile, be not so harsh to me. Will you not? But I cannot 
ask forgiveness—I am too guilty for that. I have deceived. 
It was love for you at the time made me say mama knew of 
our engagement. To-morrow one word, and on Wednesday we 
meet. I would not again ask you to love me, for I know you 
could not.” I would remark that throughout all this despair 
there is no talk of renewing her engagement with L’Angelier. 
Her object was to be in a position to fulfil her engagement with 
Minnoch—“ But oh, Emile, do not make me go mad. I will 
tell you that only myself and C. H. knew of my engagement 
to you. Mama did not know since last winter. Pray for 
me—for a guilty wretch—but do nothing. Oh, Emile, do 
nothing. Ten o’clock to-morrow night—one line, for the love of 
God.—Tuesday morning.” “Iam ill. God knows what I have 
suffered. My punishment is more than I can bear. Do nothing 
till I see you. For the love of Heaven do nothing. I am mad. 
I am ill.—Sunday night.” Now, gentlemen, we have traced 
the matter up to this point. She is so committed that she 
‘cannot extricate herself, and yet, if not extricated, her character, 
her fame, her reputation, her position, are forfeited for ever. 
But she does receive a letter from L’Angelier which we don’t 
203 


Madeleine Smith. 


Lord Advocate possess; and on the Tuesday evening she again writes to him. 


This is one of the letters found in his desk. It was not posted 
at all. It was delivered, and was found in an envelope; but 
it refers plainly to the letter that went before, and to the 
assignation that was made. I shall read every word of that 
letter, long as it is, for it is perhaps the point on which this 
case turns—[Reads letter 107, down to “I put on paper what 
I should not.”] Doubtless, poor creature, she had done that, 
and throughout this unhappy history of the gradual progress 
of an ill-regulated mind, one cannot see all this without— 
what I am sure I feel from the bottom of my heart—the 
deepest commiseration. Doubtless L’Angelier had abused his 
opportunities in a way that no man of honour ought to have 
done, and had stolen into that family and destroyed their 
peace for ever. She had no doubt put on paper what she 
should not—{The Lord Advocate then read other portions of 
the letter.|—Gentlemen, I never in my life had so harrowing a 
task as raking up and bringing before such a tribunal and 
audience as this the outpourings of such a despairing spirit, 
in such a position as this miserable girl was. Such words as 
these paraded in public under any circumstances would be 
intolerable agony, but the circumstances of this case throw 
all these considerations utterly into the shade, and if for a 
moment they do obtrude themselves upon us they must be 
repelled, for our duty is a stern one, and cannot yield to such 
considerations. And, gentlemen, pausing here for a moment, 
let me take in some of the surrounding circumstances and see 
what they are. L’Angelier, whatever were his faults, was 
certainly true to her. He spoke to Kennedy about her. He 
said his love for her was infatuation, and that it would be the 
death of him. It was not revenge that he wanted; he wanted 
his wife. That is quite clear; and he plainly has told her that 
he would not permit his engagement to be broken, and that 
he would put these letters into her fathcr’s hands. As I have 
already said, I do not know that in the circumstances he was 
altogether wrong in so doing. But, gentlemen, at this time 
a very remarkable incident takes place. More than four, and 
less than eight weeks, as one witness says, or about six weeks, as 
two of the witnesses say, prior to the apprehension of the prisoner, 
on the news of the death of L’Angelier becoming public, that 
is to say, something between four and eight weeks prior to the 
26th March, or, in other words, on the second week in February, 
the prisoner asked the boy, the page who served in the family, 
to go to a druggist’s with a line for a bottle of prussic acid. 
The date, I think, is brought out quite clearly within that 
period for any purpose I have in view, and six weeks before 
the 26th March would just be between the 6th and 12th of 
February. You have seen the state of mind she was in. Some 
204 


Addresses to Jury. 


extrication or other was inevitable if she hoped to save her Lord Advocate 
character, and with a strength of will which I think you will 
see she exhibited more than once in this case, she resolved she 
would not go back to L’Angelier; she had accepted the love 
of another, and had determined to marry that other. And 
throughout all this, while she is in utter despair, and tries to 
move him by her protestations, there is not the slightest 
indication of any intention to go back to him, to love him, 
and be his wife. Quite the contrary; but on that day, at the 
door of her own bedroom, she gives Murray a Jine for prussic 
acid. For what purpose? For what purpose or earth could 
she want it? and for what purpose did she say she wanted it? 
For her hands. This is the first indication we have that her 
mind is running in that way. This is the first suggestion we 
have of the means she proposes for her extrication from this 
labyrinth of difficulty. And why did she want prussic acid4 
For her hands as a cosmetic. Did you ever hear, gentlemen, 
of prussic acid being used as a cosmetic for the hands? There 
has been, among a great deal of curious medical evidence 
which we have had in this case, no suggestion that prussic 
acid was ever used for the hands. But it will not have 
escaped your notice, that not only is her mind now beginning 
to run upon poison, but that it is also beginning to run‘on 
the excuse for wanting it. She did not get the prussic acid; 
but it is perfectly clear that the time when she wanted it was 
the date of this despairing letter, and immediately before the 
meeting she had appointed for Wednesday the llth, and re 
garding which she says—If I cannot get you in at the back 
door I will take you in at the front door.” Another incident 
happened at this time. Christina Haggart says that one day 
some weeks before the apprehension of Miss Smith, but not 
two months, an interview took place between the prisoner and 
L’Angelier in the house in Blythswood Square. Christina 
Haggart did not see L’Angelier, but she told you plainly she 
knew it was he, and that he and the prisoner remained alone 
for nearly an hour in her room, and that she (Christina Haggart) 
remained in the kitchen while L’Angelier and the prisoner were 
together. There can be no doubt about the date, though my 
learned friend tried to throw some obscurity over it. What 
she said was that less than two months, some weeks before 
the apprehension of the prisoner, this interview took place. 
Now, you recollect that the letters I have been reading to you, 
from No. 85 onwards, beginning with the date January 9th, 
show that for some time there had been no meeting between 
the parties at all. In No. 87 she says—“ I may see you possibly 
in ten days”; but before the ten days are out the quarrel has 
begun, the coolness has been commenced, she has asked her 
letters back, and you have these despairing remonstrances from 
; 205 


Madeleine Smith. 


her, and a meeting fixed for Wednesday the 11th February. 
as There can, Uiprefors, be no question whatever that that meeting 
did take place, and take place in terms of this appointment. 
There is no other occasion that it could possibly ha e taken 
place consistently with Christina Hagvart’s evidence. Two 
months before the apprehension of the prisoner would bring 
you back exactly to the 30th January. It was not two months, 
though it was weeks, says the witness, and that fixes the time 
clearly. But, gentlemen, when M. De Mean asked the prisoner 
how she. and L’Angelier met, she denied he had ever been in 
the house at all, plainly and positively. I have shown to you 
from her letters he had been more than once in that house 
before, but probably not in the course of 1857. But she 
positively denied he ever had been there at all. You will find 
allusions throughout the letters to embraces, kisses, and inter- 
views, and things that could only have taken place had he been 
in the house, and she says distinctly that he might come without 
fear, for no one would see him, and that they might have an 
interview. That one interview took place we have the direct 
testimony of one witness. What took place at that interview 
we cannot tell; but we find this, that in one way or another 
this feud had been made up—that the whole thing had been 
arranged; and how arranged? Not certainly, gentlemen, on 
the footing of giving up the letters—not certainly on the footing 
of the prisoner not. continuing her engagement with L’Angelier ; 
but, on the opposite footing, upon the footing of the engagement 
continuing. How was that to extricate the prisoner? What 
did she propose to herself to do? She had found that 
L’Angelier would not give up the letters. She did not persevere 
in her endeavour to induce him to do se by despairing protesta- 
tions. She took another line, and that line was by pretending 
—because it could not be real—pretending to adopt the old 
tone of love and affection; all this time keeping up the engage- 
ment wth Minnoch, receiving the congratulations of his friends, 
receiving presents from him, and being engaged in fixing the 
time of their union. But they met that day; and the next 
letter was found in the desk, and was one of those brought by 
Stevenson to the Procurator-Fiecal. It bears date “Osborne 
Buildings’ Receiving Office, Glasgow, 14th February, 1857.” 
It was written apparently on Saturday, the 14th—* My dear 
Emile,—I have got my finger cut and can’t write; 80, dear, 
I wish you would excuse me. I was glad to see you looking 
so well yesterday.” I don’t think that that refers to this 
interview; she was in the habit of passing his window and 
looking up to it; and the probability is that this refers to 
some glimpse she had got of him in that way, or she might 
have met him on the street. The interview ook place, as I 
have shown, on Wednesday night. She goes on—“T hope to 
206 


Addresses to Jury. 


see you very soon. Write me for Thursday, and then IJ shall Lord Advocate 
tell you when I can see you. I want the first time we meet 
that you will bring me all my cool letters back—the last four 
I have written—and I will give you others in their place ”— 
these are the only letters she asks for now—the cool letters; 
she asks for those letters that she had written in her cool 
moments, to convince L’Angelier that she is as true to him 
as ever; but remark she makes an appointment for Thursday, 
and if that letter was written according to the post-mark, 
plainly the quarrel has been made up, and it must have been 
after the date of these despairing letters. The day was 
Thursday, 19th February. Be kind enough to bear that in 
mind. We are now coming to the very crisis of this case. 
On Tuesday, the 17th February, L’Angelier dined with Miss 
Perry; he told her he was to see Miss Smith on Thursday. 
Thursday was the 19th, and you find in this letter a corrobora- 
tion of that statement of Miss Perry’s; he told her that he was 
to see Miss Smith on the 19th; she says—“ Write me for next 
Thursday ”; he must have called with the letter; he had that 
appointment with her, and he had told Miss Perry that he had 
seen her on the 19th—some day before the 22nd of February, 
as I say the 19th of February, and you will see immediately 
whether that is proved or not. L’Angelier in the middle of the 
night was seized with a sudden illness. You heard it described 
by his landlady, Mrs. Jenkins; it was vomiting, purging, 
vomiting of a green stuff, and excessive pain. He lay on the 
floor all night; he was so ill that he could not call for assistance 
for some time; and his landlady found him in the morning. 
At last he was relieved, but only after a great deal of suffering. 
These symptoms were the symptoms of arsenic. My learned 
friends say that it might be cholera. Never mind at present 
whether it might be cholera or not—these symptoms were the 
symptoms of arsenic, the symptoms of an irritant poison. I 
shall consider by-and-by whether the symptoms of cholera are 
precisely the same. It is enough that they were the symptoms 
of arsenical poisoning. He recovered; and he went out on the 
day after, on the 20th. On the 21st, the prisoner purchased 
arsenic at the shop of Mr. Murdoch—a very singular purchase, 
gentlemen, for a person in her position to make. But it was 
not the first time in the history of this case that she had tried 
to buy poison. She had tried to buy poison before that meeting 
of Wednesday the 11th. I shall not stop just now to discuss 
the question of the reason which she gave for it, because my 
object at present is simply to give you the facts historically, 
although if you should find that the excuse she gave for the 
buying of the poison was a false one, it is evident how strong 
and inevitable the conclusion is which you must necessarily 
draw from that single fact. But she went to Murdoch’s shop: 


207 


Madeleine Smith. 


Lord Advocate she asked for the arsenic openly, but the story she told in 


regard to its use was, upon her own confession, an absolute 
falsehood; she said she wanted it to poison the rats at Row. 
A different excuse is afterwards given for the purchase of it, 
but you have this singular and startling fact, that on the 21st 
she goes into Mr. Murdoch’s shop alone; she asks for arsenic; 
, Says that the gardener at Row wants it to poison rats; she 
says he has tried phosphorus paste, but that that will not do, 
and that he wants to try arsenic. Gentlemen, that was an utter 
falsehood-—an admitted falsehood. We shall see immediately 
what she says the real reason was, and whether it was more 
correct than the one she gave in the shop. Having purchased 
that arsenic on the 21st, according to my statement, L’Angelier 
saw her on the 22nd, which was a Sunday, and on the night 
of the 22nd and the morning of the 23rd he was again seized 
with the very symptoms that he had had before—the identical 
symptoms, in a somewhat milder form—viz., the green vomiting 
again, the purging again, pains again, the thirst again—every- 
thing, in short, which you would expect in a case of arsenical 
poisoning. Gentlemen, I described these symptoms to Dr. 
Christison, and you heard what he said he would have concluded. 
Dr. Thomson, who attended the patient, said that the symptoms 
which he himself saw were the symptoms which he would 
have expected in a case of arsenical poisoning. And 
for the present, for the purpose of .what I am 
now maintaining, it is quite enough for my story that the 
symptoms were in substance those which follow from arsenical 
poisoning. And that is on the 22nd. There is no doubt about 
that date. It is Sunday the 22nd and Monday the 23rd, it is 
the evening of Sunday and the morning of Monday about which 
we are now speaking. Now, gentlemen, it is most material to 
give me your attention at this particular part of the case. 
If you believe Miss Perry—and I think you will find no reason 
to disbelieve her—L’Angelier told her that he had seen the 
prisoner on the 19th, that he had been ill immediately after 
the 19th, and that he had afterwards been ill—after the 22nd 
and 23rd—I don’t know that she named these dates, but she 
certainly said he was twice ill before she saw him on the 2nd 
March, and he told her that these two illnesses had followed 
after receiving coffee one time and chocolate another time from 
the hands of the prisoner. Now, if that be true, and he 
certainly said so, then it is certain that he saw her upon the 
19th, and that he saw her upon the 22nd; and, in corroboration 
of that, will you listen to this letter which was found in the 
tourist’s bag, and which unquestionably was in the state in 
which it was when found? And I think you will consider this 
letter of the deepest importance to the facts of this case. It 
was posted at Glasgow, the date was illegible. and we had a great 
208 


Addresses to J ury. 


deal of discussion with the witness from the Post Office as to Lord Advocate 
what really was the post-mark. He thought at last he saw a 
letter which indicated March. My learned friend disputed 
the accuracy of his inspection, and I am inclined to dispute it 
too, and, indeed, I do dispute it. The man was wrong. I 
believe the post-mark is entirely obliterated. If you have any 
curiosity, or, rather, if you think it would assist you to look at 
it, as my learned friend proposed you should, I am sure I have 
no objection whatever, but I will tell you the real date of it, 
and I shall prove it, irrespective of the post-mark. Its date was 
Wednesday, the 25th February; and now I shall read it— 

“Dearest, Sweet Emile,—I am sorry to hear you are ill. I 
hope to God you will soon be better; take care of yourself; do 
not go to the office this week, just stay at home till Monday. 
Sweet love, it will please me to hear you are well. I have not 
felt very well these two last days—sick and headache. Every 
one is complaining; it must be something in the air. I can 
see you Friday, if M. is not away, but I think Sunday P. will be 
away, and I might see you, I think, but I shall let you know. 
I shall not be at home on Saturday, but I shall try, sweet love, 
and give you even if it should be a word. I cannot pass your 
windows or I would, as you ask me to do it; do not come and 
walk about, and become ill again. You did look bad Sunday 
night and Monday morning.” 

“You did look bad on Sunday.” Where had she seen 
him on the Sunday night and the Monday morning? It could 
only be Sunday, the 22nd, and Monday, the 23rd of February. 

“J think you got sick with walking home so late and the 
long want of food, so the next time we meet I shall make you 
eat a loaf of bread before you go out. I am longing to meet 
you again, sweet love. My head aches so, and I am looking 
so bad that I cannot sit up as I used to do; but I am taking 
some stuff to bring back the colour. I shall see you soon again. 
Put up with short notes for a little time.” 


Now, gentlemen, if that was written on the 25th, it proves 
that he saw her on Sunday and Monday, the 22nd and 23rd. It 
proves that he was sick at that time, and was looking very bad. 
According to my statement, he was ill on the 19th. It proves 
that she was thinking about giving him food ; that she was laying 
a foundation for seeiag him; that she was taking stuff to bring 
back her colour It proves that she was holding out a kind of 
explanation of the symptoms which he had, because she says she 
is ill herself ; and it proves that all this took place the day after 
she had bought the arsenic at Murdoch’s. L’Angelier, it was 
89 proved, had said that his illness had taken place after receiv- 
ing a cup of coffee from herself ; and she says in her own declara- 
tion that upon one occasion she did give him a cup of cocoa. 


ra) 209 


Madeleine Smith. 


Lord Advocate As to the date of this letter, there are a few facts to determine 
it absolutely. In the first place, it is dated on 
Wednesday, it was after his illness, after he was un- 
able to go to the office in consequence of illness, for 
it says, “I am so sorry to hear you are ill,” etc. The prisoner was 
shown that letter, and refers to it in her declaration as alluding 
to his recent illness. She says it was a mere jocular observation 
that about the want of food; that, as she attributed his 
illness to the want of food, she had made that observation about 
the loaf of bread. Well, then, gentlemen, if it was after he was 
ill it was on a Wednesday; and in the month of March it could 
not be, because she says in this letter, which is of Wednesday’s 
date, “I can see you on Friday if M. is not away, but I think 
Sunday P. will be away, and I might see you, I think, but I shall 
let you know.” Now, the first Wednesday of March was the 
4th ; but there is a letter of 3rd March, in which she tells him 
they are going to the Bridge of Allan on Friday, the 6th, and 
therefore it is impossible that on Wednesday, the 4th, she could 
write him she could see him on Sunday. They were going to 
the Bridge of Allan on .’riday, the 6th, and therefore it could 
not be that Wednesday (the 4th) she wrote on. The next 
Wednesday was the 11th, and by that time she was at the 
Bridge of Allan and L’Angelier was in Edinburgh. The next 
Wednesday was the 18th, and that is the day L’Angelier was in 
Glasgow, and it is quite plain she never could have written a 
letter on that day saying, “I am so sorry to hear you are ill. 
I hope you will soon be better: take care of yourself,” beoause 
on Wednesday, the 18th, he was greatly better, and had just 
returned from Edinburgh. Now that I have shown you how 
the matter stands up to Wednesday, the 25th February, what 
do you think of it? No doubt the illness of the 19th takes 
place when I cannot prove the prisoner had any arsenic in her 
possession—that is perfectly true. The prisoner’s counsel took 
some pains to prove that arsenic might be had without being 
purchased in a druggist’s shop, but you will look at the surround- 
ing circumstances in the case—at the fact that L’Angelier said 
his two first illnesses had arisen immediately after receiving a 
cup of coffee one time and a cup of cocoa or chocolate the other ; 
that she admits she did give him a cup of cocoa; that she had 
the means of making it in the house; that the illness the second 
time was the same as the first time; and that upon both 
occasions these illnesses were symptomatic of arsenic. You will 
also consider, what weighs on my mind, what was the nature 
of the arrangement between L’Angelier and Miss Smith. How 
did she propose to extricate herself from the difficulties in which 
she found herself placed? She had everything at stake— 
character, fame, fortune, and everything else. She knew she 
could not get back her letters by entreaties, and she did not 

210 


Addresses to J ury. 


endeavour to get them by that means any longer, but professed Lord Advocate 
to adhere to their engagement. What did she contemplate at . 
that moment? For the first time she begins to purchase, or 
endeavour to purchase, prussic acid. And now, gentlemen, for 
the arsenic. What reason does she give for the purchase of 
arsenic? She says she had been told when at school in 
England, by a Miss Guibilei, that arsenic is good for the com- 
plexion. She came from school in 1853, and, singular enough, 
rt is not till that week of February prior to the 22nd that she 
ever thinks of arsenic for that purpose. | Why, gentlemen, 
should that be? At that moment I have shown you she 
was frightened at the danger she was in in the highest degree, 
and is it likely that at that time she was looking for a new 
cosmetic? But what is the truth as to what she had heard, or 
very likely read? What is the use of the arsenic, and what 
does she say? She says that she poured it all into a basin and 
washed her face with it. Gentlemen, do you believe that? 
If she was following out what she found in the magazines, 
that was not what she found there, for they say that the way 
to use arsenic is internally. Therefore, do you believe that she 
got the arsenic for the purpose she says? A very respectable 
gentleman came into the box yesterday to swear that arsenic 
might be safely used in that way, and he actually had the 
eourage to try the experiment on Saturday. _I should not like 
to say anything to shake the nerves of that gentleman, but the 
experiment cannot be said to be yet completed, and what he 
did on Saturday may possibly produce some results hereafter. 
With all deference to Drs. Maclagan and Lawrie, we have heard 
from the two first authorities in Europe that such practices. may 
be attended with danger. Dr. Maclagan says that, if you shut 
your mouth and eyes, the experiment may be safe; but Dr. 
Penny and Dr. Christison tell you plainly they would not like 
to wash in it. But has the prisoner shown you, or have her 
eounsel, with all their ability, that any man anywhere ever 
propounded washing with arsenic as a cosmetic? Before you 
ean take such a preposterous story, she must show that in some 
yeasonable and rational manner she was led to believe that this 
eosmetic might be usefully and safely used. But all that has 
been referred to is the swallowing of arsenic. She says she 
ased the whole quantity each time in-a basin of water. I fear, 
gentlemen, there is but one conclusion, and that is, that there 
is not a word of truth in the excuse; and if, therefore, you © 
think there are two falsehoods here about the poisoning—the 
first told in the druggist’s shop, and the second made in her 
declaration—I fear the conclusion is inevitable that the purpose 
for which she had purchased it was @ criminal one, and that, 
taking all the circumstances together, you cannot possibly doubt 
that the object was to use it for the purpose of poisoning 
212 


Madeleine Smith. 


Lord Advocate L’Angelier. But this time it failed; he is excessively ill, but 
recovers. How she got the poison on the 19th I say at once 
I am unable to account for, and the prisoner is entitled to any 
benefit that may give her. But you will recollect what the 
symptoms were. You will also recollect the letter, and that 
this letter proves the conclusiveness of what has been said before, 
that L’Angelier was sick at the time of their meeting. And 
that ening me of what I had forgotten. The witness Thuau, 
you will remember (his fellow-lodger), asked L’Angelier if he 
had seen Miss Smith on the occasion of his first illness, and he 
said he had. If that took place on the 19th—and I think I 
have proved it—then you have additional evidence that the 19th 
was the day. It is quite true that Mrs. Jenkins says that she 
did not think that L’Angelier was out on the 22nd, but she said 
so with hesitation, and it is quite plain that her recollection of 
the period is not very accurate unless she had something to go 
by. But if that letter on the 25th be truly written on the 
25th, then unquestionably he was out on the Sunday night until 
Monday morning, and told Miss Perry accordingly. He gets 
better, and on the 27th of February a letter, found in the 
tourist’s bag, clearly identified, bearing the post-mark of 27th 
February, 1857, is sent from the prisoner in these terms—“ My 
dear, sweet Emile,—I cannot see you this week, and I can fix no 
time to meet with you. I do hope you are better; keep well, 
and take care of yourself. I saw you at your window. I 
am better, but have got a bad cold. I shall write you, sweet 
one, in the beginning of the week. I hope we may meet soon. 
We go, I think, to Stirling about the 10th of March for a 
fortnight.” That proves, if there were anything to prove, that 
the Sunday night and Monday morning were not subsequent to 
the 25th February. Observe, she says—“I do hope you are 
better. I am better, but have got a bad cold.” Therefore this 
letter of the 27th is quite clearly connected with the letter of 
the 25th, in which she says, “I am sorry to hear you are ill; 
I am not well myself—my head aches so.” Then she writes on 
Friday to say, “I hope you are better,” etc. Now, what was 
L’Angelier about all this time? We have very clear evidence 
of that from Kennedy, Miss Perry, and Dr. Thomson. The man 
was entirely changed; he never recovered his looks; he never 
recovered his health; he appeared in the office, as Miller told 
you, with his complexion gone, and a deep hectic spot on either 
cheek. He appeared in Miss Perry’s on the 2nd March a frail 
and tottering man, entirely altered from whet he used to be. 
He was advised to go away from his office; he followed the 
advice given him, and did not return till next week; and it is 
proved by Mrs, Jenkins, Dr. Thomson, and Kennedy that this 
was the only occasion on which he was detained by illness from 
the office. He was recommended to leave town for the good 

212 


Addresses to Jury. 


of his health, and he got leave of absence from the office. While Lord Advocace 
I am here, let me just allude in a single sentence to the conver- 
sation that took place between Miss Perry and L’Angelier. 
Gentlemen, you could not fail to be struck with it. He said 
his love for Miss Smith was a fascination, and he used the 
remarkable expression, “If she were to poison me I would 
forgive her.” He had said before, in a looser way, to Kennedy 
that he was perfectly infatuated about her, and that she would 
be the death of him; but this time he uses these remarkable 
words. He used the expression, “If she were to poison me I 
would forgive her,” in connection with the statement that his 
illness had immediately followed his taking a cup of coffee or 
cocoa from her. Unless it were true that he had felt ill with a 
cup of coffee on one occasion and a cup of cocoa on the other, 
what could have put it into his head to say, “If she was to 
poison me I would forgive her”? If you believe Miss Perry’s 
story, that he got a cup of coffee the first time and a cup of 
cocoa the second, and take into account the effects that followed, 
would you think it strange that he should say, “If she was to 
poison me I would forgive her ”4 With the other evidence I 
have brought to bear upon this critical period—from 19th to 
27th February—I leave you to judge whether, at all events, it is 
not certain, first, that they met on these two occasions ; second, 
that he got something from her on both occasions ; and, third, 
that his illness succeeded immediately after having got a cup of 
coffee in the first place, and a cup of cocoa in the second ; 
and that, in the last place, these illnesses took place under 
circumstances which led him to say, half in joke, half in earnest, 
“Jf she were to poison me I would forgive her.” Miss Perry 
does not say this was a serious belief. It would appear to 
have been a floating notion which coursed through his brain, and 
I suppose he drove it away. We shall see what happened to 
drive it away; we shall see protestations of renewed love, which 
probably made him believe that that phantom, suddenly 
conjured up, was, after all, a mere delusion of his brain. In 
regard to Miss Perry’s evidence, I will say that it was a remark 
made jn the Fiscal’s office which made Miss Perry think again as 
to the day of L’Angelier’s first iIness—that at first she thought 
the 19th was not the day, but she began to reflect, and she found 
it must be so, because he was dining with her on the 17th in 
good health. He had been dining with her before in good 
health, and therefore, as he had told her he had an engagement 
on the 19th, she knew that that must be the day. While 
L’Angelier was recovering, the prisoner writes a letter dated 
Tuesday, the 3rd of March. It appears that L’Angelier had 
proposed to go to the Bridge of Allan, and on Tuesday, the 3rd 
of March, the prisoner writes this letter to say that they intend 
to go to Stirling for a fortnight, and to go on Friday, the 6th. 
213 


Madeleine Smith. 


Lord Advocate But it seems that L’Angelier had some thoughts of going to the 
Bridge of Allan too—‘ My dearest Emile,—I hope by this time 
you are quite well, and able to be out. I saw you at your 
window, but I could not tell how you looked—well, I hope. I 
am very well. I was in Edinburgh on Saturday, to be at a 
luncheon-party at the Castle. It was a most charming day, 
and we enjoyed our trip very much. On Friday we go to 
Stirling for a fortnight. I am so sorry, my dearest pet, I 
cannot see you ere we go—but I cannot. Will you, sweet one, 
write me for Thursday, eight o’clock, and I shall get it before 
ten o’clock, which will be a comfort to me, as I shall not hear 
from you till I come home again? Iam very well, and I think 
the next time we meet, you will think I look better than 1 did 
the last time. You won’t have a letter from me this Saturday, 
as I shall be off, but I shall write the beginning of the week. 
Write me for Thursday, sweet love; and with kind love, ever 
believe me to be yours, with love and affection—Mini.” The 
terms of this letter prove distinctly, I think, that the letter, 
which I have presumed to be dated on the 25th, could not by 
any possibility have been written after that date. She writes the 
next day a letter posted on the 4th March, and clearly written 
at that time—“ Dearest Emile,—I have just time to write 
you a line. I could not come te the window, as B. and M. 
were there, but I saw you. If you would take my advice you 
would go to the South of England for ten days; it would do you 
much good. In fact, sweet pet, it would make you feel quite 
well. Do try and do this. You will please me by getting 
strong and well again. I hope you won’t go to B. of Allan, as 
P. and M. would say it was I brought you there, and it would 
make me to feel very unhappy. Stirling you need not go to, 
as it is a nasty, dirty little town. Go to the Isle of Wight. 
I am exceedingly sorry, love, that I cannot see you ere I go. 
It is impossible, but the first thing I do on my return will be 
to see you, sweet love. I must stop, as it is post time. So 
adieu, with love and kisses, and much love. I am, with love 
and affection, ever yours.—Mini.” She had made the attempt 
at poison on two occasions, and had failed. Apparently her 
heart was somewhat touched, and probably she thought that if 
she could get him out of the way she might have her marriage 
with Mr. Minnoch over without his knowledge, after which it 
would be easy to get her letters, as there would be no motive for 
keeping them. You will see what L’Angelier says to this pro- 
position to go to the Isle of Wight. It cannot but have struck 
you that these last letters, though written in the words, are not 
written in the old spirit of the letters between these persons. 
And as it must have struck you so it struck L’Angelier himself, 
And I am now to read to you what, I regret to say, is the only 


214 


ee 


Addresses to Jury. 


scrap of evidence under the hand of this young man that I am Lord Advocate 
able to lay before you. But that letter is of some consequence. 
It shows the tone of nis mind, and his position altogether, after 
what had taken place between them since the reconciliation, 
and indicates very plainly what at that time his suspicions were. 
‘The Lord Advocate ihen read L’Angelier’s letter (No. 119), dated 
Glasgow, Sth March—“ My dear sweet pet Mini,—TI feel indeed 
very vexed thai the answer I received yesterday to mine of 
Tuesday to you should prevent me from sending you the 
kind letter i had ready for you. You must not blame me for 
this but really your cold, indifferent, and reserved notes, 80 
short, without a particle of love in them (especially after 
pledging your word you were to write me kindly for those 
letters you asked me to destroy), and the manner you evaded 
answering the questions I put to you in my last, with the reports 
I hear, fully convince me, Mini, that there is foundation in your 
marriage with another. Besides, the way you put off our union 
till September without a just reason is very suspicious. I do 
not think, Mini dear, that Miss Anderson would say your mother 
told her things she had not; and, really, I could never believe 
Mr. Houldsworth would be guilty of telling a falsehood for mere 
talking. No, Mini, there is foundation for all this. You often 
go to Mr. M.’s house, and common-sense would lead any one to 
believe that if you were not on the footing reports say you are 
you would avoid going near any of his friends. I know he goes 
with you, or at least meets you in Stirlingshire. Mini, dear, 
place yourself in my position, and tell me, am I wrong in 
believing what Ihear? Iwas happy the last time we met—yes, 
very happy. I was forgetting all the past, but now it is again 
beginning. Mini, I insist on having an explicit answer to the 
questions you evaded in my last. If you evade answering them 
cbis time, I must try some other means of coming to the truth. 
If not answered in a satisfactory manner, you must not again 
expect I shall again write you personally, or meet you when 
ou return home. I do not wish you to answer this at random ; 
I shall wait for a day or so if you require it. I know you can- 
not write me from Stirlingshire, as the time you have to write 
me a letter is occupied in doing so to others. There was a 
time you would have found plenty of time. Answer me this, 
Mini--Who gave you the trinket you showed me? Is it true it 
was Mr. Minnoch? And is it true you are directly or indirectly 
engaged to Mr. Minnoch, or to any ome else but me? These 
questions I must know. The doctor says I must go to the 
Bridge of Allan. I cannot travel 500 miles to the Isle of Wight 
and 500 back. What is your object in wishing me 80 very 
much to go south? I may not go to the Bridge of Allan till 
Wednesday. If I can avoid going I shall do so for your sake. 
I shall wait to hear from you. I hope, dear, nothing will 
215 


Madeleine Smith. 


Lord Advocate happen to check the happiness we are again enjoying. May 
God bless you, pet ; and with fond and tender embraces, believe 
me, with kind love, your ever affectionate husband,—Emile 
L’Angelier.” ' 

Observe, gentlemen, that in that letter he says very plainly 
that, after the meeting of the 22nd, he was “forgetting ail 
the past.” Whatever had floated through his mind on the 
subject of the strange coincidence of his illnesses on the one 
hand, and his visits to the prisoner on the other, all that 
he put away; and he says that he was “forgetting all the 
past.” “But now,” he says, “it is again beginning. Mini, 
I insist on having an explicit answer to the questions you 
evaded in my last. If you evade answering this time, I must 
try some other means of coming to the truth.” This was written 
on the 5th March. He says he won’t go to the Isle of Wight, 
and that the doctor tells him he must go to the Bridge of Allan. 
The prisoner buys her second ounce of arsenic next day. But 
before she does it, she writes this letter on the 5th. _It plainly 
was written on the 5th, because the press copy of the letter 
from L’Angelier bears date the 5th, and it is an answer to that. 
“My dear, sweet pet,” she says, “I am so sorry you should be 
so vexed; believe nothing, sweet one, till I tell you myself. It 
is a report I am sorry about, but it has been six months spoken 
about. . . . We shall speak of our union when we meet.” 
Keeping it up you see, gentlemen, till the last 3; for when she 
was at the Bridge of Allan she made all her arrangements for 
her marriage with Mr. Minnoch in June. “I wish, love, you 
could manage to remain in town till we come home, as I know 
it will be a grand row with me if you are seen there. : 
Neither M. nor his sisters go with us.” No, but she knew 
that they were going there at the same time. “If you do 
not go to Bridge of Allan till we come home, come up Mains 
Street to-morrow, and if you go, come your own way.” AsI 
told you, next morning she went into Currie’s shop with Miss 
Buchanan to purchase arsenic for the alleged purpose of killing 
rats in the Blythswood Square house. She asked for sixpence- 
worth, having bought the very same quantity on the 21st 
February. After she gets a letter from L’Angelier, saying, “If 
you won’t answer my questions, I will not any longer put them 
to you, but will find another way of satisfying myself,” she writes 
him—* Do not come to Bridge of Allan, but go to the Isle of 
Wight. If you come to Bridge of Allan, come your own way.” 
And—on 6th March—in the expectation that he might come to 
Bridge of Allan, she buys arsenic again. 

[Lord Ivory directed the attention of the Lord Advocate to 
the words in the prisoner’s letter last referred to—“I will tell 
and answer you all questions when we meet.”] 


The Lorp Apyocats, after reading the sentence pointed out, 
216 


Addresses to Jury. 


proceeded—The prisoner purchased that arsenic unquestionably Lord Advocate 
upon a false statement. The statement was that it was rats 
that were to be poisoned, and that there would be no danger, 
as the boise was to be shut up, and all the servants were to be 
away. Well, all that story was absolute falsehood ; the servants 
were not leaving Blythswood Square house, and there were no 
rats there to kill. Again, it was said to be for her complexion. 
Do you really think that it did her so much good the time 
before that she came back for more of it? No one in that 
witness-box has had the courage to say that arsenic, when 
applied to the skin, had any other than an irritant effect. It 
could not have been used as a cosmetic, and at the very lowest, 
could not have been found to have so beneficial an effect as to 
induce a repetition of the experiment. But when the prisoner 
found the toils coming closer around her—L’Angelier determined 
not to be put off—and she herself pledged to an absolute 
falsehood, viz., that the report of her marriage is not true—she 
purchases another dose of arsenic. Draw your own conclusions, 
gentlemen ; I fear you will find but one at which it is possible 
for you to arrive. It is said, what did she do with all this 
arsenic? she could not use the half, the tenth, the twentieth 
part on the former occasions. It is not difficult to account for 
that; whenever she used so much as she required, the rest was 
thrown into the fire. She did not go to the Bridge of Allan, 
and had therefore no occasion to use it there; and when she 
found she had no use for it, she disposed of what she had bought. 
The two last letters she wrote were from the Bridge of Allan. 
They are cold letters enough. The first of them bears the post- 
mark Bridge of Allan, 10th March, and she says, among other 
things in it, that she shall be home on Monday or Tuesday, 
and will write him when they shall have an interview. Observe 
that it is an interview she speaks of, and you will immediately 
see with what feverish impatience L’Angelier waited for receipt 
of that letter appointing the interview. The last letter from 
her at the Bridge of Allan has the post-mark 13th March, and 
in it she says—“I think we shall be home on Tuesday, so I 
shall let you know, my own beloved sweet pet, when we shall 
have a dear, sweet interview, when I may be pressed to your 
heart, and kissed by you, my own sweet love.” Then she says, 
“T hope you will enjoy your visit here.” By that time it had 
been arranged that L’Angelier should postpone his visit till. 
the Smiths came back. The marriage with Minnoch at this 
time was all settled—the day was fixed—the prisoner was 
committed beyond all hope of recovery, and had but one way 
out. But leaving her there for the present, let us follow the 
fortunes of L’Angelier for the next most critical ten days of 
his life. He gets leave of absence on the 6th, goes to Edinburgh 
for a week, sees a variety of persons, and gets much better. 
217 


Madeleine Smith. 


Lord Advocate Several witnesses have told you how he ate—how he talked 


about his illness, and you have heard how he repeated in the 
house of Mr. Towers the singular statement he had before made 
to Miss Perry, that he had got coffee and cocoa from somebody, 
and that illness immediately succeeded on taking these two 
substances. He says—‘I do not wonder so much that I should 
be ill after cocoa, for I am not accustomed to that, but that 
I should be ill after coffee, which I take regularly, I cannot 
account for.” And they were so much struck with the remark, 
that they said to him, “Has any one any motive in poisoning 
you!” To that he made no answer; but you will not omit to 
see the corroboration that gives to the story of Miss Perry, 
and to the real circumstances, as I have explained them to you. 
The week after, he was to have a letter appointing an interview. 
He had not had one since the 22nd, and he was longing for it 
with impatience. He came back to Glasgow on Tuesday, the 
17th, and said, “Is there no letter waiting for me? for they 


were to be home on the 17th, and she was to write and say ~ 


when the interview was to be.” He stayed at home all Wednes- 
day, better in health, but low in spirits, expecting a letter. 
He went to Bridge of Allan on Thursday, the 19th, and after he 
had gone, a letter came. He did not get that letter at his 
lodgings, but he had left his address with M. Thuau, with 
instructions to forward any letter which came; and the envelope 
is found addressed to his lodgings, and posted between 8.45 a.m. 
and 12.25 p.m. on Thursday. That envelope was found in the 
tourist’s bag, and I make that remark in consequence of an 
observation made by my learned friend. That letter has never 
been found. We do not know what became of it, but this is 
certain, that the envelope without the letter was found in the 
bag; and as the things in the bag were marked at once, there 
can be no doubt whatever as to the state in which they were 
found. I regret the absence of that letter as much as my 
learned friend can, though I think there is external evidence 
of what that letter set forth. It arrived, however, on the 19th 
March, Thursday, and Thuau on the same day addressed it to 
the Post Office at Stirling; and that was posted at Franklin 
Piace on the night of the 19th March, and reached Stirling 
about nine o’clock on the 20th. On the 20th L’Angelier writes 
to Miss Perry, and says—‘“I should have come to see some one 
last night, but the letter came too late, so we are both dis- 
appointed.” After a letter or two, which are not material now 
for me to read—though they were material as identifying the 
course L’Angelier took, as proved otherwise—after a letter or 
two from Mr. Stevenson and others, we come to the last of 
the series. His lordship then read the letter from panel, with 
postmark “Glasgow, March 21,” beginning—“ Why, my 
beloved, did you not come to me. Oh, beloved, are you ill? 
218 


ere 


Addresses to Jury. 


Come to me, sweet one. I waited and waited for you, but you Lord Advocate 
came not. I shall wait again to-morrow night, same hour and 
arrangement. Do come, sweet. love, my own dear love of a 
sweetheart. Come, beloved, and clasp me to your heart. 
Come and we shall be happy. A kiss, fond love. Adieu, with 
tender embraces. Ever believe me to be your own ever dear, 
fond Mini.” That letter was posted in Glasgow, if at a box, 
between 9 a.m. and 12.30 p.m., and if at the General Post Office, 
between 11.45 am. and 1pm. That letter was found in the 
pocket of the coat. About that letter and envelope there is 
no dispute nor question whatever. There was an appointment 
for Thursday, the 19th. On Wednesday, the 18th, she bought 
her third packet of arsenic. She went back to Currie’s shop 
on the 18th, told him that the first rats had been killed, that 
they had found a great many large ones lying in the house; 
and, as she had got arsenic before, appeared to be a respectable 
person, and told her story without hesitation, on the 18th 
March she got her third packet of arsenic. That letter was 
enclosed by Thuau to L’Angelier on the same day with the 
rest. He enclosed it in a letter of his own, in which he says 
that the letter came at half-past twelve, and that he hastens 
to put it into the post, if there is time. L’Angelier got that 
letter after nine o’clock at Stirling on Sunday morning. He 
left shortly after the afternoon service had begun. It is proved 
by his landlady that he left at that time—it is proved by the 
postmaster that he got a letter—it is proved that he was in 
his usual health. He walked to Stirling, started instantly, 
taking the letter as an appointment for Sunday night. The 
question whether it was so or not is immaterial. The guard 
recognised him as a gentleman who travelled from Stirling to 
Coatbridge, handed him over to Ross, the auctioneer, and he 
swears these two were the only passengers in that train who 
stopped at Coatbridge. They had food together in the inn; 
the guard, Fairfoul, saw him start with Ross in perfect health 
at Coatbridge to walk to Glasgow. Ross swears that he walked 
with him to Glasgow, that he was quite well, walked briskly, 
did not tire, stopped at no place on the road, and arrived in 
his lodgings a little after eight, and, Mrs. Jenkins says, looking 
infinitely improved since he left her on the 19th. He came 
home in the greatest spirits, and told them that the letter had 
brought him home. They knew, and he made no secret of, 
why he had come home. The landlady knew so well that when | 
he went out at night he was going to see his sweetheart, that 
she never asked him any questions on these occasions. He 
stayed in the house, took some tea, and left the house in his 
usual health a little after or before nine o’clock. He is seen 
sauntering along in the direction of Blythswood Square about 
twenty minutes past nine. It is too early. He knows the 
219 


Madeleine Smith. 


Lord Advocate ways of the house, and knows that they have prayers on 


Sunday night. He must beguile the time a little, and so he 
goes past Blythswood Square, down to the other side, and 
makes a call on his acquaintance M‘Alester, in Terrace Street. 
but does not find him at home. The maid-servant recognised 
him, and says he was there about half-past nine. Here my 
clue fails me; we lose sight of him for the period of two or 
three hours, and my learned friends on the other side are 
equally unsuccessful in their endeavours to trace him ; but there 
is no attempt to show that any mortal man saw him anywhere 
else than the only place he was going to. He went out with 
the determination of seeing her; and believing that he had 
an appointment at that place, you cannot doubt that, after 
coming from the Bridge of Allan, post haste, to see her, walking 
first from Bridge of Allan to Stirling, then travelling from 
Stirling to Coatbridge, walking from Coatbridge to Glasgow. 
and then walking from his lodgings in the direction of Blyths- 


wood Square—you cannot believe that he would give up his 


purpose within a hundred yards of the house. The thing is 
incredible, impossible. Well, gentlemen, as I said, he knew 
the ways of the house; he knew when it was the habit of the 
family to retire to rest, and that he would have to wait till 
Janet was asleep. Can you believe—is it reasonable to believe 
—that after all these preparations, L’Angelier should have 
returned without going into the house? The thing is impossible. 
But if he did go to the house, what do you suppose he did? 
He went of course to the window and made his presence known. 
He could do it with certainty. The prisoner denies she heard 
anything that night. Is that within the region of possibility? 
She writes him a letter to come to her. I know she says the 
appointment was for Saturday. But do you suppose that in 
the course of that correspondence, even if that were true, 
she would not have waited for him next night on the chance 
of his being out of town? The interview was long delayed, 
anxiously looked for—the interview at which everything was 
to be explained, in an explanation which she knew he was 
waiting for. Is it possible that she went to sleep that night, 
and never woke till the morning? Gentlemen, whatever else 
you may think, I think you will come to this inevitable con- 
clusion, that L’Angelier did go to the house, did make his 
presence known; and if he did that, what means the denial in 
the prisoner’s declaration, that L’Angelier was there that night 
at all? It is utterly inconceivable and impossible. You have 
no other trace of him. The policeman, it is true, did not see 
him, but neither did he see him in many a midnight walk— 
for you know what a policeman’s beat is, and how easy it would 
be to avoid him. But that he was there is certain. This 
was the critical night, when the question was to be decided 
220 


Addresses to Jury. 


of her fame and reputation for ever. When and how do we Lord Advocate 
see him next? He is found at his own door, without strength 
to open the latch, at two o’clock in the morning, doubled up 
with agony, speechless with exhaustion and pain, parched with 
thirst, and burning with fever ; vomiting commences instantly, 
and the former symptoms, with great aggravations, go on from 
two til’ about eleven o’clock, when the man dies of arsenic. 
So ends this unhappy tale that I have taken so long to tell you. 
His last words are few. No one asks him where he has been. 
They know where he has been, and that is why they do not ask ; 
so says his landlady. She knows where he has been, but asks 
no questions ; but she was a kindly, attentive woman, and she 
does say to the doctor—“ What can be the meaning of this, 
that while he has gone out in good health twice, he has come 
back ill? We must have this inquired into, for I cannot com- 
prehend it.” The unfortunate victim himself is unwilling plainly 
to admit to himself what doubtless he suspected. He says— 
“T never had bile before; I do not know what it is; I never 
felt this way before; I am very cold; cover me up.” On the 
first proposal to sénd for the doctor, he says—for he certainly 
does seem to have been a kind-hearted creature—he says to his 
landlady—“It is too far for you to go.” After a while, as he 
is worse, the landlady again proposes to go for a doctor, one 
who is near at hand, and he says—“If he is a good doctor, 
bring him.” She goes, and comes back with a prescription. 
He makes some difficulty about taking the laudanum; for 
though it appears from Thuau that he did occasionally take it, 
he had an aversion to all drugs, thinking that as he had got 
round before without laudanum, he would get round again. 
But the symptoms get worse, and he tells Mrs. Jenkins to go 
again for Dr. Steven, who comes. Now, gentlemen, I shall 
have to speak of the allegation of suicide immediately. But 
was it not remarkable that not a single question was asked of 
the doctor by my learned friends as to whether L’Angelier seemed 
to wish to get better or not? The evidence of Mrs. Jenkins, 
from first to last, shows that L’Angelier was most anxious to 
recover. And among the very last things he said was—“ Oh, 
if I could only get a little sleep, I think I should recover.” At 
last, Mrs. Jenkins, taking alarm, says—“Is there any one you 
would like to see?” He replies, “I should like to see Miss 
Perry.” He does not say, “JT should like to see Miss Smith.” 
If he thought that his life was really in danger, surely the 
natural feeling is, that he should wish to see her whom of all 
the world he was most devotedly attached to. But he expresses 
a wish only to see Miss Perry ; and, doubtless, if he had seen 
Miss Perry, we should have known more about this case than 
we do now. But before Miss Perry saw him, death had sealed 
his mouth; it had caught him more quickly than the doctor or 


221 


Madeleine Smith. 


Lord Advocate his land!ady expected, and more quickly than he had any idea 


of himself. And so, when the doctor raised his head from the 
pillow, it fell back; the man was dead; and the mystery of 
that night remains sealed, so far as the tongue of the unhappy 
victim is concerned. Now, gentlemen, I have told you this 
long and sad tale, and I am very much mistaken indeed if it 
does not produce an effect on your mind leading to one inevitable 
result. I don’t wish to strain any one point against the unhappy 
prisoner at the bar. The case is one of such magnitude, the 
amount of evidence so intricate, and depending as it does upon 
minute circumstances, the more so from the position in which 
I am now obliged to present the case—I have found it necessary 
to collect all the little facts and put them all together, in 
order to construct, as I say, a chain of evidence that appears 
to me completely irrefutable. But, notwithstanding that, I 
have no desire whatever to press you beyond the legitimate 
consequences of the facts which I have now stated, and I shall 
therefore go on to consider, with all the candour that I can, 


the defence that. has been set up. Just let me, before I do so, 


recapitulate that which we have proved. We have brought 
these unhappy persons down to the end of December, bound 
to each other in a way which truly was indissoluble, because 


the prisoner was so committed in her letters that, except with — 


L’Angelier’s consent, she never could have got quit of him. 
You find her engaging herself to another, and trying to break 
off from L’Angelier by mere coldness, and not succeeding ; you 
find the threats of L’Angelier; you find her despairing letters ; 
you then find a meeting fixed, and the first indications of poison 
being given ; the meeting takes place, a reconciliation is effected, 
but the engagement with Mr. Minnoch goes on. In about a 
fortnight or ten days he is taken ill after the purchase of arsenic 


on one occasion—I have not been able to prove the purchase 


on the other occasion—but it is proved by her own stztement 
that he was taken ill after getting something from her ; he 
proposes to go to the Bridge of Allan; she entreats him not 
to go, because Mr. Minnoch is there; and by-the-by I forgot 
to read, although I will not now stop to read, the letter which 
on the 16th March—the very time she appointed for the last 
meeting with L’Angelier—she wrote to Mr. Minnoch, her in- 
tended husband ; he takes ill, talks of going to Bridge of Allan ; 
she tries to dissuade him from going, but he goes; she buys 
arsenic on the 18th; she writes to make an appointment for 
the 19th, and she buys arsenic the same day ; he does not keep 
his appointment for the 19th, but he does so on Sunday in 
answer to a second invitation from her, which is found in his 
pocket; he goes back to Glasgow for the express purpose of 
keeping the appointment; he goes out that night to keep the 
appointment; and he comes home and dies of arsenic within 
222 


rtennte HP aen tee > 


Addresses to Jury. 


twelve or fourteen hours. Gentlemen, I have concluded that Lord Advocate 
part which I considered necessary relative to the case of the 
prosecution. But it is right that I should now read the letter 
which the prisoner addressed to Mr. Minnoch. It is dated 
the 16th of March, the day before the family returned from 
the Bridge of Allan. I read it to show you the inextricable 
difficulty in which the unhappy prisoner had placed herself. 
“My dearest William,—It is but fair, after your kindness to 
me, that I should write you a note. The day I part from 
friends I always feel sad. But to part from one I love—as 
I do you—makes me feel truly sad and dull. My oniy con- 
solation is that we meet soon. To-morrow we shall be home. 
I do so wish you were here today. We might take a long P 
walk. Our walk to Dunblane I shall ever remember with 
pleasure. That walk fixed a day on which we are to begin a 
new life—a life which I hope may be of happiness and long 
duration to both of us. My aim through life shall be to please 
and study. you. Dear William, I must conclude as Mama is 
ready to go to Stirling. I do not go with the same pleasure 
as I did the last time. I hope you got to town safe—and 
found your sisters well. Accept my warmest, kindest love, and 
ever believe me to be yours with affection,— Madeleine.” 


This letter was written two days before she wrote making the 
assignation with L’Angelier only a very few days before his death, 
and it was found in his pocket after his death. There is one 
other incident to which I must call your attention, and it is 
this—Apparently the prisoner had shown no particular agitation 
at the news of L’Angelier’s death. Gentlemen, if she is capable 
of committing the crime charged, you will not wonder at her 
self-possession ; but news came on Thursday. Something on 
that day reached her ears. What it was we do not know. One 
morning she was missed from her father’s house. Whether she 
had been in bed or not is not certain. Janet, her sister, says 
she was not in bed when she awoke in the morning. She was 
not seen that morning by any of the servants. She was found 
by Mr. Minnoch at half-past three o'clock in the Helensburgh 
steamer at Greenock. Where she was that evening we cannot 
discover. But it has been shown that she was absent from 
half-past. seven o’clock in the morning, when she was missed, 
till half-past three, when she was found by Mr. Minnoch. So 
much is certain. I do not press this incident for more than 
it is worth, for the mere discovery of the letters was enough ~ 
to induce her to fly from her father’s house. But still the 
fact remains that these letters were discovered, and that the 
prisoner flies. She is brought back by Mr. Minnoch. From 
a very gentlemanly feeling he asks no questions, and she never 
explains, and never has explained, what she did on that occasion. 

223 


Madeleine Smith. 


Lord Advocate This incident bears, therefore, on the case for the prosecution. 


As I said before, I have nothing but a public duty to perform. 
I have no desire to plead this cause as an advocate. My duty 
is to bring the case before you, as the ends of truth and justice 
require. But I would be wanting in my duty if I had not 
brought out these elements, and culled these details, to show 
you how they bear upon the accusation in the indictment. TI 
now go to the defence which, as I gather, will probably be 
set up. As I said before, I will go into it in the spirit of 
candour, as well as justice. Now, the first thing may be taken 
from the declaration of the panel herself. Let us see what it 
says. Although the declaration of a prisoner is never evidence 
in his or her favour, yet, in this case, if it be truth, I have no 
desire to prevent it from having its legitimate effect upon 
your minds. If she can tell a consistent story—a story con- 
sistent with the evidence—there is no desire to deprive her 
of the benefit of it. [His lordship then read the declaration, 
of which a copy will be found on page 77.} Gentlemen, in 
regard to the last letter, you will see that the prisoner does not 
tell that the letter referred to was written on any previous occa- 
sion. She says he had been unwell, and had gone to the Bridge of 
Allan, and she is shown a letter, and I can only refer the writing 
of it to the sickness before his death. In reference to the use 
of the arsenic, I do not, of course, know what my learned friend is 
going to say, but I have not been able to find either in the 
publications of the Messrs. Blackwood or the Messrs. Chambers 
the shadow of a statement to the effect that arsenic, diluted in 
water, is ever used in the manner spoken of by the prisoner, 
and you have the evidence of the lady (Madame Guibilei), who 
told you that in the story read in the school at Clapton, it was 
said that arsenic was used internally by the Styrian peasants 
for the purpose of making their wind stronger, and also for 
improving the appearance of their complexion. Now, gentle- 
men, that is her account of what took place. She denies 
entirely that she saw L’Angelier on the night before his death— 
she denies that she heard him at the window the night before 
his death. You will consider, gentlemen, if that is consistent 
with any reasonable probability. No doubt the girl Janet slept 
with her. She said she found her there when she awoke in 
the morning, and that she went to bed with her at the same 
time that night. My learned friend did not ask her, and 
perhaps properly, whether she had heard any noise during 
the night, and the prisoner is quite entitled to the benefit of 
the supposition that her sister did not hear any noise during 
the night. Again, the foot-boy, who slept in the front of 
the house, declares he heard nothing, and the two maids, who 
slept in the room behind, swear they heard nothing. But, 
gentlemen, so far as regards Janet, you have it positively proved 
224 


eae 


The Lord Advocate (James Moncrieff), 


Addresses to J ury. 


that L’Angelier was in the habit of coming night after night to Lord Advocate 
the window—you have it proved that on many occasions he 
did come to the house—and you certainly have it proved that 
on some occasions he was in the house with the prisoner. It 
does not appear that Janet knew anything about these meetings ; 
and you have her referred to sometimes in the letters, in which 
she says she could not get Janet asleep last night, as an 
excuse for not having been at the window to receive him. In 
regard to the servants, you will recollect how the house stands 
by the plan; and that nothing could be easier than for the 
prisoner, if she had a mind, to go up-stairs and open the front 
door to receive him into the drawing-room; or, if the area 
gate were left open, she could with great ease (for the boy 
slept soundly, and foot-boys are rather apt to sleep soundly) 
open the area door, and let him in that way. Whether she could 
let him in by the back-door without the connivance of Christina 
Haggart is another question. Christina Haggart swears that 
she did not connive at it on that occasion; ard it may be 
doubtful, therefore, whether that mode of access was open 
to her; and, therefore, while there is nothing in what these 
witnesses say to imply that they did meet that night, there is 
certainly nothing to exclude the possibility of it. As to the 
prisoner’s account of the use for which she bought the arsenic, 
as I said before, you must be satisfied that it is a reasonable 
and credible account before you make up your mind on this 
case; because, unless it can be presented to you in some intel- 
ligible way that this arsenic was bought and used for this 
purpose, I am afraid the prisoner stands in the position of 
having in her possession the very poison by which her lover 
died without being able to account satisfactorily for the posses- 
sion of it. I do not mean now to. go back on the observations 
I have already made, but you will consider whether—the poison 
having only been purchased on these three occasions, and never 
before—that is a true statement which she makes with regard 
to the use of it. You have ‘to consider whether there is the 
slightest probability—a probability which any reasonable man 
can entertain—that she made these three solitary purchases 
on these three days, and that she used the whole arsenic for 
that purpose, and that the coincidence of her meeting with 
L’Angelier on these particular occasions, and immediately after 
these purchases, is a mere coincidence. If you come to that — 
conclusion, gentlemen, no doubt it will go very far indeed to 
maintain the defence, but if you cannot, then I am very much 
afraid the opposite result follows inevitably. But then it is 
said, and said with some plausibility, that the meeting which 
was intended to take place was a meeting trysted for the Satur- 
day, and not for the Sunday. Now, gentlemen, the way I 
put it to you is this, that either of these two suppositions is 
P 225 


Madeleine Smith. 


Lord Advocate quite possible. The letter may have been posted after eleven 
o’clock, in that ease there can be no doubt that the tryst or 
meeting was for the Sunday; it may have been posted at nine 
o’clock, in which case probably it would have been the night 
before, and though it bears no date, it may possibly have meant 
that the tryst was to be held on Saturday. But I may make 

- this remark, that while throughout this correspondence the | 
Thursdays and Fridays and Sundays are the nights generally \ 
appointed for the meetings, I have found no instance—perhaps 
my learned friend may find one—of meetings appointed for the 
Saturday. But still, gentlemen, that is within the bounds of 
probability, and it will be for you to consider, even supposing 
she expected L’Angelier on the Saturday, whether, knowing he 
was at Bridge of Allan, which, in her declaration, she says she 
knew, it is at all likely she should not have waited on the 
Sunday also, in the case of his not having returned to town 
on the Saturday—that even if it had been the Saturday evening, 
the question is, is it within the bounds of probability in this 
case that he did not go to the window that night, and make 
himself heard in the usual way? But, gentlemen, it is one 
of the main theories on which the defence is founded, that 
L’Angelier may have committed suicide. Of course, that is 
a matter with which I am bound to deal, and can deal only 
with the anxiety to discover truth. Why, if we had found in 
this case anything indicating, with reasonable certainty, a 
case of suicide, we might have disregarded all these facts on 
which this prosecution is founded. J own, gentlemen, however, 
and I say it with regret, that I have been unable to see, from 
first to last, in the evidence for the prosecution or the defence, 
anything that warrants me in believing that this could possibly 
be a case of suicide. You must deal with that, gentlemen, 
you must consider the question as between murder and suicide ; 
and, of course, if you are not satisfied that it was a case of 
murder, you must give the prisoner the benefit of any doubt 
you may entertain on the subject. But, gentlemen, we have 
also to consider, is there any other conceivable cause for what 
has taken place? Therefore, before I deal with the question of 
suicide, let us see whether other contingencies are altogether 
excluded. It seems to have been said that L’Angelier was an 
eater of arsenic, and that he may have poisoned himself by 
an overdose. Gentlemen, I think that rests on evidence so 
little entitled to credit that I need not deal with it; and if 
my learned friend takes that defence, I am quite content to 
leave it in the hands of the Court, to direct you as they may 
think fit. The only evidence of L’Angelier ever having spoken 
of arsenic is the evidence of two parties who knew him in ; 
Dundee in the year 1852. On one occasion he is said to have | 

226 


————E——————we 


Addresses to Jury. 


given it to horses; but the evidence on that point is entirely’ Lord Advocate 
uncorroborated. And as to the other case—the lad who found 
a parcel of arsenic, but who never recollected the conversation 
with L’Angelier until a very few days before this trial, I must 
throw his evidence out of view altogether. There is not, from 
the time he came to Glasgow, the smallest suspicion that he 
was in the habit of taking arsenic; he is not proved to have 
bought it on any single occasion; and it is not proved that he 
had it in the house at any time. The supposition, therefore, 
that he was in the habit of taking it we must altogether reject ; 
neither is the slightest evidence that it would be possible, even 
by the practice of eating arsenic, regarding which I am very 
incredulous, to have arranged the matter that the amount of 
106 grains should have been found in the stomach of the man. 
It is 80 completely out of the bounds of reason that I dismiss 
the hypothesis as beyond the range of possibility. It seems, 
however, to be said, that perhaps at the Bridge of Allan he had 
accidentally got arsenic. But, gentlemen, that won’t do—that 
is impossible. The cases in which arsenic shows itself only 
after five hours are very rare indeed. Dr. Christison told 
you that active exercise would accelerate the action of the 
poison, and that from half an hour to two hours is the ordinary 
time that it takes to operate. But L’Angelier left the Bridge 
of Allan at three o’clock. He walked to Stirling and was found 
at Coatbridge quite well, and he walked to Glasgow quite well, 
looking better than he had done for three weeks. He left 
his own house looking quite well at nine o’clock, and he is 
seen at Mrs. Parr’s at half-past nine in perfect health. You 
thus have him traced for upwards of six hours from leaving 
Bridge of Allan, and he is quite well, and you have no indication 
that at Bridge of Allan, Coatbridge, or anywhere else, he had 
arsenic, or could have had it. Therefore, gentlemen, it seems 
to me that accidental administration is out of the question, or 
the administration by any one else. It is not suggested that 
he saw anybody that night except the prisoner, and you are 
therefore left to no conjecture, unless it be either a case of 
suicide or a case of murder. Now this, as I said before, is 
s most important matter for you to consider, and you are bound 
to consider it most deliberately. If the case be suicide, within 
the limits of the evidence, of course you will say so; but it is 
my duty to put these facts in the light in which they ought 
to stand; and I say that I do not think the facts admit the 
possibility of this being, within any reasonable compass or 
probability, a case of suicide. Under any circumstances we 
should have to consider and place in the balance the probabilities 
of the case, because, although a great deal of evidence has been 
led as to L’Angelier’s temperament, I don’t think much import- 
227 


Madeleine Smith. 


Lord Advocate ance is to be attached to this matter. You do not discern 
from a man’s temperament whether he is likely to commit 
suicide or not, and I don’t think we can learn from the statistics ] 
of suicide that the men whose temperament, would be supposed 
as likely to lead them to commit suicide are those who do so. 
In regard to L’Angelier’s history, we have had a great deal of 
evidence, but it did not affect my mind in the slightest degree. 
There was evidence from one or two men who knew L’Angelier 
at a time when he was of a poorer class in life, and they told 
about his having wished to put himself out of the world. Well, 
but listen, even these witnesses proved to you that at that 
very time L’Angelier was a kind of gasconading, boasting man, 
such as a Jersey man might be; that he was in the habit of 
boasting of his acquaintance with high families, of saying what 
he knew not to be true. I do not know that they proved all 
he said not to be true, because that gentleman from Dublin, 
who seemed to think he was a vain, lying fellow (and you will 
set his evidence against that of the persons from Glasgow who 
knew the deceased), admitted that his story about the Fife 
lady was true, and it turned out that L’Angelier had a some- 
what winning way among ladies. But it is said that he talked 
about committing suicide. He did so, but he did not do it. 
He said at one time that if any lady jilted him he would put a 
knife in his breast ; but he was jilted, and he did not do it. The 
man that is going to commit suicide does not go to the window 
when his companion is in bed, and wait till he gets out of it. 
The man desiring to commit suicide does not go down with a 
companion to Leith Pier and say that he is going to drown 
himself. The man that commits suicide does not take a knife 
in his hand and say to his companions that he is going to 
plunge it into his breast. I think this temperament is much 
the reverse of the suicidal. It is more the characteristic of 
our neighbours on the other side of the Channel, but it does 
not to my mind lead in the slightest degree to a conclusion 
‘one way or other in regard io L’Angelier having committed 
suicide. I think you must deal with this matter altogether 
independently of these considerations. No doubt a variable 
temperament is a matter of some consequence. Rapid transi- 
tion from extreme elevation to extreme depression is a matter 
to be considered in such a case as this. But I think his 
conversation with Mr. Miller in regard to the abstract question 
of suicide is perhaps the only thing that is proved on the other 
side that can bear on this part of the case. But then, gentle 
men, you will have to consider the circumstances under which 
this supposed suicide was committed. L’Angelier had taken J 
up his position. He had a strong suspicion that there was 
something in the rumours about Mr. Minnoch. He did not 
228 


< PE 


Addresses to J ury. 


mean to kill himself if they were true, but he said, “I will Lord Advocate 
show these letters to her father.” That is what he meant to 
do. Well, he came from the Bridge of Allan for the purpose 
of seeing Miss Smith, the prisoner—very happy, in good spirits, 
cheerful—he had a kind note from her in his pocket—he went 
oxt at night, to go to Blythswood Square—he certainly had 
no thoughts of suicide. Well, now, is it conceivable that, 
without having gone near the house, he committed suicide? 
Is it within the bounds of evidence or probability? Where did 
he get the arsenic to buy that night? Not surely at Todd & 
Higginbotham’s store—not in any of the chemical works— 
certainly not in any of the druggists’ shops. That is not 
conceivable. Is it in the least likely that a man in his position 
would go out to Blythswood Square and swallow dry arsenic 
there, and then totter home and die? Gentlemen, that is a 
supposition that is entirely inconceivable. There is the possi- 
bility, no doubt, that he went to see Miss Smith, and that she 
told him she was going to give him up, and that this had a 
great impression on his mind; but if she saw him, what comes 
of the declaration that she has made that she did not see him 
that night? and if she did see him that night, is there any link 
awanting in the chain of evidence that I have laid before you? 
I can conceive of no possibility of it being a case of suicide 
that does not imply that they met, and if they met, then 
the evidence of her guilt is overwhelming. The only chance 
of escape for the prisoner is to maintain the truth of her 
declaration that they did not meet that night; and, if they did 
“not meet, J cannot see how the case can be considered as one 
of suicide. You may, no doubt, consider whether the truth 
is that he went to the house, and finding he was not admitted, 
and that Miss Smith did not hear him, went away in disgust. 
This is an observation that may be made ; but you will consider, 
in the first place, whether it is possible that, having fixed a 
meeting the night before, L’Angelier, if he went to the window, 
would have desisted till he had attracted Miss Smith’s attention ; 
and, if he attracted her attention, then they met that night. 
Therefore, gentlemen, it must be maintained by the prisoner 
that he did not go to the window, or make a noise there, for 
she says in her declaration that she never heard him; and, if 
that be so, I say again I do not see how this can be treated 
as a case of suicide. But then it is said that the quantity of 
arsenic found in the stomach clearly denoted a case of suicide, 
because so much could not have been given and successfully 
administered. Gentlemen, I don’t think this is made out, but 
quite the reverse, because if the poison were given in cocoa, 
as it probably was, it has been proved by Dr. Penny that a very 
large quantity can be held in suspension in it, and Dr. Maclagan 


229 


Madeleine Smith. 


Lord Advocate proved the same thing, though my learned friend the Dean of 

Faculty did not ask him what amount might or might not be 

held in suspension in cocoa. No doubt it would require to be . 
boiled in it. But, gentlemen, if the defence that is to be set 
up is that the prisoner saw certain things in Blackwood’s 
Magazine, then she was not without some knowledge of the 
properties of arsenic. She had access to the kitchen, the fire 
of which was close to her bedroom. She had a fire in her 
bedroom, and she might have boiled it without the least danger. 
This, therefore, presented no difficulty. There is no proof that 
she did so; but, on the other hand, there is no proof on the 
other side in the slightest degree to exclude the probability of 
it. And that there should be a large dose is quite consistent 
with reason and the facts of this case. If we are right in saying 
that there were-two former cases of administration which were 
unsuccessful (and it is proved that a slight dose might be given 
in coffee)—if there had been two doses which were not successful 
—is it not plain if the thing were to be done that night—just 
what we would have expected—that it should have been done 
with certainty? and consequently there is nothing surprising 
in the fact that the third dose was a very large quantity. It 
is said, gentlemen, and probably will be maintained, that this 
arsenic was so mixed, that traces of it must have been found in 
the stomach, and that therefore the arsenic must have been got 
by L’Angelier and administered by himself. But as to that 
taken by L’Angelier a month before, no traces of carbonaceous 
matter could by any possibility have been expected. If Currie’s 
arsenic had been coloured with indigo, probably the colouring 
matter would have been detected in the stomach. But it was 
not coloured with indigo; it was coloured with waste indigo ; 
and by experiment, as well as by theory, this was found to leave 
no trace. There were, no doubt, experiments made by Dr. 
Penny, in which very minute particles of carbonaceous matter 
were found in the stomach mixed with the arsenic. But, 
gentlemen, when Dr. Penny, in the first place, examined the 
stomach his attention was noi directed to this subject at all, 
and it was his subsequent experiments that were directed to this 
matter. Dr. Christison also told you that, unless in one part, 
he could not have expected to find traces of the colouring matter 
—indigo ; and it is quite easy to conceive, independently of the 
fact that the analysts were not looking for it, that a large 
quantity of the carbonaceous matter, which is lighter than 
arsenic, might have been thrown off the stomach in the violent 
vomiting; and, therefore, gentlemen, I must own that this 
suspicion of suicide does not appear to me to have any pro- 
bability. The only thing peculiar about his demeanour was this 
—he did not say where he had got it; the landlady did not ask 


230 


Addresses to Jury. 


him, because she thought she knew; she had no doubt he had Lord Advocate 
been visiting Miss Smith. If he had not gone there, I think 
you would have expected him to say so. But while that is quite 
true, you can very easily see, especially in a man with the 
temperament which he is described by the witnesses to have 
had, that if he had got anything which disagreed with him 
there, he would rather die than disclose it. You can easily 
understand that. Whether, when he sent for Miss Perry, he 
intended to disclose it is a different question. But during the 
whole of the illness there seems not to have been the slightest 
desire for death or the slightest aversion to life, but, on the 
contrary, the last thing that he said was, “If I could only get 
a little sleep I think I should be well.” The sleep he got was 
the sleep of death. 

Now, gentlemen, I have gone through all this case; there has 
been a great deal of medical evidence led, but I think I have 
touched upon all the important portions of it. Evidence was 
led as to the character of L’Angelier; it is not for me to refer 
further to that; I think you will understand perfectly well 
what sort of a man he was. That he was in very low circum- 
stances in 1851, and in a position in which he might well 
have been weary of life, is perfectly certain. That he had 
good friends in different parts of the country has at all events 
not been disproved, and that he himself may have been well 
connected—as many French refugees are—though in a low 
position in point of fortune, is at least possible, though there is 
no proof of it. And now, gentlemen, having detained you so 
long—having gone over this case with an amount of trouble 
and anxiety which I would fain have spared—I leave it entirely 
in your hands. I am quite sure that the verdict which you 
give will be a verdict consistent with your oath, and with your 
opinion of the case. I have nothing but a public duty to 
discharge. I have endeavoured in my argument in this case 
throughout to show you as powerfully as I could how the 
circumstances which have been proved in evidence bear upon 
the prisoner. Nor should I have done so if a solemn sense of 
duty, and my own belief in the justice of the case had not led 
me to do so. If I had thought that there were any elements 
of doubt or of disproof in the case that would have justified 
me in retiring from the painful task which I have now to dis- 
charge, believe me, gentlemen, there is not a man in this — 
Court who would have rejoiced more at that result than myself ; 
for of all the persons engaged in this trial, apart from the 
unfortunate object of it, I believe the task laid upon me is 
at once the most difficult and the most painful. I have now 
discharged my duty. I am quite certain that in the case which 
I have submitted to you I have not overstrained the evidence. 

231 


Madeleine Smith. 


Lord Advocate I do not believe that in any instance I have strained the facts 
beyond what they would naturally bear. If I have, you your- 
selves, my learned friend on the other side, and the Court, will 
correct me. And now, gentlemen, as I have said, I leave the 
case in your hands. I see no outlet. for this unhappy prisoner, 
and if you come to the same result as I have done, there is but 
one course open to you, and that is to return a verdict of guilty 
of this charge. 


On the suggestion of the Lorp Justicu-Cimrx, the Dean of 


Faculty delayed his address till next day, and the Court 
adjourned at half-past three o’clock. 


Eighth Day—Wednesday, 8th July, 1857, 
The Court met at ten o’clock. 


The Dzan or Facuuty then proceeded to address the jury as Dean of 
follows :—Gentlemen of the jury, the charge against the prisoner Faculty 
is murder, and the punishment of murder is death; and that 
simple statement is sufficient to suggest to us the awful solemnity 
of the occasion which brings you and me face to face. But, 
gentlemen, there are peculiarities in the present case of so 
singular a kind—there is such an air of romance and mystery 
investing it from beginning to end—there is something so 
touching and exciting in the age, and the sex, and the social 
position of the accused—ay, and I must add, the public attention 
is so directed to the trial, that they watch our proceedings and 
hang on our very accents with such an anxiety and eagerness 
of expectation, that I feel almost bowed down and overwhelmed 
by the magnitude of the task that is imposed on me. You are 
invited and encouraged by the prosecutor to snap the thread 
of that young life, and to consign to an ignominious death on 
the scaffold one who, within a few short months, was known 
only as a gentle and confiding and affectionate girl, the orna- 
ment and pride of her happy home. Gentlemen, the tone in 
which my learned friend, the Lord Advocate, addressed you 
yesterday could not fail to strike you as most remarkable. It 
was characterised by great moderation—by such moderation 
as I think must have convinced you that he could hardly expect 
a verdict at your hands—and in the course of that address, 
for which I give him the highest credit, he could not resist the 
expression of his own deep feeling of commiseration for the 
position in which the prisoner is placed, which was but an 
involuntary homage paid by the official prosecutor to the kind 
and generous nature of the man. But, gentlemen, I am going 
to ask you for something very different from commiseration ; 
I am going to ask you for that which I will not condescend 
to beg, but which I will loudly and importunately demand— 
that to which every prisoner is entitled, whether she be the 
lowest and vilest of her sex or the maiden whose purity is as 
the unsunned snow. I ask you for justice; and if you will kindly 
lend me your attention for the requisite period, and if heaven 
grant me patience and strength for the task, I shall tear to 
tatters that web of sophistry in which the prosecutor has striven 
to involve this poor girl and hor sad, strange story. 


233 


Madeleine Smith. 


Dean of Somewhat less than two years ago, accident ‘brought her 
Faculty acquainted with the deceased L’Angelier; and yet I can hardly 
call it accident, for it was due unfortunately in a great measure 
to the indiscretion of a young man whom you saw before you 
the day before yesterday. He introduced her to L’Angelier on 
the open street in circumstances which plainly show that he 
could not procure an introduction otherwise or elsewhere. And 
what was he who thus intruded himself upon the society of 
this young lady, and then clandestinely introduced himself into 
her father’s house? He was ap unknown adventurer; utterly 
unknown at that time, so far as we can see. For how he pro- 
cured his introduction into the employment of Huggins & Co. 
does not appear; and even the persons who knew him there, 
knew nothing of his history or antecedents. We have been 
enabled in some degree to throw light upon his origin and his 
history. We find that he is a native of Jersey; and we have 
discovered that at a very early period of his life, in the year 
1843, he was in Scotland; he was known for three years at that 
time to one of the witnesses as being in Edinburgh, and the 
impression which he made as a very young man, which he 
then was, was certainly, to say the least of it, not of a very 
favourable kind. He goes to the Continent; he is there during 
the French Revolution, and he returns to this country, and is 
found in Edinburgh again in the year 1851. And in what 
condition is he then? In great poverty, in deep dejection, living 
upon the bounty of a tavern-keeper, associating and sleeping 
in the same bed with the waiter of that establishment. He goes 
from Edinburgh to Dundee, and we trace his history there; 
at length we find him in Glasgow in 1853; and in 1855, as I 
said before, his acquaintance with the prisoner commenced. 
In considering the character and conduct of the individual, 
whose history it is impossible to dissociate from this inquiry, 
we are bound to form as just an estimate as we can of what 
his qualities were, of what his character was, of what were the 
principles and motives that were likely to influence his conduct. 
We find him, according to the confession of all those who 
observed him then most narrowly, vain, conceited, pretentious, 
witb a great opinion of his own personal attractions, and a very 
silly expectation of admiration from the other sex. That he 
was to a certain extent successful in attracting such admiration 
may be the fact, but, at all events, his own prevailing idea 
seems to have been that he was calculated to be very successful 
in paying attentions to ladies, and that he was looking to push 
his fortune by that means. And accordingly once and again 
we find him engaged in attempts to get married to women of 
some station at least in society; we have heard of one dis- 
appointment which he met with in England, and another we 
heard a great deal of connected with a lady in the county of 


234 


Addresses to Jury. 


Fife; and the manner in which he bore his disappointment on Dean of 
those two occasions is perhaps the best indication and light we Faculty 
have as to the true character of the man. He was depressed 
and melancholy beyond description ; he threatened—whether he 
intended or not—to commit suicide in consequence of his dis- 
appointment. He was not a person of strong health, and it is 
extremely probable that this, among other things, had a very 
important effect in depressing his spirits, rendering him change- 
able and uncertain—now uplifted, as one of the witnesses said, 
and now most deeply depressed—of a mercurial temperament, 
as another described it, very variable, never to be depended on. 

Such was the individual with whom the prisoner unfortunately 
became acquainted in the manner that I have stated. The 
progress of their acquaintance is soon told. My learned friend 
the Lord Advocate said to you that, although the correspondence 
must have been from the outset an improper correspondence, 
because it was clandestine, yet the letters of the young lady at 
that first period of their connection breathed nothing but gentle- 
ness and propriety. I thank my learned friend for the 
admission; but even with that admission I must ask you to 
bear with me while I call your attention for a few moments to 
one or two incidents in the course of that early period of their 
history which I think are very important for your guidance in 
judging of the conduct of the prisoner. The correspondence in 
its commencement shows that if L’Angelier had it in his mind 
originally to corrupt and seduce this poor girl, he entered upon 
the attempt with considerable ingenuity and skill; for the very 
first letter of the series which we have contains a passage in 
which she says—“ I am trying to break myself off all my very bad 
habits; it is you I have to thank for this, which I do sincerely 
from my heart.” He had been noticing, therefore, her faults, 
whatever they were. He had been suggesting to her improve 
ment in her conduct or in something else. He had thus been 
insinuating himself into her confidence. And she no doubt 
yielded a great deal too eusily to the pleasures of this new 
acquaintance, but pleasures comparatively of a most innocent 
kind at the time to which I am now referring. And yet it 
seems to have occurred to her own mind at a very early period 
that it was impossible to maintain this correspondence con- 
sistently with propriety or with due regard to her own welfare. 
For so early as the month of April, 1855—indeed in the very 
month in which apparently the acquaintance began—she writes 
to him in these terms—‘“I now perform the promise I made in 
parting to write to you. We are to be in Glasgow to-morrow 
(Thursday), but as my time shall not be at my own disposal, 
I cannot fix any time to see you. Chance may throw you in 
my way. I think you will agree with me in what IJ intend 
proposing, viz. that for the present the correspondence had 


235 


Madeleine Smith. 


Dean of better atop. I know your good feeling will not take this 

Faculty unkind, it is meant quite the reverse. By continuing to corre- 
spond harm may arise; in discontinuing it nothing can be said.” 
And accordingly for a time, so far as appears, the correspondence 
did cease. Again, gentlemen, I beg to call your attention to the 
fact that in the end of this same year the connection was 
broken off altogether. That appears from the letter which the 
prisoner wrote to Miss Perry in the end of September or 
beginning of October, 1855—“ Dearest Miss Perry,—Many, 
many kind thanks for all your kindness to me. Emile will tell 
you I have bid him adieu. My papa would not give his con- 
sent, so I am in duty bound to obey him. Comfort dear Emile. 
It is a heavy blow to us both. I had hoped some day to have 
been happy with him, but, alas! it was not intended. We were 
doomed to be disappointed. You have been a kind friend to 
him. Oh! continue so. I hope and trust he may prosper 
in the step he is about to take. I am glad now he is leaving 
this country, for it would have caused me great pain to have 
met him. Think my conduct not unkind. I have a father to 
please, and a kind father, too. Farewell, dear Miss Perry, and, 
with much love, believe me yours most sincerely,—Mini.” Once 
more, in the spring of 1856, it would appear—the correspondence 
having in the interval been renewed, how, we do not know, but 
is it not unfair to suppose, rather on the importunate entreaty 
of the gentleman than on the suggestion of the lady who 
wrote such a letter as I have just read?—the correspondence 
was discovered by the family of Miss Smith. On that occasion 
she wrote thus to her confidante, Miss Perry—‘ Dearest Mary,— 
M. has discovered the correspondence. I am truly glad that it 
is known; but, strange to say, a fortnight has passed and not 
a word has been said. J cannot understand it. Now that it is 
known, I do not mean to give way. I intend to state in plain 
terms that I intend to be dear Emile’s wife. Nothing shall 
deter me. I shall be of age soon, and then I have a right to 
decide for myself. Can you blame me for not giving in to 
my parents in a matter of so serious importance as the choice 
of a husband? I had been intended to marry a man of money ; 
but is not affection before all things, and in marrying Emile 
I will take the man whom I love. I know my friends will 
forsake me, but for that I do not care so long as I possess the 
affection of Emile; and to-possess and retain his affection I 
shall try to please him in all things by acting according to his 
directions, and he shall cure me of my faults. . . . I am 
sorry not to he able to see you, as we are going to Edinburgh 
in a week or ten days.” Now, what follows from this you have 
heard from some of the witnesses. The correspondence was 
put an end to by the interference of Mr. Smith, and for a time 
that interference had effect. 


236 


Addresses to Jury. 


But, alas! the next scene is the most painful of all. This Dean of 
which we have been speaking of is in the end of 1855. In Faculty 
the spring of 1856 the corrupting influence of the seducer was 
successful, and his victim fell. It is recorded in a letter bearing 
the post-mark of the 7th May, which you have heard read. And 
how corrupting that influence must have been!—how vile the 
arts to which he resorted for accomplishing his nefarious purpose, 
can never be proved so well as by the altered tone and language 
of the unhappy prisoner’s letters. She had lost not her virtue 
merely, but, as the Lord Advocate said, her sense of decency. 
Gentlemen, whose fault was that—whose doing was that? Think 
you that, without temptation, without evil teaching, a poor 
girl falls into such depths of degradation? No. Influence from 
without—most corrupting influence—can alone account for such 
a fall. And yet, through the midst of this frightful correspond- 
ence—and I wish to God that it could have been concealed from 
you, gentlemen, and from the world, and I am sure the Lord 
Advocate would have spared us, if he had not felt it necessary 
for the ends of justice—I say that even through the midst of 
this frightful correspondence there breathes a spirit of devoted 
affection towards the man who had destroyed her that strikes 
me as most touching. 

The history of the affair is soon told. I do not think it 
necessary to carry you through ail the details of their intercourse 
from the spring of 1856 down to the end of that year. 
It is in the neighbourhood of Helensburgh almost entirely that 
that correspondence took place. In November the family of 
the Smiths came back to Glasgow. And that becomes a very 
important era/in the history of the case; for that was the 
first time at which they came to live in the house in Blythswood 
Square, which you have heard so much about. There were 
many meetings between them in the other house in India Street 
in 1855; they met still more frequently at Row; but what wo 
are chiefly concerned with is to know what meetings took place 
between them in that last winter in the house in Blythswood 
Square—how these took place, and what it was necessary for 
them to do in order to come together; for these things have a 
most important bearing on the question which you are here 
to try. Now, the first letter written from Blythswood Square 
bears date 18th November, 1856, No. 61. There is another 
letter also written in November, 1856, and plainly out of its 
place in this series. It is letter No. 57, and does not bear 
the day of the month, but must be subsequent to that bearing 
date the 18th of November, as it is written also from Blythswood 
Square, and the other letter is shown to be the first written 
from that house. In this second letter she gives her lover some 
information of the means by which they may carry on their 
correspondence in the course of the winter. She says—“ Sweet 


237 


Madeleine Smith, © 


Dean of love, you should get those brown envelopes; they would not be 

Fac so much seen ag white ones put down into my window. You 
should just stoop down to tie your shoe and then slip it in. 
The back-door is closed. M. keeps the key for fear our servant 
boy would go out of an evening. We have got blinds for our 
windows.” This shows she had been arranging with him at 
that time in what manner their correspondence by letter was 
to be carried on, and I think you will soon see that it was 
by letter chiefly, if not exclusively, that the correspondence was, 
for a considerable time, carried on while she was in that house. 
The next reference to the matter is in a letter of the 21st 
November, No. 63, in which she says—“ Now about writing, 
I wish you to write me and give me the note on Tuesday evening 
next. You will about eight come and put the letter down into 
the window (just drop it in, I won’t be there at the time), the 
window next to Minnoch’s close door. There are two windows 
together with white blinds. Don’t be seen near the house on 
Sunday, as M. won’t be at church, and she will watch. In 
your letter, dear love, tell me what night of the week will be 
best for you to leave the letter for me. If M. and P. were from 
home I could take you in very well at the front door, just the 
same as I did in India Street, and I won’t let a chance pass.” 

Now you see the condition on which alone she understood it 
to be possible to admit him to the Blythswood Square house. 
That condition was the absence of her father and mother from 
home—an absence which did not take place throughout the 
whole of the period with which we have to do. “If M. and P. 
were from home I could take you in at the front door, and I 
won’t let a chance pass.” But the chance, gentlemen, never 
occurred. Her father and mother were never absent. 

Again, it is very important for you to understand—for the 
Lord Advocate spoke in such a way as may have left a false 
impression on your minds—it is very important, I say, that 
you should understand the means by which communication was 
made between these two at the window. The Lord Advocate 
seemed to say that there were some concerted signals by rapping 
at the window or on the railings with a stick in order to attract 
attention. This, you will find, was an entire mistake. 
L’Angelier did on one or two occasions take that course but 
the prisoner immediately forbade it, and ordered him not to do 
it again. In a letter which bears the post-mark of 5th December, 
1856, she says—“ Will you, darling, write me for Thursday first? 
If six o’clock, do it; I shall look. If not at six eclock, why, I 
shall look at eight. I hope no one sees you; and, darling, 
make no noise at the window. You mistake me. The snobs 
I spoke of do not know anything of me; they see a light, and 
they fancy it may be the servants’ room, and they may have 
some fun; only you know I sleep downstairs. I never told 


238 ; 


Addresses to Jury. 


any one; so don’t knock again, my beloved.” Again, in the Dean of 
same letter, a little further down, she says in a postscript— Féculty 
“Pray do not knock at the window,” earnestly repeating the 
same warning. About this time it is quite obvious that they 
had it in view to accomplish an elopement. It was quite plain 
that the consent of Miss Smith’s parents to her union with 
this young Frenchman was not to be thought of any longer. 
That hope. was altogether gone, and accordingly there are 
constant references in the letters about this time to the arrange- 
ments that were to be made for carrying her from her father’s 
house and accomplishing a marriage either in Glasgow or Edin- 
burgh. I won’t detain or fatigue you by reading the repeated 
mention of these preparations; I merely notice it in passing 
as applicable to the period of which I am now speaking. But 
I beg you to observe, gentlemen, that in going through this series 
of letters passing in the course of last winter, I endeavour to 
notice, as I pass, everything that relates to their mode of corre- 
spondence and to proposals for meetings, or to meetings that 
had taken place. I shall not willingly pass by one of them, 
for I wish thoroughly and honestly to lay before you every bit 
of written evidence that can affect the prisoner in that respect. 
In a letter which bears post-mark “17th December,” she says 
—“I would give anything to have an hour’s ehat with you. 
Beloved Emile, I don’t see how we can. M. is not going from 
home, and when P. is away Janet does not sleep with M. 
She won’t leave me, as I have a fire on in my room and M. has 
none. Do you think, beloved, you could not see me some 
night for a few moments at the door under the front door? 
But perhaps it would not be safe. Some one might pass as 
you were coming in. We had better not.” Now you will 
recollect that Christina Haggart told us that upon one occasion, 
and one only, there was a meeting in that place, arranged in the 
way spoken of in this letter—a meeting, that is to say, at the 
door, under the front door, to which, of course, he required to 
be admitted through the area gate; and that was accomplished 
through the assistance of Christina Haggart. Then, again, 
there is reference in the next letter, which bears the post-mark 
of the 19th, to a desire for a meeting—“My beloved, my 
darling,—Do you for @ second think I could feel happy this 
evening, knowing you were in low spirits, and that I am the 
cause? . . . Oh, would to God we could meet. I would 
not mind for M.; if P. and M. are from home—the first time 
they are, you shall be here. Yes, my love, I must see you, 
I must be pressed to your heart. . . . O yes, my beloved, 
we must make a bold effort.” Here again is the same condition, 
and the impossibility of carrying the meeting through unless 
in absence of the parents; but the first opportunity which 
occurs she will certainly avail herself of. Then in another letter, 
239 


Madeleine Smith. 


Dean of dated 29th, ghe writes—“ If you love me you will come to me 
Faculty when P. and M. are away in Edinburgh, which I think will be 
about the 7th or 10th of January.” In the same letter also, r| 
she says—“If P. and M. go, will you not, sweet love, come to 
your own Mini? Do you think I would ask you if I saw danger 
in the house?” On the 9th of January she writes again a 
letter, in which you will find a repetition of the same warning 
how to conduct himself at the window—“ It is just eleven o'clock, 
and no letter from you, my own ever dear beloved husband. 
Why this, my sweet one? I think I heard your stick this 
evening (pray do not make any sounds whatever at my window).” | 
Further, she says in the same letter—‘“I think you are again 
at my window, but I shall not go down stairs, as P. would 
wonder why, and only he and I are up waiting for Jack. I 
wish to see you; but no, you must not look up to the window 
in case any one should see me. So beloved think it not unkind 
if I never by any chance look at you; just leave my note and 
go away.” In the next letter, dated the llth, she says—“I 
would so like to spend three or four hours with you just to 
talk over some things; but I don’t know when we can; perhaps 
in the course of ten days. . . . If you would risk it, my 
sweet beloved pet, we would have time to kiss each other and 
a dear, fond embrace; and though, sweet love, it is only for a 
minute, do you not think it is better than not meeting at all? 
‘ . Same as last.” Plainly that was the short meeting 
which Christina Haggart told us of as occurring in the area 
under the front door; and, so far as I can see, there is not a 
vestige or tittle of written evidence of any meeting whatever, 
except that short meeting in the area, down to the time of 
which I am now speaking—that is to say, from the 18th of 
November till the date of this letter, which is the 11th January. 
Then, on the 13th January, she writes a letter, which is also 
very important, with reference to the events at this period, 
because at that time he had been very unwell. The 13th of 
January is the date of the letter—“Monday night.” It is 
posted on the 14th, but as she almost always wrote her letters 
at night, you will easily understand that it was written on 
the night of the.13th. She says—“I am glad you are sound. 
That is a great matter, I had a fear you were not, and I feared 
that you would die; but now I am easy on that point. I am 
very well.” In the same letter she says—“I don’t hear of 
M. or P. going from home, so, my dear pet, I see no chance for 
us. I fear we shall have to wait a bit.” That may have 
reference either to the possibility of their meetings, or to the 
possibility of their carrying out their design of an elopement. 
It matters not very much. Then on the 18th January we have 
this—“ J did love you so much last night when you were at the 
window.” Now, whether that last phrase indicates that there 
240 


| 
| 
| 


The Dean of Faculty (John Inglis). 


Addresses to Jury. 


was @ conversation at that meeting or not does not very clearly Dean of 
appear; but, at all events, it can have been nothing more than Faculty 
a meeting at the window. She says—“I think I shall see you 
Thursday night ”—I suppose the same kind of meeting that she * 
refers to immediately after. Whether that meeting on Thurs- 
day night ever took place or not does not appear; but it is not 
very important, because, pray observe, gentlemen, that that 
Thursday night is a night of January; this being written on 
Monday, the 19th, Thursday would have been the 22nd. In 

the next letter, bearing the post-mark 21st January, she says— 

“T have not got home till after two o’clock for the last two 
nights. If you can I shall look for a note on Friday, eight or 

ten, not six.” In the next, dated 22nd January, she says—“I 

was so sorry that I could not see you to-night; I had expected 

an hour’s chat with you; we must just hope for better the next 
time. . . . I don’t see the least chance for us, my dear 
love. M. is not well enough to go from home, and, my dear 
little sweet pet, I don’t see we could manage in Edinburgh, 
because I could not leave a friend’s house without their knowing 

of it; so, sweet pet, it must at present be put off till a better 
time. I see no chance before March.” In the same cover there 

is another letter, dated Sunday night, where there is reference 

to a meeting; but my learned friend the Lord Advocate very 
properly admitted that that was a meeting at the window— 
nothing more; and therefore I need say no more of it. He 

was convinced of that by referring back to letter No. 93, and 
comparing them together. He admitted the meeting there was 
merely at’ the window. 

Now, gentlemen, that concludes the month of January. There 
are no more letters of that month. There is not another, so 
far as I can see, referring to any meeting whatever in that house. 
Christina Haggart told you, when she was examined, that in 
the course of that winter, and when the family were living in 
Blythswood Square, they met but twice; and it is clear that 
they could not meet without the intervention of Christina 
Haggart. I don’t mean that it was physically impossible, but ° 
when the young lady saw so much danger, so much obstruction 
in the way of her accomplishing her object, unless she could 
secure the aid of Christina Haggart, there is not the slightest 
tittle of evidence that without that assistance she ever made 
the attempt. I mean, of course, you must understand, meetings 
within the house. I don’t dispute the existence of the corre- 
spondence which was carried on at the window, and I don’t 
doubt that even on occasions they may have exchanged words 
at the window, and had short conversations there. But I am 
speaking of meetings within the house. The only evidence at 
all as to meetings within the house is confined to the meeting 
in the area under the front door, and the other meeting that 


241 


Madeleine Smith. 


Dean of took place on the occasion when Christina Haggart introduced 

Faculty [Angelier at the back-door. Now, I am sure you will agree 
with me that this is 2 most important part of the case; and I 
bring you down thus to the commencement of the month of 
February with this, I think, distinctly proved—or at least I am 
entitled to say, without a shadow of evidence to the contrary— 
that they were not in the habit of coming into personal contact. 
On the contrary, they had only met in this way on two occasions 
in the course of the winter. 

But now we have come te a very important stage of the case. 
On the 28th of January Mr, Minnoch proposes, and, if I under- 
stand the theory of my learned friend’s case aright, from that 
day the whole character of this girl’s mind and feelings was 
changed, and she set herself to prepare for the perpetration 
of what my learned frierfd has called one of the most foul, cool, 
deliberate murders that ever was committed. Gentlemen, I will 
not say that such a thing is absolutely impossible; but I shall 
venture to say it is well-nigh incredible. He will be a bold 
man who will seek to set limits to the depths of human 
depravity ; but this at least all past experience teaches us, that 
perfection, even in depravity, is not rapidly attained, and that 
it is not by such short and easy stages as the prosecutor has 
been able to trace in the career of Madeleine Smith, that a 
gentle, loving girl passes at once into the savage grandeur of 
a Medea, or the appalling wickedness of a Borgia. No, gentle 
men, such a thing is not possible. There is and must be a 
certain progress in guilt, and it is quite out of all human experi- 
ence, judging from the tone of the letters which I have last read 
to you, that there should be such a sudden transition from 
affection to the savage desire of removing by any means the 
obstruction to her wishes and purposes, that the prosecutor 
imputes to the prisoner. Think, gentlemen, how foul and un- 
natural a murder it is—the murder of one who within a very 
short space was the object of her love—an unworthy object— 
an unholy love—but yet while it lasted—and its endurance 
was not very brief—it was a deep, absorbing, unselfish, devoted 
passion. And the object of that passion she now conceives the 
purpose of murdering. Such is the theory that you are desired 
to believe. Before you will believe it will you not ask for 
demonstration? Will you be content with conjecture—will you 
be content with suspicion, however pregnant—or will you be so 
unreasonable as to put it to me in this form, that the man 
having died of poison, the theory of the prosecutor is the most 
probable that it offered? Oh, gentlemen, is that the manner in 
which a jury should treat such a case?—is that the kind of proof 
on which you could convict of a capital offence? On the 19th 
of February, on the 22nd of February, and on the 22nd of 
March—for the prosecutor has now absolutely fixed on these 

242 


Addresses to J ury. 


dates—he charges the prisoner with administering poison. Dean of 
Observe, he does not ask you to suppose merely that by some Fae 
means or other the prisoner conveyed poison to L’Angelier, but 
he asks you to affirm on your oaths the fact that, on those three 
occasions, she, with her own hands, administered the poison. 
Look at the indictment and see if I have not correctly repre- 
sented to you what the prosecutor demands at your hands. 
He says in the first charge that she “wickedly and feloniously 
administered to,Emile L’Angelier, now deceased.” Again, in the 
second charge, he alleges that she did “ wickedly and feloniously 
administer to him a quantity or quantities of arsenic”; and in 
the third charge, that she did “ wickedly and feloniously adminis- 
ter to, or cause to be taken by, the said deceased Emile 
L’Angelier, a quantity of arsenic, of which he died, and was thus 
murdered” by her. There are three separate acts of administra- 
tion, not, I pray you to observe, general psychological facts, 
which you may deduce from a great variety of moral considera- 
tions, but plain physical facts—facts which, if anybody had seen, 
would have been proved to demonstration, but which, in the 
absence of eye-witnesses I do not dispute may be proved by 
eircumstantial evidence. But then you must always bear in mind 
that the circumstantial evidence must come up to this—that it 
must convince you of the perpetration of these acts. 

Now, then, in dealing with such circumstantial proof of such 
facts as I have been speaking of, what should you expect to find? 
Of course, the means must be in the prisoner's hands of com- 
mitting the crime. The possession of poison will be the first 
thing that is absolutely necessary; and on the other hand, the 
fact that the deceased was on the first occasion ill from the 
consequences of poison; on the second occasion was ill in the 
same manner from the consequences of poison; and on the 
third occasion died from the same cause. But it would be the 
most defective of all prvofs of poisoning to stop at such facts 
as these, for one person may be in the possession of poison, and 
another person die from the effects of poison, and yet that proves 
nothing. You must havea third element. You must not merely 
have a motive—and I shall speak of motive by and by—you 
must not merely have a motive, but opportunity—the most 
important of all elements. You must have the opportunity of 
the parties coming into personal contact, or of the poison being 
conveyed to the murdered person through the medium of 
another. Now, we shall see how far there is the slightest room 
for such a suspicion here. 

As regards the first charge, it is alleged to have taken place 
on the evening of the 19th February, and the illness, on the 
same theory, followed either in the course of that night, or 
rather the next morning. Now, in the first place, as to date, 
is it by any means clear? Mrs. Jenkins—than whom I never 


243 


Madeleine Smith. 


Dean of saw a more accurate or more trustworthy witness—Mrs. Jenkins 

Faculty swears that, to the best of her recollection and belief, the first 
illness preceded the second by eight or ten days. Eight or ten 
days from the 22nd, which was the date of the second illness, 
will bring us back to the 13th February, and he was very ill 
about the 13th February, as was proved by the letter I read 
to you, and proved also by the testimony of Mr. Miller. Now, 
if the first illness was on the 13th February, do you think that 
another illness could have intervened between that and the 22nd 
without Mrs. Jenkins being aware of it? Certainly that won't 
do. Therefore, if Mrs. Jenkins is correct, that the first illness 
was eight or ten days before, that is one and a most important 
blow against the prosecutor's case on this first charge. Let 
us look now, if you please, at what is said on the other side a8 
to the date. It is said by Miss Perry that not only was that the 
date of his illness, but that he had a meeting with the prisoner 
on the 19th. Miss Perry’s evidence upon that point, I take 
leave to say, is not much worth. She had no recollection of 
that day when she was examined first by the Procurator-Fiscal ; 
no, nor the second time, nor the third time; and it was only 
when, by a most improper interference on the part of one of the 
clerks of the Fiscal, a statement was read to her out of a book 
which has been rejected as worthless in fixing dates, that she 
then for the first time took up the notion that it was the 19th 
which L’Angelier had referred to in the conversations which 
he had with her. And, after all, what do these conversations 
amount to? To this, that on the 17th, when he dined with her, 
he said he expected to meet the prisoner on the 19th. But did - 
he say afterwards that he had met her on the 19th? The Lord 
Advocate supposed that he had, but he was mistaken. Miss 
Perry said nothing of the sort. She said that when she saw him 
again on the 2nd March, he did not tell her of any meeting on 
the 19th. Well, gentlemen, let us look now, in that state of 
the evidence, as to the probabilities of the case. This first illness, 
you will keep in view, whensoever it took place, was a very 
serious one—a very serious one indeed. Mrs. Jenkins was very 
much alarmed by it, and the deceased himself suffered intensely. 
There can be no doubt about that. Now, if the theory of the pro- 
secutor be right, it was on the morning of the 20th that he was 
in this state of intense suffering, and upon the 21st, the next 
day, he bought the largest piece of beef that is to be found in his 
pass-book from his butcher; and he had fresh herrings for 
dinner in such a quantity as to alarm his landlady, and a still 
more alarming quantity and variety of vegetables. Here is a 
dinner for a sick person! All that took place upon the 21st, 
and yet the man was near death’s door on the morning of the 
20th, by that irritation of stomach, no matter how pro- 
duced, which necessarily leaves behind it the most debilitating 


244 


Addresses to Jury. 


and sickening effects. I say, gentlemen, there is real evidence Dean of 
that the date is not the date which the prosecutor says it is. Faculty 
But, gentlemen, supposing that the date were otherwise, 
was the illness caused by arsenic? Such I understand to be the 
position of my learned friend. Now, that is the question which 
I am going to put to you very seriously; and I ask you to 
consider the consequences of answering that question in either 
way. You have it proved very distinctly, I think—to an absolute 
certainty almost—that on the 19th February the prisoner was 
not in possession of arsenic. I say proved to a certainty for 
this reason—because when she went to buy arsenic afterwards, 
on the 2lst February and the 6th and the 18th March, she 
went about it in so open a way that it was quite impossible 
that it should escape observation if it came afterwards to be 
inquired into. I am not mentioning that at present as an 
element of evidence in regard to her guilt or innocence of the 
second or third charges. But I want you to keep the fact in view 
at present for this reason, that if she was so loose and open in 
her purchases of arsenic on these subsequent occasions, there 
was surely nothing to lead you to expect that she should be more 
secret or more cautious on the first occasion. How could that 
be? Why, one could imagine that a person entertaining a 
murderous purpose of this kind, and contriving and compassing 
the death of a fellow-creature, might go on increasing in caution 
as she proceeded; but how she should throw away all idea of 
caution or secrecy upon the second, and third, and fourth occa- 
sions if she went to purchase so secretly upon the first, that the 
whole force of the prosecutor has not been able to detect that 
earlier purchase, I leave it to you to explain to your own minds. 
It is incredible. Nay, but, gentlemen, it is more than incredible; 
I think it is disproved by the evidence of the prosecutor him- 
self. He sent his emissaries throughout the whole druggists’ 
shops in Glasgow, and examined their registers to find whether 
any arsenic had been sold to a person of the name of L’Angelier. 
I need not tell you that the name of Smith was also included in 
the list of persons to be searched for; and therefore, if there 
had been such a purchase at any period prior to the 19th 
February, that fact would have been proved to you just as easily, 
and with as full demonstration, as the purchases at a subsequent 
period. But, gentlemen, am I not struggling a great deal too 
hard to show you that the possibility of purchasing it before the 
19th is absolutely disproved? That is no part of my business. » 
It is enough for me to say that there is not a tittle or vestige 
of evidence on the part of the prosecutor that such a purchase 
was made prior to the 19th; and, therefore, on that ground, I 
submit to you with the most perfect confidence as regards that 
first charge, that it is absolutely impossible that arsenic could 
have been administered by the prisoner to the deceased upon the 


245 


Madeleine Smith. 


Dean of evening of the 19th of February. Nay, gentlemen, there is one 


Faculty 


circumstance more before I have done with that, which is worth 
attending to. Suppose it was the 19th, then it was the occasion 
in reference to which M. Thuau told you that, when the deceased 
gave him an account of his illness and the way in which it 
came on, he told him that he had been taken ill in the presence 
of the lady—a thing totally inconsistent with the notion, in the 
first place, that the arsenic was administered by her, and its 
effects afterwards produced and seen in his lodgings, but still 
more inconsistent with Mrs. Jenkins’s account of the manner 
and time at which illness came on, which, if I recollect right, 
was at four o'clock in the morning, after he had gone to bed 
perfectly well. Now, gentlemen, I say, therefore, you are 
bound to hold not merely that there is here a failure to make 
out the administration on the 19th, but you are bound to give 
me the benefit of an absolute negative upon that point, and to 
allow me to assume that arsenic was not administered on the 
19th by the prisoner. I think I am making no improper demand 
in carrying it that length. 

Now, see the consequences of the position which I have thus 
established. Was he ill from the effects of arsenic on the morn- 
ing of the 20th? I ask you to consider that question as much 
as the prosecutor has asked you; and if you can come to the 
conclusion, from the symptoms exhibited, that he was ill from 
the effects of arsenic on the morning of the 20th, what is the 
inference ?—that he had arsenic administered to him by other 
hands than the prisoner’s. The conclusion is inevitable, irresist- 
ible, if these symptoms were the effect of arsenical poisoning. 
If, again, you are to hold that the symptoms of that morning’s 
illness were not such as to indicate the presence of arsenic in 
the stomach, or to lead to the conclusion of arsenical poisoning, 
what is the result of that belief? The result of it is to destroy 
the whole theory of the prosecutor’s case—a theory of successive 
administrations, and to show how utterly impossible it is for 
him to bring evidence up to the point of an actual administra- 
tion. I give my learned friend the option of being impaled on 
one or other of the horns of that dilemma, I care not which. 
Either L’Angelier was ill from arsenical poisoning on the morn- 
ing of the 20th, or he was not. If he was, he had received 
arsenic from other hands than the prisoner’s. If he was not, 
the foundation of the whole case is shaken. 

So much for the first charge. Gentlemen, before I proceed 
further, I am anxious to explain one point which I think I left 


imperfectly explained in passing—I mean regarding the meeting 


referred to in the letter of Sunday night in the envelope of the 

23rd January. My statement was that the Lord Advocate had 

admitted that that meeting which was there referred to was a 

meeting at the window. I think he did not admit it in thie 
246 


Addresses to Jury. 


form, but he made an admission, or rather he asserted, and Dean of 
insisted on a fact which is conclusive to the same effgtt. He Faculty 
said that that Sunday night was a Sunday immediately preceding 

the Monday of letter No. 93. Now, then, if it be the Sunday 

night immediately preceding the Monday of letter No. 93, observe 

the inevitable inference, because on the Sunday night she says— 

“You have just left me.” In the postscript to the letter of 
Monday she says—“I did love you so much last night when 

you were at the window.” So that his lordship’s admission, 
though it was not made in the form that I supposed, was 
exactly to the same effect. It is proved that this was a meeting 

at the window, like the others. 

I have disposed of the first charge, and in a way which I 
trust you won’t forget in dealing with the remainder of the case, 
because I think it enables me to take a position from which I 
shall demolish every remaining atom of this case. But before 
I proceed to the consideration of the second charge more par- 
ticularly, I want you to follow me, if you please, very precisely 
as to certain dates, and you will oblige me very much if you take 
a note of them. The first parcel of arsenic which is purchased 
by the prisoner was upon the 2ist of February. It was bought 
in the shop of Murdoch the apothecary, and the arsenic there 
purchased was mixed with soot. Murdoch was the person who 
ordinarily supplied medicines to Mr. Smith’s family, and she 
left the arsenic unpaid for, and it went into her father’s account ; 
and I shall have something to say about these circumstances 
hereafter. I merely mention them at present. Now, on Sunday, 
the 22nd, it is said, and we shall see by-and-by with how much 
reason, that L’Angelier again had arsenic administered to him, 
and so far it may be that we have, in regard to the second 
charge, a purchase of arsenic previous to the alleged administra- 
tion. I shall not lose sight’ of that weighty fact; but, from the 
_ 22nd February onwards, there appears to me to be no successful 
attempt on the part of the prosecutor to prove any meeting 
between these persons. He was confined to the house after that 
illness, as you have heard, for eight or ten days. There are 
letters written at that time which completely correspond with 
that state of matters, speak of his being confined, and of the 
possibility of seeing him at his window. But it is not pretended 
that there is any meeting during all that time, which lasted for 
eight or ten days after the 22nd. Now, suppose it lasted for 
eight days, that brings you down to the 2nd March.. On the 
5th March there is said to be a letter written by L’Angelier to 
the prisoner, and there is a letter from the prisoner to L’Angelier 
which is said to have been written on the same day. But 
neither of these letters indicates the occurrence of a meeting 
upon that day, nor bears any reference to any recent 
meeting, nor any anticipated or expected meeting. In short, 


247 


Madeleine Smith. 


Dean of there is not, from the 22nd of February to the 6th of March, 
Faculty any attémpt to prove a meeting between the parties. I think 
I am justified in stating the import of the evidence to be so. 
I shall be corrected if I am wrong, but I think, I am quite 
certain, that there is not an insinuation that there was a meeting 
between the parties from the 22nd February to the 6th March. 
On the 6th March the prisoner gues with her family to the 
Bridge of Allan, and there she remains till the 17th; and on 
the 6th March, immediately preceding her departure to the 
Bridge of Allan, she buys her second parcel of arsenic, and that 
she buys in the company of Miss Buchanan, talks about it to 
two young men who were in the shop, signs her name on the 
register as she had done on the previous occasion ; every circum- 
stance shows the most perfect openness in making the purchases. 
Well, she goes to the Bridge of Allan on the 6th, and confessedly 
does not return till the 17th. Let us now trace, on the other 
hand, the adventures of L’Angelier. He remains in Glasgow till 
the 10th. He then goes to Edinburgh, and returns on the 17th 
at night. He comes home by the late train to Glasgow. On the 
18th he remained in the house all day, and is not out at night. 
I thought, but was not quite sure, that I was right in thinking 
that the witness said so, and I am glad to find that my learned 
friend the Lord Advocate in his speech corroborates my recollec- 
tion of this fact—that L’Angelier was in the house all the 18th. 
On the 19th, in the morning, he goes first to Edinburgh and 
then to the Bridge of Allan, from which he did not return till 
the night preceding his death, on the 22nd. I have missed 
directing your attention at the proper place to the fact that on 
the 18th, on her return from the Bridge of Allan, the prisoner 
epee her third portion of arsenic in the same open way as 
efore. 

Observe, gentlemen, that unless you shall hold it to be true, 
and proved by the evidence before you, that these two persons 
met on the 22nd of February, which was a Sunday, or unless, 
in like manner, you hold it to be proved that they met again 
on the fatal night of the 22nd March, there never was a meeting 
at all after the prisoner had made any of her purchases of 
arsenic. I maintain that there not only was no meeting—that 
we have no evidence of any meeting—but that practically there 
was no possibility of their meeting. I say that, unless you can 
believe on the evidence that there was a meeting on the 22nd 
of February, or again on the 22nd of March, there is no possible 
occasion on which she either could have administered poison, or 
could have purposed or intended to administer it. You will 
now, gentlemen, see the reason why I wanted these dates well 
fixed in your minds, for from the first alleged purchase of poison 
to the end of the tragedy, there is no possibility of contact or 
of administration, unless you think you have evidence that 


248 


Addresses to Jury. 


they met on one or other or both of these Sundays, the 22nd Dean of 
February and the 22nd March. sins 
Let us see if they did meet on the 22nd February. What 
is the evidence on that point of Mrs. Jenkins, L’Angelier’s land- 
lady? She says he was in his usual condition on the 21st, 
when he made that celebrated dinner to which I have already 
adverted, and when she thought he was making himself ill, 
and on that 21st he announced to her that he would not leave 
the house all the Sunday—the following day. He had therefore 
no appointment with the prisoner for the Sunday, else he would 
never have made that statement. On the 22nd Mrs. Jenkins 
says she has no recollection of his going out, in violation of his 
declared intention made the day before. Gentlemen, do you 
really believe that this remarkably accurate woman would not 
have remembered a circumstance in connection with this case 
of such great importance as that he had first of all said that 
he would not go out upon that Sunday, and that he had then 
changed his mind and gone out? It is too daring a draft on 
your imagination. She has no recollection of his going out, 
and I am entitled to conclude that he did not. And when he 
did go out of a night and came in late, what was his habit? 
Mrs. Jenkins says he never got into the house on those occasions 
—that is, after she went to bed—except in one or other of these 
two ways; either he asked for and got a check-key, or the door 
was opened to him by M. Thuau. Mrs. Jenkins says there was 
no other mode. She says he did not ask the check-key that 
night. If he had done so she must have recollected. Thuau 
says he certainly did not let him in. Now, gentlemen, I must 
say that to conjecture in the face of this evidence that L’Angelier 
was out of the house that night is one of the most violent 
suppositions ever made in the presence of a jury, especially 
when that conjecture is for the purpose of—by that means, and 
that means only—rendering the second administration of poison 
charged in this indictment a possible event, for without that 
conjecture it is impossible. ; 
Well, L’Angelier was not taken ill till late in the morning, 
and he did not come home ill. There is no evidence that he 
ever came home at all, or that he ever was out; all we know, 
as matter of fact, is, that he was taken ill late in the morning, 
about four or five o’clock. Only one attempt was made by my 
learned friend to escape from the inevitable results of this 
evidence. And it was by a strange and forced use of a particular 
letter, No. 111, written on a Wednesday, in which letter the 
prisoner says she is sorry to hear he is ill; but the portion on 
which he particularly founded was that in which she added. 
“You did look bad Sunday night and Monday morning.” My 
learned friend says that that letter was written on the 25th of 
February, and points out to you that the Sunday before that was 
249 


Madeleine Smith. 


Dean of the 22nd. And, no doubt, if that were conclusively proved, it 
Faculty would be a piece of evidence in conflict with the other, and a 
very strong conflict and contradiction it would indeed be, and 
one which you, gentlemen, would have great difficulty to recon- 
cile. This, however, would not be a reason for believing the 
evidence of the Crown, or for convicting the prisoner, but for 
a very opposite result. But, gentlemen, in point of fact, the 
supposed conflict and contradiction are imaginary; for the only 
date the letter bears is Wednesday, and it may be, so far as 
the letter is traced, any Wednesday in the whole course of their 
correspondence. There is not a bit of internal evidence in this 
letter, nor in the place where it was found, nor anywhere else, 
to fix its date, unless you take that reference to Sunday night, 
which is, of course, begging the whole question. Therefore, I 
say, again, gentlemen, that it might have been written on any 
Wednesday during the whole course of their correspondence and 
connection. But it is found in an envelope, from which its date 
is surmised. And, gentlemen, because a certain letter, without 
date, is found in a certain envelope, you are to be asked to con- 
vict, and to convict of murder, on that evidence alone! I say 
that if this letter had been found in an envelope bearing the 
most legible possible post-mark, it would have been. absurd 
and monstrous to convict on such evidence. But, when the post 
mark is absolutely illegible, how much is that difficulty and 
absurdity increased? Except that the Crown witness from the 
Post Office says that the mark of the month has an R, and that 
the Post Office mark for February happens to have no R, we 
have no evidence even as to the month. My learned friend must 
condemn the evidence of his own witness before he can fix the 
post-mark. The witness said the letter must have been posted 
in the year 1857; but perhaps even on that point the Crown 
will not take the evidence of a witness whom they themselves 
have discredited. The whole evidence on this point is subject 
to this answer—that the envelope proves absolutely nothing. 
Again, to take the fact that a particular letter is found in a 
particular envelope as evidence to fix the date of an administra- 
tion of poison is, gentlemen, a demand on your patience and on 
your credulity which to me is absolutely unintelligible. The 
Lord Advocate said in the course of his argument that, without 
any improper proceedings on the part of the Crown officials, 
nothing could be so easily imagined as that a letter should 
get into a wrong envelope in the possession of the deceased 
himself. I, adopt that suggestion. And if that be a likely 
accident, what is the value of this letter as a piece of evidence! 
—especially in opposition to the plain evidence of two witnesses 
for the Crown, that the Sunday referred to in the letter could 
not be the 22nd of February, because on that Sunday L’Angelier 
was never over the door. Well, I do not think the Crown has 
250 


Addresses to Jury. 


succeeded much better in supporting the second charge. For if Dean of 
the instrument be indispensable to the administration of poison, Faculty 
it is equally evident that there must also be the »opportunity 

of administering it. I should like to know whether my learned 
friend still persists in saying that, on the morning of the 23rd 
February, the deceased was suffering from the effects of arsenical 
poisoning ; for, if he does, the inference recurs that the deceased 

was in the way of receiving arsenic from another hand than the 
prisoner's. And now, gentlemen, am I not entitled to say that, 

as regards the first two charges, step by step—tediously, I am 
afraid, but with no more minuteness than was necessary for 

the ends of justice and the interests of the prisoner—I have 
pulled to pieces the web of sophistry which had been woven 
sround the case. 

Well, gentlemen, time goes on, and certainly in the interval 
between the 22nd February and the 22nd March we have no 
event in the nature of a meeting between these parties. Nothing 
of that kind is alleged; and on the 22nd of March it is perfectly 
true that L’Angelier goes to Glasgow, and goes under peculiar 
circumstances. The events connected with his journey from 
Bridge of Allan, with the causes and consequences of it, I must 
beg you to bear with me while I detail at considerable length. 
He went to the Bridge of Allan on the morning of the 19th, 
or, in other words, he went first to Edinburgh, and then from 
that to the Bridge of Allan. You recollect that upon the 18th— 
from the night of the 17th, after his arrival from Edinburgh, 
and in the course of the 18th—he had expressed himself very 
anxious about a letter which he expected. He spoke to Mrs. 
Jenkins about it several times; but he started for Edinburgh 
without receiving that letter; and I think it is pretty plain that 
the sole cause of his journey to Edinburgh that day was to see 
whether the letter had not gone there. Now, in Edinburgh again 
he receives no letter, but goes on to the Bridge of Allan, and 
at the Bridge of Allan he does receive a letter from the prisoner. 
That letter was written on the evening of Wednesday, the 18th 
—remember that there is no doubt about that; we are quite 
agreed about it—and it was posted on the morning of Thursday. 
It was addressed by the prisoner to the deceased at his lodgings 
at Mrs. Jenkins’s, the prisoner being ignorant of the fact that 
he had left town. It reached Mrs. Jenkins in the course of the 
forenoon, and it was posted in another envelope by M. Thuau 
addressed to L’Angelier at Stirling, where he received it upon 
Friday. I hope you follow this exactly, as you will find it 
immediately of the greatest consequence. It reached the Post 
Office at Stirling, I think, about ten on the morning of Friday. 
Now, gentlemen, there are two or three circumstances con- 
nected with this letter of the greatest consequence. In the first 
place, it is written on the evening before it is posted. In that 

251 


Madeleine Smith. 


Dean of respect it stands very much in the same position as by far the 
Faculty oreater part of the letters written by the prisoner, which were 
almost all written at night and posted next morning. In the 
second place, it undoubtedly contained an appointment to meet 
the deceased on the Thursday evening. That was the evening 
after it was written—the evening of the day on which it was 
posted. But L’Angelier, being out of town, and not receiving 
it until the Friday, it was, of course, too late for the object, and 
he did not come to town in answer to that letter—a very 
important fact too, for this reason, that it shows that if the 
tryst was made by appointment for one evening, he did not 
think it worth while to attempt to come the next evening, 
because he could not see the prisoner but by appointment. 
Remember how anxious he was about this letter before he left 
Glasgow; remember that he made a journey to Edinburgh for 
the very purpose of getting the letter that he expected. He 
was burning to receive the letter—in a state of the greatest 
anxiety—and yet, when he gets it on the Friday morning in 
Stirling, seeing that the hour of appointment is already past, 
he knows that it is in vain to go. She cannot see him except 
when a tryst is made. Now, most unfortunately—I shall say 
no more than that of it at present—that letter was lost; and, 
most strangely, not merely the original envelope in which it 
was enclosed by the prisoner herself, but the additional envelope 
into which it was put by Thuau are both found, or said to be 
found in the deceased’s travelling bag, which he had with him 
at Stirling and Bridge of Allan. But the letter is gone—where, 
no man can tell. Certainly it cannot be imputed as a fault to 
the prisoner that the letter is not here, for that it was received 
is without doubt. On the Friday he writes a letter to Miss 
Perry, in which he makes use of this expression—“I should 
have come to see some one last night, but the letter came too 
late, so we were both disappointed.” He got the letter; he 
knew that it contained an appointment for that night, and the 
mention of this letter to Miss Perry proves its contents so 
far. But the letter itself is gone, and I cannot help thinking, 
although I am not going to detain you by any details on the 
subject, that the Crown is responsible for the loss of that letter. 
If they had been in a position to prove, as they ought. to 
have done, that these two envelopes were certainly found in the 
travelling bag without the letter, they might have discharged 
themselves of the obligation that lay upon them; but, having 
taken possession of the contents of that travelling bag, which 
are now brought to bear on the guilt or innocence of the 
prisoner, I say again, as the fact stands, that that letter is lost. 
and they are answerable for the loss. ‘ 
Now, then, the next day there is another letter, which is sent 
to the Bridge of Allan through the same channel. It is 
252 


Addresses to J ury. 


addressed to Mrs. Jenkins, and bears the post-mark of 21st Dean of 
March—that is to say, Saturday morning. It reached Mra. Faculty 
Jenkins in the course of the forenoon; it was posted to Stirling 
by M. Thuau in the afternoon of the same day, and was received 
by the deceased at.the Bridge of Allan on Sunday morning. 
Here is the letter—“ Why, my beloved, did you not come to 
me? Oh, my beloved, are you ill? Come to.me. Sweet one, 
I waited and waited for you, but you came not. I shall wait 
again to-morrow night—same hour and arrangement. Oh, 
come, sweet love, my own dear love of a sweetheart. Come, 
beloved, and clasp me to your heart; come, and we shall be 
happy. A kiss, fond love. Adieu, with tender embraces. Ever 
believe me to be your own ever dear, fond Mini.” When was 
it that she “waited and waited”? It was upon Thursday even- 
ing—that was the tryst. The letter to Miss Perry proves 
conclusively that it was on the Thursday she waited, expecting 
him to come in answer to her previous invitation. When, then, 
do you think it was likely that she should write her next . 
summons? I should think that, in all human probability, it 
was on the following evening—that is, on Friday. She almost 
always wrote her letters in the evening, and I think I am 
not going too far when I say, that when she did not write them 
in the evening she almost always put the hour to them at which 
they were written; and when she wrote her letters in the even- 
ing they were invariably posted next morning, and not that 
evening, for very obvious reasons. Now, then, is it not clear 
to you that this letter, this all-important letter, written upon 
the Friday evening, was posted on the Saturday morning, while 
she still believed that he was in Glasgow with Mrs. Jenkins, 
making the appointment for Saturday evening—“TI shall wait 
to-morrow night, same hour and arrangement?” It is the very 
same amount of warning that she gave him in the previous letter 
written on Wednesday, and posted on the Thursday morning 
when she made the appointment for Thursday evening. Here, 
in like manner, comes this letter written, as I say, upon the 
Friday evening, and posted upon the Saturday morning—fixing 
a meeting for the Saturday evening. The two things square 
exactly ; and it would be against all probability that it should 
be otherwise. She was most anxious to see him; she believed 
him to be in Glasgow; and she entreated him to come to her. 
Oh, but, says my learned friend, they were not in the way of 
meeting on Saturdays—Sunday was a favourite night, but not 
Saturday. Really, gentlemen, when my learned friend has put 
in evidence before you somewhere about 100 out of 200 or 300 
letters, that he should then ask you to believe (because there 
is no appearance of a Saturday evening meeting in any of them 
which he has read) that there is no such appearance in any that 
he has not read would be a somewhat unreasonable demand. 


253 


Madeleine Smith. 


Dean of But, unhappily for his theory or conjecture, it is negatived by 

Faculty the letters that he has read, as you will find. In one letter, 
No. 55, October, 1856, she says—“ Write me for Saturday if 
you are to be on Saturday night.” That is, to meet her on 
Saturday night. Again, in letter No. 111, she says—“TI shall 
not be at home on Saturday, but I shall try, sweet love, to meet 
you, even if it be but for a word ”—alluding to her return from 
some party. Now, these are two examples selected out of the 
very letters that my learned friend himself has used negativing 
the only kind of supposition that he has set off against what 
I am now advancing. Gentlemen, I think further, with reference 
to the supposed meeting on the Sunday evening, that I am 
entitled to say to you that there is no appearance of their 
ever having met without previous arrangement. The very 
existence of that number of references in various parts of the 
correspondence, and at different dates, to meetings then made 
or that were passed—the constant reference to the aid and 
assistance of Christina Haggart, whenever there was anything 
more than a mere meeting at the window required—all go to 
show that in meetings between these parties there always was 
and always must have been, in order to their being brought 
about at all, prevjous arrangement. If indeed, as regards Blyths- 
wood Square house, the theory of the prosecutor had been 
correct, that the decéased had it in his power at any time to 
go to the window in Mains Street and call her attention by some 
noisy signal, the case might have been different. But I have 
already shown how constantly she repeated to him her warning 
that he was on no account to make the slightest knocking or 
noise of any kind—that when she wanted to see him she would 
watch for kim and tell him when to come. But a signal at the 
window was to be avoided of all things, because it was sure 
to lead to discovery. Therefore, without previous arrangement 
it does not appear to me to be possible for these parties to have 
met on the occasion the prosecutor says they did. 

And now, let us see what the condition of Blythswood Square 
house and its inmates was upon this all-important Sunday, the 
22nd March. If I am right in my reading of the letters, she 
expected him on Saturday evening, and she waited for him then 
—waited most impatiently; waited and waited as she had upon 
the Thursday, but he came not. On the Sunday evening she 
did not expect him—why should she? When he did not come 
on the Thursday evening she did not expect him, and he did not 
come on the Friday evening—when he did not come on the 
Saturday evening, why should she expect him on the following 
evening? Having broken his appointment of the Thursday, he 
did not understend he could procure an interview on the Friday. 
Having broken it on the Saturday, why should he expect that 
the meeting was transferred to the following evening? Well, 


254 


Addresses to Jury. 


then, that is the state in which her expectations were on that 
occasion, and her conduct precisely squares with these expecta- 
tions. She is at home in the family, with her father, mother, 
brother, and sisters. They are all at prayers together at nine 
o’clock. The servants come up to attend prayers along with 
the family. Duncan Mackenzie, the suitor of Christina Haggart, 
remains below while the family are at worship. The servants 
afterwards go downstairs after prayers, and go to bed as usual— 
one after the other, first the boy, then Christina Haggart, and 
lastly the cook, who gets to bed about eleven o'clock. The 
family then retire to rest, and the prisoner with her youngest 
sister descends from the dining-room to her bedroom between 
half-past ten and eleven. They take half an hour to undress; 
they both get into bed about the same time; the prisoner 
apparently is undressed as usual; goes to bed with her sister; 
and, so far as human knowledge or evidence can go, that house 
is undisturbed and unapproached till the prisoner is lying in the 
morning, side by side with her sister, as she .had fallen asleep 
at night. Do you think it possible that, if there had been a 
meeting between these two parties, no shred of evidence of that 
meeting would have been forthcoming? The watchman was on 
his beat, and he knew L’Angelier well, and he saw nothing. As 
you must be aware, this is a very quiet part of the town; it is 
not a bustling thoroughfare, but a quiet west-end square of 
dwellings, about which the appearance of @ stranger at a late 
hour on a Sunday evening would attract attention. The police- 
man, whose special charge was, on such an evening, and in such 
eircumstances, to see every one passing there (and there is 
no charge against him of not having been upon his beat, and 
nothing in the least to detract from his evidence), sees nothing. 
Neither within the house, nor without the house, is there the 
slightest vestige of ground for suspecting that that meeting 
of which they had been disappointed on Saturday took place 
on the Sunday. 

But now let me turn to L’Angelier. It is said that he came 
from the Bridge of Allan in answer to the invitation sent him 
by the prisoner in the course of Saturday. I don’t think that 
is altogether a reasonable presumption. But even if you assume 
it, it won’t advance the prosecutor’s case one step. But I 
say it is not a reasonable presumption. I say it for this reason, 
because to say that he came into Glasgow on a Sunday, at such 
great inconvenience, to keep an appointment which was already 
past, is to suppose him to contradict on Sunday what he did, 
or rather omitted to do, on Friday under precisely similar 
circumstances. If he had wanted to have a meeting on an 
evening subsequent to that for which it was appointed, he could 
have been in on Friday, and the circumstances were the same. 
And yet on Sunday, when there was far less facility for putting 

255 


Dean of 
Faculty 


Madeleine Smith. 


Dean of his purpose into execution, when he required to walk a con- 
Faculty siderable part of the way, instead of going by rail, as he could 
have done on Friday, he is represented as having done this on 
purpose to keep a meeting which had been appointed for the 
previous night. I say that is not a reasonable supposition. 
We do not know what other letters he received at the Bridge of 
Allan on Sunday morning. There is no evidence of that. The 
prosecutor might have given it, but he has failed to do so. 
Then there is surely a great deal of mystery attending the 
prosecution of this journey from the Bridge of Allan to Glasgow 
on that Sunday. But before I go into that, let me remind 
you, with reference to the correspondence between him and 
M. Thuau as to the forwarding of his letters, that we have this 
in his letter of the 16th March, 1857. He says—“I have 
received no letters from Mr. Mitchell; I should like to know 
very much what he wants with me.” Now we don’t know 
anything of Mr. Mitchell, and the Crown has not told us; but 
apparently L’Angelier was expecting letters from this Mr. 
Mitchell when he was in Edinburgh. He was anxious to receive 
them, and anxious to know what Mitchell wanted; and who 
can tell what letters he received at Bridge of Allan on Sunday 
morning? Who can tell whether there was not a letter from 
this Mitchell? and, if so, who can tell what it contained? 
However, L’Angelier came to Glasgow, and, as I said before, 
there is a certain degree of mystery, and a very great obscurity 
thrown over this part of the case—I mean the course of his 
journey to Glasgow. I refer to this part of the evidence because 
I think everything that bears on the proceedings of L’Angelier. 
on Sunday is important to the case. It is most essential that 
everything should be laid before you; and it is for that reason, 
rather than. because I attach any great importance to the thing 
itself, that we brought before you the evidence of the three 
apothecaries to which I am going to refer. But observe, in 
the first place, what the evidence of the Crown is. They call 
the guard of the mail train by which he travelled from Stirling 
to Coatbridge; and that guard says that a gentleman travelled 
with him from Stirling to Coatbridge on a Sunday, and set out 
to walk to Glasgow in company of the witness Ross. Now, 
Ross did not describe the person of L’Angelier, or his conversa- 
tion, or anything about him in such a way that anybody could 
possibly identify him from his description. And Ross was not 
shown the photograph—a very remarkable omission on the 
part of the Crown, and, of course, done for some good reason. 
They did show the photograph to the mail-guard, and the mail- 
guard recognised and identified the deceased man entirely from 
the photograph ; and yet, when we proposed on the part of the 
prisoner, to identify him in the same way, the Crown seemed 
to think that we were relying upon very imperfect means of iden- 
256 


Addresses to J ury. 


tification. Why, it was of their own making and suggestion. It Dean of 
was the very medium of identification on which alone they Faculty 
relied, only that they relied on the exhibition of that photograph 
to a single witness, and if he was mistaken so was Ross’s evidence 
worthless; for Ross told us nothing particular about him, 
except that he walked with a gentleman to Glasgow. But 
there are some things connected with his conversation with 
Ross, while on the way to Glasgow, that certainly startle one 
very much. After they had the refreshment at the inn at 
Coatbridge—none of the other parties connected with which 
have been called as witnesses to identify or describe L’Angelier— 
after they left that inn, they fell into conversation, and the 
conversation was at first on indifferent matters. Among other 
things they spoke of the place from which the supposed 
L’Angelier had come; and what was the account that he gave 
of himself? That he had come from Alloa. It seemed to me 
at first that there might be some misunderstanding or mis 
statement on the part of the witness in calling Alloa the Bridge 
of Allan, or something of that kind; but no. Ross was quite 
sure about it. He said there’ was not a word spoken about 
the Bridge of Allan between them. I asked him, did he tell 
him how far it was from Alloa to Stirling, and he said it was 
eight miles, which is just the distance; while, as we proved 
to you, the distance between the Bridge of Allan and Stirling 
is only between two and three; and yet it is on this evidence 
that the Crown asks you to believe this was L’Angelier who 
came in with Ross. It might have been possible for the Crown 
to identify him further. In the course of his conversation with 
Ross he said that he had come to Stirling the day before or 
on Friday, that he had endeavoured to cash a cheque at the 
bank and had been refused, because they did not know him, 
No attempt has been made to show that L’Angelier did this ; 
no attempt to show that he had a cheque with him ; no attempt 
to show that he had occasion to cash a cheque, having no money 
with him. All these things were open to the Crown to have 
proved. Not one of them have they tried. 

Now, on the other hand, observe the condition in which the 
witnesses for the defence stand in regard to this Sunday. Ross, 
you know, said that the man never parted with him from the 
time they started till they reached Abercromby Street in the 
Gallowgate; and therefore, if it was L’Angelier who was with 
him he gave him a perfectly false account of the place where 
he had come from, and the distance he had walked; and then 
his evidence—Ross’s evidence—would be in direct conflict with 
that of the witnesses whom I am now about to refer you to. 
If L’Angelier was not with Ross, then there is no difficulty in 
reconciling the evidence, and no difficulty in believing the 
witnesses Adams, Kirk, and Dickson. Adams, the first witness, 


Ris 257 


Madeleine Smith. 


Dean of speaks to the 22nd as the day of a gentleman passing along the 

Faculty oad from Coatbridge to Glasgow bearing a very strong likeness 
to L’Angelier. Adams is not so clear about the likeness as the 
others, but he is perfectly clear about the day. And when 
you come to the witness Dickson at Baillieston, he is clear about 
the likeness, and what he says to the date is this, that it was 
a Sunday in the end of March. Miss Kirk is equally clear 
about the likeness. She is very strong on that; and, besides, 
she identified the purse from which he took out his money, 
and which was found on the person of L’Angelier after death. 
And she also states the occasion to be the evening of a Sunday 
at the end of March. Now, gentlemen, I need not tell you 
it could not have been any later Sunday in March, because the 
poor man died the next morning, and it could not be the Sunday 
before that, for he was then in Edinburgh ; and, therefore, if 
it was a Sunday in March at all, and above all if it was a 
Sunday in the end of March, it could be no Sunday but the 22nd. 
Now, if these three witnesses are correct in what they stated to 
you, observe these important results. He was ill on the road 
from Coatbridge to Glasgow; he was taking laudanum in the 
apothecaries’ shops as he passed; and, finally, in Miss Kirk’s 
shop he purchased, but did not consume in the shop, some 
white powder, of which Miss ‘Kirk could not tell what it was. 
Well, he came to Glasgow. He is seen by Mrs. Jenkins at his 
lodgings on his arrival at about eight o'clock. He remains 
there till nine, and then goes out. He is seen in different 
streets. He calls about half-past nine o'clock on his friend 
M‘Alester, who lives some five minutes’ walk from Blythswood 
Square. He calls there, but finds that M‘Alester is from home. 
Again I ask, why have we not M‘Alester here to tell us what 
be knew about him, or whether he expected him? Could 
M‘Alester have told us anything about the Mitchell of the letter? 
Could not M‘Alester have explained what was the errand on 
which he had come from the Bridge of Allan? Why do the 
Crown leave all these different things unexplained on this, the 
last and most important day in his history? 

Now, gentlemen, from half-past nine till half-past two o’clock 
—at least five hours—he is absolutely lost sight of ; and I was 
startled at the boldness of the manner in which my learned 
friend the Lord Advocate met this difficulty. He says it is no 
doubt a matter of conjecture and inference that in the interval 
he was in the presence of the prisoner. Good heavens! Infer- 
ence and conjecture! A matter of inference and conjecture 
whether, on the night he was poisoned, he was in the presence ' 
of the person who is charged with his murder! I never heard 
such an expression from the mouth of a Crown prosecutor in a 
capital charge before, as indicating or describing a link in the 
chain of the prosecutor’s case. It is absolutely new to me. 

258 


Addresses to J ury, 


I have heard it many a time in the mouth of a prisoner’s counsel, Dean of 
and I daresay you will hear it many a time in mine yet before Faculty 
I have done ; but for the prosecutor himself to describe one part 
of his evidence as a piece of conjecture and hypothesis is to 
me an entire and most startling novelty-——and yet my learned 
friend could not help it. It was honest and fair that he 
should so express himself if he intended to ask for a verdict 
at all; for he can ask for this verdict on nothing but a set 
of unfounded and incredible suspicions and hypotheses. 

Let us now look at this third charge in the light of pro 
babilities, since we must descend to conjecture, and let us see 
whether there is anything to aid the conjecture, which the Crown 
has chosen to consider as the most probable one. If you believe 
the evidence of the Crown, L’Angelier suspected the prisoner 
of having tried to poison him before. But then, says my 
learned friend, his suspicions were lulled. She had become 
more kind to him before he had left the town, and his suspicions 
were lulled. But I think my learned friend said in another 
place that he was brooding over it when he was in Edinburgh, 
and spoke of it in a very serious tone to Mr. and Mrs. Towers 
at Portobello. That was the 16th of March, after which he 
had nothing to change his mind in the shape of kindness or 
confidence from the prisoner; and, therefore, if he did once 
entertain the suspicion, however unfounded, there was nothin 
so far as the prisoner was concerned, to remove it from his min 
anterior to the evening of Sunday, the 22nd of March. A man 
whose suspicions are excited against a particular person is 
not* very likely to take poison at that person’s hand. I am 
merely uttering a very commonplace observation when I say 
this—but the circumstance of its being a commonplace observa- 
tion makes it all the stronger here—it is a thing so plain and 
obvious on the face of it, that nobody can fail to see it; and 
yet what are we asked to believe that he did that night? We 
are asked to believe that he took from her hand a poisoned 
cup in which there lurked such a quantity of arsenic a8 was 
sufficient to leave in his stomach after his death 88 grains— 
such a dose, indicating the administration of at least. double— 
ay, I think, as Dr. Christison said, indicating the administration 
of at least half an ounce—240 grains—and this he took that 
evening from the hand of the prisoner, with all his previous 
suspicion that she was practising on his life. It ie a dose 
which, as far as experience goes, never was successfully 
administered by a murderer. There is not a case on record 
in which it has ever been shown that a person administering 
poison to another ever succeeded in persuading him to swallow 
such a quantity. There is the greatest improbability of such 
4 thing being ever done ; it is a most difficult thing to conceive 
« vehicle in which it could be given. Yet with all these extra 

259 


Madeleine Smith. 


Dean of ordinary circumstances attending the character and quantity 

Faculty of the dose, this gentleman swallowed it, having had his 
suspicions previously excited that the prisoner was practising 
on his life. Nay, more, even supposing he did swallow all this 
arsenic in a cup of cocoa, as is suggested, it is at least next to 
impossible, that with all the gritty undissolved powder passing 
over his throat, he should not become aware that he had 
swallowed something unusual. And yet, instead of immediately 
seeking medical aid, or communicating his alarm or his sus- 
picions to anybody, he staggers home in great paiu ; and through 
the long dreary hours of that fatal morning, amidst all his 
frightful sufferings, neither to the landlady nor to the doctor 
does he ever suggest that he may have been poisoned or breathes 
a suspicion against her whom he had previously suspected of 
an attempt to poison him. 

But. gentlemen, here comes again another point in which the 
evidence for the Crown is very defective, to say the least of it. 
They knew very well when they were examining and analysing 
the contents of this poor man’s stomach, and the condition of 
his intestines generally, what was the arsenic that the prisoner 
had bought. They knew perfectly well, from her own candid 
statement, disclosed the moment she was asked, that the arsenic 
that she bought was got partly at Murdoch’s and partly at 
Currie’s. Murdoch’s arsenic was mixed with soot, Currie’s 
arsenic was mixed with waste indigo. If that arsenic had been 
swallowed by the deceased, the colouring matter could have 
been detected in the stomach I confess I did not expect to 
have it so clearly proved, when the witnesses for the Crown 
were originally in the box; but you recollect what Dr. Penny 
said when he was recalled by my learned friend on the other 
side, and I think a more clear or precise piece of evidence I 
never listened to. He said he tried the experiment with 
animals. He gave one dog a dose of ~Murdoch’s arsenic, and 
found the soot in its stomach after its death, notwithstanding 
constant vomiting. He gave another dog Currie’s arsenic ; and, 
said Professor Penny, after the dog had vomited, and died, “I 
found particles that might correspond with the colouring matter 
in Currie’s arsenic.” But I asked him whether they did pre- 
cisely correspond, and he said yes. Now, gentlemen, there was 
one means of connecting the prisoner with this poison which 
was found in the stomach of L’Angelier—and a very obvious 
means. It may be very well for Professor Penny and Professor 
Christison to say now that their attention was not directed 
to this matter. Whose fault is that’. The Crown, with the 
full knowledge of what was the arsenic which the prisoner had 
in her possession, could have directed their attention to it; 
they must have seen the importance of the inquiry, or, if the 

. q ry, > y 
did not see that, they must suffer for their omission. Plainly, 
260 


SS Se 


Addresses to Jury. 


there can be no fault on the part of the prisoner, for, observe, 
she had no means of being present, or of being represented, 
at these post-mortem examinations or chemical analyses. The 
whole thing was in the hands of the authorities. They kept 
them to themselves—they dealt with them secretly—and they 
present to you this lame and impotent conclusion. 

Such is the state of the evidence on this third and last 
charge upon the 22nd of March; and I do venture to submit 
to you that if the case for the Crown is a failure, as it unques- 
tionably is upon the first and second charges, it is a far more 
signal and radical failure as regards the third. The one fact 
which is absolutely indispensable to bring guilt home to the 
prisoner remains not only not proved—I mean the act of 
administration—but the whole evidence connected with the pro- 
ceedings of that day seems to me to go to negative such an 
assumption. 

I might stop there, for nothing could be more fallacious than 
the suggestion which was made to you by the Lord Advocate, 
that it was necessary for the prisoner to explain how the deceased 
came by his death. I have no such duty imposed upou me. His 
lordship will tell you that a defender in this Court has no 
further duty than to repel the charge and to stand upon the 
defensive, and to maintain that the case of the prosecutor 
is not proved. No man probably will or can ever tell-— 
certainly at the present moment I believe no maa on earth can 
tell—how L’Angelier met his death. Nor am I under the 
slightest obligation even to suggest to you a possible mode in 
which that death may have been brought about without the 
intervention of the prisoner. Yet it is but fair that, when we 
are dealing with so many matters of mere conjecture and 
suspicion on the part of the Crown, we should for a moment 
consider whether that supposition upon which the charge is 
founded is in itself preferable, in respect to its higher pro- 
bability, to other suppositions that may be very fairly made. 
The character of this man—his origin, his previous history, the 
nature of his conversation, the numerous occasions upon which 
he spoke of suicide—naturally suggest that as one mode by 
which he may have departed this life. I say, gentlemen—under- 
stand me—that I am not undertaking to prove that he died 
by his own hand. If I were doing anything so rash I should 
be imitating the rashness of the prosecutor—but I should not 
be stepping a hair’s-breadth further out of the beaten track of 
evidence and proof and demonstration. For I think there is 
much more to be said for suicide than for the prisoners guilt. 
But I entreat you again to remember th’t that is no necessary 
part of my defence. But, of course, I should have been using 
you very ill—I should have been doing less than my duty to the 
prisoner—if I had not brought before you the whole of that 

261 


Dean of 
Faculty 


Madeleine Smith. 


Dean of evidence which suggests the extreme probability of the deceased 
Faculty dying by his own hand at one time or another. From the very 
first time at which we see him, even as a lad, in the year 1843, 
he talks in a manner to impress people with the notion that 
he has no moral principle to guide him. He speaks over and 
over again in Edinburgh, Dundee, and elsewhere of suicide— 
ay, and the prisoner’s letters show that he had made the same 
threat to her, that he would put himself out of existence. The 
passages were read to you, and I need not now repeat them. 
And is it half as violent a supposition as the supposition of this 
foul murder, that upon this evening—the 22nd of March—in a 
fit of that kind of madness which he himself described came 
over him when he met with a disappointmeht—finding, it may 
be, that he could not procure access to an interview which he 
desired—assuming that he came to Glasgow for the purpose— 
assuming, even, that he mistook the evening of the meeting, 
and expected to see her on the Sunday—can anything be more 
probable than that in such a case, in the excited state in which he 
then was, he should have committed the rash act which put _ 
an end to his existence? I can see no great improbability in 
that. It is said, no doubt, that his deathbed scene is incon- 
sistent with the supposition of his having taken poison for the 
purpose of self-destruction, because he willingly received the 
services of Dr. Steven. What is the evidence as to this? He 
refused most of the remedies suggested. He rejected the blister 
as‘useless. And he also rejected laudanum, and assigned a false 
reason for doing so. And, finally, he told his landlady after 
Dr. Steven’s departure—“ The doctor does not know how ill I 
am,” which seems to indicate his own knowledge of a cause for 
his illness, which was unknown to others. But even supposing 
that he had taken the treatment of the medical man with more 
appearance of a reliance on its efficacy, this would not be at 
all inconsistent with suicide. The cases mentioned by Dr. 
Paterson, and the still more remarkable case of which Dr. 
Lawrie gave so interesting an account, establish as matter of 
medical experience that persons who take arsenic for the purpose 
of self-destruction may and do conceal the fact during the 
intense sufferings which precede death, and submit to medical 
treatment as if they expected and hoped that it might save 
their lives. This is the fair result of experience. But what 
experience is there to support the wild hypothesis that one 
who has drunk poison in such quantities as to ensure detection, 
and that poison administered by a suspected hand, should yet die 
after hours of bodily torture without suggesting poison as the 
ree or hinting a suspicion against the administrator of the 
ose 
But whether he met his death by suicide, or whether he met 
his death by accident, or in what way soever he met his death, 
262 


Addresses to Jury. 


the question for you is—Is this murder proved? You are not Dean of 
bound to account for his death—you are not in the least degree Faculty 
bound to account for his death. The question you have got to 

try is—Whether the poison was administered by the hands of 

the prisoner? I have shown you from the indictment that 

that is the fact which you are asked to affirm. I pray you to 
remember that you are asked to affirm that on your oaths— 

to affirm on your, oaths as a fact that the arsenic which was 

found in that man’s stomach was presented to him by the 

hands of the prisoner. 

Gentlemen, I have spoken of the improbabilities which belong 
to this story—to this charge. But surely you cannot have 
omitted to observe how very unnatural and extraordinary a 
crime it is to impute to a person in the prisoner's situation. 
I stated to you before, and I state to you again, as a piece of 
undoubted experience, that no one sinks to such a depth of 
depravity all at once. And now I ask you to remember at what 
period we left this correspondence. At a period when she 
desired to break off with L’Angelier no doubt—at a period 
when she desired to obtain possession of her letters. The return 
of them was refused. I am most unwilling to intersperse my 
address with severe remarks upon the character of a man who 
‘3s now no more, But picture to yourselves the moral tem- 
perament—paint the feelings of a human being who, having 
received such letters from a girl as you have heard read in 
this Court, would even preserve them. He must have been 
dead to all feelings of humanity or he would never have 
refrained from burning those letters. But he not only preserves 
them, he retains them as an engine of power and oppression in 
his hands. He keeps them that he may carry out his cold- 
blooded original design not merely of possessing himself of her 
person, but of raising himself in the social scale by a marriage 
with her. It was his object from the first, and that object he 
pursues constantly, unflinchingly, to the end. He will expose 
her to her friends and to the world—he will drive her to 
destruction, or to suicide itself, rather than let her out of his 
power. It may be said that I am only describing the great 
provocation which she received, and therefore enhancing the 
probability of her taking this fearful mode of extricating herself 
from her embarrassment. I don’t fear that, gentlemen. I want 
you to look now at the picture which I have under her own hand 
of her state of mind at this time—not for the purpose of 
palliating her conduct—not for the purpose of vindicating her 
against the charge either of unchasteness, or inconstancy, or 
of impropriety as regards Mr. Minnoch, but for the purpose of 
showing you in what frame of mind that poor girl was at the 
time—the very time at which she is said to have conceived and 
contrived this foul murder. There are two or three letters, but 

263 


Madeleine Smith. 


Dean of I select one for the purpose of illustrating what I now say. It_ 
Faculty ig written on the 10th February, and it is written after she has 
asked for the return of her letters and been refused : —“ Tuesday 
evening, 12 o’clock. Emile, I have this night received your 
note. Oh, it is kind of you to write me. Emile, no one can 
know the intense agony of mind I have suffered last night 
and to-day. Emile, my father’s wrath would kill me; you little 
know his temper. Emile, for the love you once had for me do 
not denounce me to my P. Emile, if he should read my letters to 
you, he will put me from him, he will hate me as a guilty 
wretch. I loved you, and wrote to you in my first ardent love; 
it was with my deepest love I loved you. It was for your love 
I adored you. I put on paper what I should not. I was free, 
because I loved you with my heart. If he or any other one saw 
those fond letters to you what would not be said of me? On 
my bended knees I write you and ask you, as you hope for 
mercy at the Judgment Day, do not inform on me; do not make 
me a public shame. Emile, my life has been one of bitter dis- 
appointment. You and you only can make the rest of my life 
peaceful. My own conscience will be a punishment that I shall 
carry to my grave. I have deceived the best of men. You 
may forgive me, but God never will—for God’s love forgive me— 
and betray me not—for the love you once had to me do not 
bring down my father’s wrath on me. It will kill my mother 
(who is not well). It will for ever cause me bitter unhappiness. 
Iam humble before you and crave your mercy. You can give me 
forgiveness—and you, oh, you only; can make me happy for 
the rest of my life. I would not ask you to love me—or ever 
make me your wife. I am too guilty for that. I have deceived 
and told you too many falsehoods for you ever to respect me. 
But, oh, will you not keep my secret from the world? Oh, will 
you not, for Christ’s sake, denounce me. I shall be undone. I 
shall be ruined. Who would trust me? Shame would be my 
lot ; despise me, hate me, but make me not the public scandal— 
forget me for ever—blot out all remembrance of me. I have 
you ill. I did love you, and it was my soul’s ambition 
to be your wife. I asked you to tell me my faults. You did 
so, and it made me cool towards you gradually. When you 
have found fault with me I have cooled; it was not love for 
another, for there is no one I love. My love has all been given 
to you. My heart is empty, cold—I am unloved. I am despised. 
I told you I had ceased to love you; it was true. I did not 
love as I did; but, oh, till within the time of our coming to 
town I loved you fondly. I longed to be your wife. I had 
fixed February. I longed for it. The time I could not leave my 
father’s house I grew discontented, then I ceased to love you. 
Oh, Emile, this is indeed the true statement. Now, you can 
know my state of mind. Emile, I have suffered much for you. 
264 


Addresses to J ury. 


I lost much of my father’s confidence since that September. Dean of 
And my mother has never been the same to me. No, she Faculty 
has never given me the same kind look. For the sake of my ~ 
mother—her who gave me life—spare me from shame. Oh, 
Emile, will you, in God’s name, hear my prayer. I ask God 
to forgive me. I have prayed that He might put in your heart 
yet to spare me from shame. Never, never while I live can I be 
happy. No, no, I shall always have the thought I deceived you. 
I am guilty; it will be a punishment I shall bear till the 
day of my death. I am humbled thus to crave your pardon. 
But I care not. While I have breath I shall ever think of 
you as my best friend if you will only keep this between 
ourselves. I blush to ask you. Yet, Emile, will you not grant 
me this, my last favour? If you will never reveal what has 
passed: Oh, for God’s sake, for the love of heaven, hear me; 
I grow mad. I have been ill, very ill, all day. I have had what 
has given me a false spirit. I had resort to what I should not 
have taken; but my brain is on fire. I feel as if death would 
indeed be sweet. Denounce me not. Emile, Emile, think of 
our once happy days. Pardon me if you can; pray for me as 
the most wretched, guilty, miserable creature on the earth. I 
could stand anything but my father’s hot displeasure. Emile, 
you will not cause me death. If he is to get your letters I cannot 
see him any more. And my poor mother, I will never more 
kiss her—it would be a shame to them all. Emile, will you not 
spare me this? Hate me, despise me, but do not expose me. I 
cannot write more. I am too ill tonight—M. P.S.—I cannot 
get to the back stair. I never could see the fouitcet 
will take you within the door. The area gate will be open. 
I shall see you from my window, 12 o’clock. I will wait till 
Loe.” 

Is that the state of mind of a murderess, or can any one 
affect that frame of mind? Will you for one moment listen 
to the suggestion that the letter covers a piece of deceit? 
No! The finest actress that ever lived could not have written 
that letter unless she had felt it. And is that the condition in 
which a woman goes about to compass the death of him whom 
she has loved? Is shame for past sin—burning shame—the 
dread of exposure—what leads a woman not to advance another 
step on the road to destruction, but to plunge at once into the 
deepest depths of human wickedness? The thing is preposter- 
ously incredible; and yet it is because of her despair, as my 
learned friend called it, exhibited in that and similar letters, 
that he says she had a motive to commit this murder. A 
motive! What motive? A motive to destroy L’Angelier? What 
does that mean? It may mean, in a certain improper sense 
of the term, that it would have been an advantage to her that 
he should cease to live. That cannot be a motive, else how 


265 


Madeleine Smith. 


Dean of few of us are there that live who have not a motive to murder 


Fac 


some one or other of our fellow-creatures. If some advantage, 
resulting from the death of another, be a motive to the com- 
mission of a murder, a man’s eldest son must always have a 
motive to murder him that he may succeed to his estate; and 
I suppose the youngest officer in any regiment of Her Majesty’s 
line has @ motive to murder all the officers in his regiment— 
the younger he is the further he has to ascend the scale—the 
more murders he has a motive to commit. Away with such non- 
sense. A motive to commit a crime must be something a great 
deal more than the mere fact that the result of that crime might 
be advantageous to the person committing it. You must see 
the motive in action—you must see it influencing the conduct 
before you can deal with it as a motive; for then, and then 
only, is it a motive in the proper sense of the term—that is to 
say, it is moving to the perpetration of the deed. But, gentle 
men, even in this most improper and illegitimate sense of the 
term, let me ask you what possible motive there could be—I 
mean, what possible advantage could she expect from L’Angelier 
ceasing to live, so long as the letters remained? Without the 
return of his letters she gained nothing. Her object—her 
greatest desire—that for which she was yearning with her whole 
soul, was to avoid the exposure of her shame. But the death 
of L’Angelier, with these letters in his possession, instead 
of ensuring that object, would have been perfectly certain to 
lead to the immediate exposure of everything that had passed 
between them. Shall I be told that she did not foresee that? 
I think my learned friend has been giving the prisoner too 
much credit for talent in the course of his observations upon her 
conduct. But I should conceive her to be infinitely stupid if 
she could not foresee that the death of L’Angelier, with these 
documents in his possession, was the true and best means of 
frustrating the then great object of her life. 

So much for the motive. And if there is no assignable or 
intelligible motive in any sense of the word, see what another 
startling defect that is in the case for the prosecution. Shall 
I be told that the motive might be revenge? -Listen to the 
letter which I have just read. Tell me if it is possible that, 
in the same breast with these sentiments, there could lurk 
one feeling of revenge? No; the condition of mind in which 
that poor girl was throughout the months of February and 
March is entirely inconsistent with any of the hypotheses that 
have been made on the other side—utterly incredible in connec- 
tion with the perpetration of such a crime as is here laid 
to her charge. It is of importance, too, that we should keep 
in mind the way in which her spirit was thus broken and bowed 
down with the expectation of an exposure of her unchastity ; for, 
when the death of L’Angelier was made known to her, can you 

266 


Addresses to J ury. 


for a single moment doubt that her apprehensions were keenly Dean of 
awakened—that she foresaw what must be the consequences of Faculty 
that event; and, dreading to meet her father or her mother— 
feeling that, in the condition of the family, it was impossible 
she could remain among them—she left her father’s house on 
the Thursday morning? I really don’t know whether my 
learned friend meant seriously to say that this was an abscond- 
ing from justice from a consciousness of guilt? An absconding 
from justice by going to her father’s house at Row! Oh, he 
said, all we know is, that she left Glasgow early in the morning, 
and that she was found at three in the afternoon on board a 
steam-packet going from Greenock to Helensburgh; the interval 
is unaccounted for. If my learned friend were only half as 
ingenious on behalf of the prisoner as he is in supporting the 
prosecution, he could have very little difficulty. in knowing that 
one who starts by water to Helensburgh in the morning may 
be easily overtaken by others travelling by railway to Greenock 
in the afternoon. She was on board a steam-packet, but its 
destination was no further than Helensburgh and its neighbour- 
hood. And that he calls absconding from justice. Gentlemen, it 
is no fleeing from justice, but it is fleeing from that which she 
could as little bear—the wrath of her father and the averted 
countenance of her mother. 

But she came back again without the slightest hesitation ; 
and upon the Monday morning there occurred a scene as 
remarkable in the history of criminal jurisprudence as anything 
I ever heard of, by which that broken spirit was altogether 
changed. The momeni she was met by a charge of being impli- 
cated in causing the death of L’Angelier, she at once assumed the 
courage of a heroine. She was bowed down and she fled, while 
the true charge of her own unchastity and shame was all that 
was brought against her. But she stood erect, and proudly con- 
scious of her innocence, when she was met with this astounding 
and monstrous charge of murder. You heard the account that 
M. de Mean gave of the interview that he had with her, in her 
father’s house, on the Monday. That was a most striking 
statement, given with a degree of minute and accurate truth- 
fulness that could not be surpassed. And what was the import 
of that conversation? He advised her as a friend—and that 
was the very best advice that any friend could have given her— 
if L’Angelier was with her on that Sunday night, for God's 
sake not to deny it. And why? Because, said M. de Mean, 
it is certain to be proved. A servant, a policeman, a casual 
passenger, is certain to know the fact, and if you falsely ‘deny 
his having met you that evening, what a fact that will be 
against you! Gentlemen, the advice was not only good, but most 
irresistible in the circumstances if that meeting had taken place. 
But what was her answer? To five or six suggestions she 

267 


Madeleine Smith. 


Dean of gave the same constant answer, and at length she sail—* I 


Faculty 


swear to you, M. de Megn, I have not seen L’Angelier for three 
weeks.” Is this not proved to be true? If it is true that she did 
not see him on the 22nd March, then she did not see him at 
all for three weeks. M. de Mean was in doubt whether she 
said three weeks or six weeks, either of which would have been 
practically quite true. Immediately afterwards she was brought 
before the magistrate and interrogated on the circumstances 
implicating her in the suspicion which had come upon her. 
What does she say? She tells the truth again with a degree of 
candour and openness which very much surprised the magistrate, 
and which you too must be struck with. Listen to the words 
of her declaration; for though these must lose much of their 
effect from the want of being listened to as spoken by her, I 
must ask you to look at two or three particular passages there 
stated which it is of the utmost importance that you should 
mark— 


“TI learned about his death on the afternoon of Monday, the 
23rd March current, from: mamma, to whom it had been men- 
tioned by a lady named Miss Perry, a friend of M. L’Angelier. 
I had not seen M. L’Angelier for about three weeks before his 
death ; and the last time I saw him was on a night about half- 
past ten o’clock. He was in the habit of writing notes to me, 
and I was in the habit of replying to him by notes. The last 
note I wrote to him was on the Friday before his death, viz., 
Friday, the 20th March current. I now see and identify that 
note and the relative envelope, and they are each marked No. 
1. In consequence of that note I expected him to visit me on 
Saturday night, the 21st current, at my bedroom window in the 
same way as formerly mentioned; but he did not come, and 
sent no notice. There was no tapping at my window on said 
Saturday night, or on the following night, being Sunday. J 
went to bed on Sunday night about eleven o’clock, and remained 
in bed till the usual time of getting up next morning, being eight 
or nine o'clock. In the course of my meetings with M. 
L’Angelier he and I had arranged to get married, and we had 
at one time proposed September last as the time the marriage 
was to take place, and subsequently the present month of 
March was spoken of. It was proposed that we should reside 
in furnished lodgings, but we had not made any definite arrange- 
ment as to time or otherwise. He was very unwell for some 
time, and had gone to the Bridge of Allan for his health; and 
he complained of sickness, but I have no idea what was the 
cause of it.” 


My learned friend, the Lord Advocate, said that this showed 
that she knew he had gone to the Bridge of Allan. Certainly 
it showed she knew it then, for she had been told it by M. de 

268 


Addresses to Jury. 


Mean. But it does not show—it does not in the least degree Dean of 
tend to show—against the real evidence of her own letter, Faculty 
which was addressed to Mrs. Jenkins’s—that she knew at the 

time. She says— 


“JT remember giving him some cocoa from my window one 
night some time ago, but I cannot. specify the time particularly. 
He took the cup in his hand and barely tasted the contents, and 
I gave him no bread to it. I was taking some cocoa myself 
at the time, and had prepared it myself. It was between ten 
and eleven p.m. when I gave it to him. I am now shown a 
note or letter and envelope, which are marked respectively No. 
2, and I recognise them as the note and envelope which I wrote 
to M. L’Angelier and sent to the post. As I had attributed his 
sickness to want of food, I proposed, as stated in the note, to 
give him a loaf of bread; but I said that merely in a joke, and, 
in point of fact, I never gave him any bread.” 


And it is perfectly plain from her letters that it was merely a 
joke. “I have bought arsenic on various occasions.” No 
hesitation about the buying of the arsenic— 


“The last I bought was a sixpence worth, which I bought in 
Currie, the apothecary’s in Sauchiehall Street; and, prior to 
that, I bought other two quantities of arsenic, for which I paid 
sixpence each—one of these in Currie’s, and the other in Mur- 
doch, the apothecary’s shop in Sauchiehall Street.” 


And then she goes on to specify the use she intended to make 
of it, and did actually make of it, after she got it. She is also 
asked about who was present when she purchased the arsenic ; 
and she states this with perfect precision and accuracy, as has 
been proved, and she says that she entered her name in the 
book when she was asked to do it ; and gives a particular account 
of everything that took place when she made these purchases, so 
far as she recollected—all which is precisely in accordance with 
the evidence now before us. Then, she admits her engagement 
with Mr. Minnoch, and makes various other statements, with 
regard to which my learned friend was not able to say that any 
one has been contradicted by the evidence. 

Such openness and candour of statement, under such circum- 
stances—first to M. de Mean, a friend, and next the magis- 
trate interrogating her on the charge, and who had, as was 
his duty, informed her that whatever she said might be used 
to her prejudice, but could not possibly be used to her advantage 
—I leave to speak for themselves. 

But I have now to request your attention to one particular 
point in connection with this declaration—the different purchases 
of arsenic. With regard to the purchase from Murdoch I shall 
not trouble you with any further observations after what I have 

269 


Madeleine Smith. 


Dean of already said on this subject; but the occasion of the second pur- 

Faculty chase is too remarkable to be passed over without some further 
observations. It was made on the 6th of March, the day the 
prisoner went to the Bridge of Allan. For what purpose—for 
what murderous purpose could that purchase have been made? 
She had been doing everything in her power, as you see from 
one of her letters, to dissuade and prevent the deceased from 
going to the Bridge of Allan at the same time as herself, and 
she had succeeded in persuading him to abstain from going; and 
yet, when going away to the Bridge of Allan, she buys this 
arsenic—when going away from the supposed object of her 
murderous attack—when therefore she could have no possible 
use for it. She carries it with her, it is to be 
presumed—it could not have been bought for the pur- 
pose of leaving behind her—she carries it with her, and 
my learned friend says that whenever she found, either that she 
had some left over after the administration of a dose, or that 
she had got arsenic which for the time was of no use to her, she 
put it away. And it is in this way my learned friend accounts 
for none of the arsenic being left or found in her possession. 
But what is this she does on the 6th as connected with what she 
does on the 18th? She bought arsenic when she was going 
away from the man she wanted to murder, and when she could 
have no opportunity of administering it to him. And then, I 
suppose, we must take it for granted, on the Lord Advocate’s 
theory, that, finding she could not administer it to him, she 
threw it away. What on earth eould she mean by that? He 
says—that is his theory—she kept it at the Bridge of Allan in 
case he should come there. Well, then, she kept it down to 
the 17th. Why did she throw it away on the 17th and buy 
more on the 18th? Can anybody explain that? Why did she 
throw away the arsenic when she was coming back from the 
Bridge of Allan to be in the immediate neighbourhood of her 
victim? And why, above all, having thrown it away, did she 
forthwith purchase more the very day after she came back, 
with those circumstances of openness and exposure and observa- 
tion that are perfectly inconsistent with the existence of an 
illegitimate purpose? Why expose herself to the necessity of 
a repeated purchase, when she could get or had got enough at 
once to poison twenty or a hundred men? Her conduct is utterly 
unintelligible on any such supposition as has been made by the: 
prosecutor. 

Let us now look at what was her object at this time in another 
view. She wanted L’Angelier to go away; she was most anxious 
that he should go to the south of England—to the Isle of Wight 
—for ten days. Oh, says my learned friend, her object was to 
marry Mr. Minnoch in the meantime. Why? There was no 


270 


Addresses to Jury. 


arrangement up to that time of the day of her marriage with Dean of 
Mr. Minnoch. She was going away herself for ten days on a Faculty 
casual visit to the Bridge of Allan; and if L’Angelier had 
followed her advice and gone to the south of England for ten 

days, while he would in the meantime have been absent and 
beyond her reach, he would have returned only to find matters 
where they were—nothing more definite than in the month of 
January—Mr. Minnoch still her suitor, but not her husband. 
Then, again, L’Angelier’s absence could surely be of no advantage 

to her if she wanted to give him poison. All the facts, gentle- 

men, relating to this part of the case go to show this, that she 

had no object but perhaps to get rid of him for the time, to 

keep him from going to the Bridge of Allan, and to get him to 

go elsewhere, out of regard for his health, as expressed in her 
letters. 

But the possession of this arsenic is said to be unaccounted 
for, as far as the prisoner herself is concerned. It might be 
so—it may be so—and yet that would not make a case for the 
prosecution. She says she used it as a cosmetic. This might 
be startling at first sight to many of us here, but after the 
evidence we have heard it will not in the least amaze you. Her 
statement, which has been so far borne out by evidence, was 
that at school she had read of the Styrian peasants using arsenic 
for the strengthening of their wind and the improvement of 
their complexions. No doubt they used it internally and not 
externally as she did; but in the imperfect state of her know- 
ledge that fact is of no significance. L’Angelier, too, was well 
aware of the same fact. He stated to more than one witness— 
and if he stated falsely it is only one of a multitude of lies 
proved against him—that he used it himself. It is not 
surprising that if L’Angelier knew of this custom that he 
should have communicated it to the prisoner. It is not surpris- 
ing that under these circumstances the prisoner should have 
used the arsenic externally, for an internal use is apparently 
a greater danger, which might have suggested to her to try it 
externally ; and there is no reason to suppose that, if used exter- 
nally, as the prisoner says she did use it, it would be productive 
of any injurious effects; so that there is no reason to suspect 
on that ground the truth of the statement that the prisoner 
had made. No doubt we have had medical gentlemen coming 
here and shaking their heads and looking wise, and saying that 
such a use of arsenic would be a dangerous practice. Well, so 
should we all say, that it is both a dangerous and foolish prac- 
tice. But that is not the question. The question is, whether the 
prisoner could actually so use it without injurious effects; and 
that she could do so is demonstrated by the experiment of Dr. 
Lawrie, fortified by the opinion of Dr. Maclagan. The publica- 
tion in Chambers’s Journal, Blackwood’s Magazine, and 


271 


Madeleine Smith. 


Dean of Johnston’s “Chemistry of Common Life,” of information on 

Faculty such uses of arsenic had reached not the prisoner alone, but a 
multitude of other ladies, and had incited them to the same 
kind of experiments. The two druggists—Roberton and 
Guthrie—spoke to the fact of ladies having come to their 
shops seeking arsenic for such purposes on the suggestion of 
these publications. It cannot, therefore, be surprising to you, 
gentlemen, to learn that, when the prisoner bought this arsenic, 
she intended to use it, and did afterwards actually use it, for 
this very purpose. 

My learned friend, the Lord Advocate, said that, great as was 
the courage the prisoner displayed when charged with this 
serious crime, such a demeanour was not inconsistent with the 
theory of her guilt. He said that a woman who had the nerve 
to commit the murder would have the nerve calmly to meet the 
accusation. I doubt that very much. Gentlemen, I know of 
no case in which such undaunted courage has been displayed, 
from first to last, by a young girl, confronted with such a 
charge, where that girl was guilty. But, gentlemen, our 
experience does furnish us with examples of as brave a bearing 
in as young a girl when innocent. Do you know the story of 
Eliza Fenning? She was a servant girl in the city of London, 
and she was tried on the charge of poisoning her master .and 
family by putting arsenic into dumplings. When the charge 
was first made against her she met it with a calm but indignant 
denial; she maintained the same demeanour and self-possession 
throughout a long trial; and she received sentence of death 
without moving a muscle. According to the statement of an 
intelligent bystander, when brought upon the scaffold, she 
seemed serene as an angel, and she died as she had borne herself 
throughout the previous stages of the sad tragedy. It was an 
execution which attracted much attention at the time. Opinion 
was much divided as to the propriety of the verdict, and the 
angry disputants wrangled even over the poor girl’s grave. 
But time brought the truth to light; the perpetrator of the 
murder confessed it on his deathbed—too late to avoid the 
enacting of a most bloody tragedy. That case, gentlemen, is 
now matter of history. It happened at a time beyond the 
recollection of most of those whom I now address; but it 
remains on record—a flaming beacon to warn us against the 
sunken rocks of presumptuous arrogance and opinionative self- 
reliance, imbedded and hid in the cold and proud heart; it 
teaches us, by terrible example, to avoid confounding suspicion 
with proof, and to reject conjectures and hypotheses when 
they are tendered to us as demonstrations. I fear, gentlemen, 
that this is not a solitary case—either the recollection or the 
reading of any of us may recall other occasions— 

““When, after execution, Judgment hath 
Repented o’er his doom; ”’ 


272 


Addresses to Jury, 


but I pray God that neither you nor I may be implicated in the Dean of 
guilt of adding another name to that black and bloody catalogue. Faculty 
I have thus laid before you, as clearly as I could, what I 
conceive to be all the important branches of this inquiry 
separately, and as calmly and deliberately as I could; and I 
now ask you to bring your judgment—to bring the whole 
powers with which God has endowed you—to the performance 
of your most solemn duty. I have heard it said that juries 
have nothing to do with the consequences of their verdicts, 
and that all questions of evidence must be weighed in the same 
scale, whether the crime be a capital one or merely penal in a 
lower degree. I cannot agree to that proposition. I cannot too 
indignantly repudiate such a doctrine. It may suit well enough 
the cramped mind of « legal pedant, or the leaden rules of a 
heartless philosophy; but he who maintains such a doctrine is 
entirely ignorant of what materials a jury is, and ought to be, 
composed. Gentlemen, you are brought here for the perform- 
ance of this great duty, not because you have any particular 
skill in the sifting or weighing of evidence—not because your 
intellects have been highly cuitivated for that or similar ‘pur- 
poses—not because you are a class or caste set apart for the 
work; but you are here because, as the law expresses it, you 
are indifferent men—because you are like, not because you are 
unlike, other men; not merely because you have clear heads, 
but because you have warm and tender hearts—because you 
have bosoms filled with the same feelings and emotions, and 
because you entertain the same sympathies and sentiments 
as those whose lives, characters, and fortunes are placed in your 
hands. To rely, therefore, upon your reason only, is nothing 
less than impiously to refuse to call to your aid, in the per- 
formance of a momentous duty, the noblest gifts that God has 
implanted in your breasts. Bring with you then to this 
service, I beseech you, not only your clear heads, but your 
warm hearts—your fine moral instincts, and your guiding and 
regulating consciences—for thus, and thus only, will you satisfy 
the oath which you have taken. To determine guilt or innocence 
by the light of intellect alone is the exclusive prerogative of 
infallibility; and when man’s presumptuous arrogance tempts 
him to usurp the attribute of Omniscience, he only exposes the 
weakness and frailty of his own nature. Then, indeed, 


‘Man, proud man, 
Dressed in a little brief authority, 

Most ignorant of what he’s most assured, 
Plays such fantastic tricks before high Heaven, 
As make the angels weep.”’ 


Raise not, then, your rash and impotent hands to rend aside 

the veil in which Providence has been pleased to shroud the 

circumstances of this mysterious story. Such an attempt is not 
s 273 


Madeleine Smith. 


Dean of within your province, nor the province of any human being. 

Faculty The time may come—it certainly will come—perhaps not before 
the Great Day in which the secrets of all hearts shall be 
revealed—and yet it may be that in this world, and during 
our own lifetime, the secret of this extraordinary story may 
be brought to light. It may even be that the true perpetrator 
of this murder, if there was a murder, may be brought before 
the bar of this very Court.. I ask you to reflect for a moment 
what the feelings of any of us would then be. It may be our 
lot to sit in judgment on the guilty man. It may be the lot of 
any one of you to be empanelled to try the charge against him. 
Would not your souls recoil with horror from the demand for 
more blood? Would not you be driven to refuse to discharge 
your duty in condemnifg the guilty, because you had already 
doomed the innocent to die? I say, therefore, ponder well 
before you permit anything short of the clearest evidence to 
induce or mislead you into giving such an awful verdict as 
is demanded of you. Dare any man hearing me—dare any man 
here or elsewhere say that he has formed a clear opinion against 
the prisoner—will any man venture for one moment to make 
that assertion? And yet, if on anything short of clear opinion 
you convict the prisoner, refiect—I beseech you, reflect—what 
the consequences may be. Never did I feel so unwilling to part 
with a jury—never did I feel as if I had said so little as I feel 
now after this long address. I cannot explain it to myself, 
except by a strong and overwhelming conviction of what your 
verdict ought to be. I am deeply conscious of a personal 
interest in your verdict, for if there should be any failure of 
justice I could attribute it to no other cause than my own 
inability to conduct the defence ; and I feel persuaded that, 
if it were so, the recollection of this day and this prisoner would 
haunt me as a dismal and blighting spectre to the end of life. 
May the Spirit of all Truth guide you to an honest, a just, 
and a true verdict! But no verdict will be either honest, or 
just, or true, unless it at once satisfies the reasonable scruples 
of the severest’ judgment, and yet leaves undisturbed and 
unvexed the tenderest conscience among you. 


After an interval of about a quarter of an hour the Court 
resumed, 


The Lord Justice-Clerk’s Charge to the Jury. 


Lord The Lorp Justice-CierK thereafter proceeded to deliver his 
Justice-Cletk charge to the jury. He said—Gentlemen of the Jury—The con- 
test of evidence and of argument is now closed, and the time has 
now come for deliberation and decision; and to enable you to 
discharge that duty aright and justly, it is necessary that you 


274 


The Lord Justice-Clerk’s Charge. 


remember that the case is to be tried and decided solely on the Lord 
evidence. You are not to give the slightest weight to the Justice-Clerk 
personal opinion of the guilt of the prisoner, which I regret my 
earned friend the Lord Advocate allowed himself to express. 
or are you, on the other hand, to be weighed in the prisoner’s 
favour by the more moving and earnest declaration made by 
her counsel of his own conviction of her innocence. I think on 
both sides such expressions of opinion by the counsel ought never 
to be brought before a jury. Neither of them are so good 
judges of the truth as all of you are. Engaged in this case and 
in its preparation, influenced by many considerations and 
many circumstances which are not brought out before you, and 
misled and influenced, as you would plainly see, by the over- . 
excitement of such a trial, it is not wonderful that in a case 
of this description the counsel on either side should entertain 
&@ wrong opinion as to the guilt of the accused, however honest 
and sincere that opinion may be. As Lord Campbell said in 
his charge to the jury in Palmer’s case—“Gentlemen—I must 
strongly recommend to you to attend to everything that fell 
from that advocate, so eloquently, so ably, and so impressively. 
You are to judge, however, of the guilt or innocence of the 
prisoner from the evidence, and not from the speeches of the 
counsel, however able or eloquent those speeches may be. When 
a counsel tells you that he believes his client to be innocent, 
remember that that is analogous to the mere form by which a 
prisoner pleads ‘Not guilty’! It goes for nothing more, and 
the most inconvenient consequences must follow from regarding 
it in any other light.” : 
Gentlemen, in a case of poisoning, which is almost always 
an offence secretly perpetrated, I may observe at the outset 
that it seldom occurs that anybody has seen the mixture and 
preparation of the poison, or seen it put into the fluid or sub- 
stance in which it is administered. I believe there are only 
two cases in which this was done in this country—one of them 
the case of Palmer, and the other the case of a Mrs. Nairn,* 
who was tried for poisoning her husband in the middle of last 
century. Poisoning is a crime which must generally be proved 
by circumstantial evidence ; and it was very fairly and properly 
admitted by the Dean of Faculty that the administration of 
poison may be most satisfactorily proved by circumstantial 
evidence alone. But, on the other hand, great care must be 
taken that the circumstantial evidence is such as to exclude the 
conclusion either of innocence on the one hand, or of an unex- 
plained and mysterious occurrence on the other. It is one 
great misfortune attending the administration of poison that, 
if the party is not immediately detected in some such way as 


* Patrick Ogilvy and Catherine Nairn, August, 1765. 
275 


Madeleine Smith. 


Lord to leave no doubt of actual guilt, suspicions arise often most 
Justice-Clerk ynjustly, and obtain great weight and great hold over the 
public mind, just because it is a crime committed in secret. 
The person who last gave the deceased a cup of coffee, or a 
glass of water, or a glass of wine—the person who made the 
last appointment with him—is thus exposed to strong and 
apparently well-founded suspicions, and may be subjected even 
to false and groundless charges. You must, therefore, keep in 
view that, while on the one hand the crime has been perpetrated 
secretly, and no eye has seen the parties at the time, or what 
passed, on the other hand you must not allow positive evidence 
to be supplied by suspicion, and still less admit of loose pre- 
sumptions as coming in room of that. You must be satisfied 
by proper evidence that the parties were together when the 
poison was said to have been administered, satisfied that there 
was the purpose to administer poison upon the occasion referred 
to, that the accused had the poison in her possession, and that 
it was given and administered upon that particular occasion, 
and in the circumstances set forth in the indictment. That 
you may have given weight to the remarks made before you by 
the counsel of the Crown I cannot doubt, but I think it was 
unnecessary to urge personal convictions upon you so solemnly, 
in a case of this kind, for the purpose of getting a verdict of 
guilty. JI am quite sure that, if you are compelled to give a 
verdict against the prisoner, you can only be made to do so 
reluctantly by satisfactory evidence. The duty I have to do in 
aiding you, as far as I possibly can, to come to a decision 
is very different from what fell to the lot of either counsel. 
I have simply to go over the évidence in detail, in case it may 
not be sufficiently in your recollection, and to make such observa- 
tions as the evidence suggests as proper and fitting for your 
assistance; but what I want to impress upon your minds is, 
that whatever doubt you may have of the matters set forth in 
her defence, you must have evidence against her, satisfactory 
and eonvincing to your minds, in which you find no conjectures, 
but only irresistible and just inferences. I wish you to keep 
in view that, although you may not be satisfied with any of the 
theories that had been propounded on behalf of the prisoner— 
though you may not be inclined to adopt the notion either that 
L’Angelier was the man taking laudanum twice over in the 
course of the journey to Glasgow. or that he took arsenic 
himself, or believe Miss Smith’s statement of the use for which 
she got arsenic—still, nevertheless, though all these matters 
may fail in her defence, the case for the prosecution may be 
radically defective in evidence. I own there are some things 
which have been introduced into the evidence on the part of 
the prisoner—very naturally, perhaps, as it 1s very right to 
investigate everything regarding this man L’Angelier and his 
276 


The Lord Justice-Clerk’s Charge. | 


journey to Glasgow on 22nd March—which, I think, cannot aid Lord 

the prisoner in any degree. You must judge of that before Justice-Clerk 
you can arrive at the conclusion that on Sunday, the 22nd 

of March, she did actually administer the poison. 

His lordship then entered upon a summary of the evidence 
elicited in the course of the trial, reading to the jury copious 
extracts from his notes. | After the evidence of Sheriff Smith and 
his clerk, Gray, who spoke to the pr’soner’s declaration having 
been taken down in the regular way, after due warning that 
had been given her of the position in which she stood, came 
the depositions of the most important witness in the whole case, 
Mrs. Jenkins, who kept the lodgings where L’Angelier resided 
in Franklin Piace. Her remark, that the deceased’s health was 
good till about January, was important, as showing that his . 
health seemed, to a certain extent, to have failed before any 
of the occasions on which the administration of poison was 
alleged to have taken place. The indictment charged the 
administration of poison with intent to murder, in so far as “on 
the 19th or 20th day of February, 1857, or on one or other 
of the days of that month, or of January immediately preceding, 
or of March immediately following,” prisoner did “ wickedly 
and feloniously administer to the deceased a quantity or quan- 
tities of arsenic or other poison, to the prosecutor unknown, 
in cocoa or in coffee.” Now, a mere variance as to the precise 
day of the week or month would be of no importance in an 
ordinary case, and whether the 19th or 20th February, or the 
12th or 13th, were fixed as the date of the murderous attempt 
would not have been of any moment, or not at least of such 
moment as to make any variance in your decision, if the 
evidence pointed to a different date; but in this case you will 
observe that the Crown takes the date not in the indictment, 
but in the argument and evidence, of the 19th or 20th February 
as the exact day. Now, if it were proved that it could not ‘be 
on that day, but on an earlier date, then the evidence would 
be at variance with the case which the prosecutor wished to 
establish, because from the whole circumstances of the case, 
from the letters, from the conduct of the parties, and every- 
thing else, he was taking that date as the 19th or 20th, and 
if the evidence failed to prove it, then what he placed before 
you was not supported by evidence. Now, the landlady, in 
affirming L’Angelier’s first illness to have been eight or ten 
days before the second attack, might be mistaken. But 
that was not enough, whatever suspicion they might have; 
because she was not shaken on that point at all. On 
the contrary, other evidence seemed to him to show 
that she was right upon that point. For she could hardly 
have forgotten, considering the illness of the 22nd, whether 
that illness had only been one day or several days before, and 


277 


Madeleine Smith. 


Lord whether he had recovered from the effects of his first illness 
Sustice-Clerk hefore he was seized with the second. When he said “ recovered ” 
he did not allude to his altered appearance, but to the 
fact of his recovery from actual sickness. This was his first 
illness before the 22nd. The evidence of Miss Perry went also 
to prove that the illness was on the 19th; but then they must 
not overlook the remarkable fact that there was no proof 
whatever, not the smallest vestige of proof, that the prisoner 
had arsenic in her possession at that time. It would not do 
to infer from her having arsenic afterwards that she probably 
had arsenic on the first occasion. The purchase of arsenic had 
been sufficiently proved against the prisoner. She admitted it 
when she was examined, and it would be a matter for the jury 
to consider afterwards whether the fact of her purchasing the 
arsenic so openly was a point as much in her favour as was at 
first supposed; for if she had bought arsenic at another part 
of the town, and under a false name, that would only have 
made the case stronger against her. So that the mere open 
purchase of arsenic was, after all, not of much weight. But of 
the possession of any arsenic at the time of the deceased’s 
first illness they had no proof whatever. The use of the arsenic 
in the way she stated afterwards—as a cosmetic—was not 
proved. There was one witness, who had been a servant in her 
father’s house, and who two or three years ago had heard her 
say that arsenic was good for the complexion or the health; 
but ip was not pretended that any of her family, or any one in 
the house, were aware of her having arsenic before the 19th 
February. Then the jury would remember that the contents 
of the stomach vomited in the way the landlady described were 
not examined; and the fact that arsenic produced the illness 
was merely an inference from the fact that, on the 22nd March 
he did die of arsenic, and that the stuff then vomited was of 
the same character as on that occasion. This was, he thought, 
very loose and unsatisfactory indeed. The charge was the 
administration of arsenic on the 19th February; but the 
prisoner was not proved to have possessed arsenic at that time, 
and the stuff indeed was not proved to have contained any 
arsenious matter. It would not do to go back to the occasion 
of the death and infer from the presence of arsenic then that 
this first illness also arose from the presence of arsenic, and 
not from other causes. As to the large quantity of meat 
ordered by L’Angelier, Mrs. Jenkins did not say, nor did he 
so understand her, that the whole of it was meant for con- 
suoiption at dinner on the day after his illness. It was 
ovviously intended as a supply to be kept in the house. 
Coming to the second illness, his lordship desired the jury 
to observe that it was on the 21st February that the prisoner 
had got the arsenic mixed with soot at Murdoch’s shop; so 


278 


The Lord Justice-Clerk’s Charge. 


that, if the use of that arsenic was not properly accounted for, Lord 
they must suppose she got it for a purpose different from what Justice-Clerk 
she described. Little attention need be paid to the story 
about giving it to rats, because, without some such excuse, she 
would not have got it; and, if she wanted it for cosmetic pur- 
poses, it was not likely she would say so. But the fact 
remained that she possessed arsenic on the 21st; and then 
arose the question, did she see the deceased on the Sunday 
before the arsenic was administered? Mrs. Jenkins did not 
know he was out of the house on that Sunday; and really 
there seemed a good deal of force in the Dean’s observation, 
that the foundation of the prosecutor’s case was somewhat 
shaken. 

Coming to the question of the third illness, his lordship 
thought there was ample evidence to show that a letter was 
anxiously expected by L’Angelier just before he went to the 
Bridge of Allan, so anxiously that even after his return to 
Glasgow from Edinburgh, and after leaving instructions with 
Thuau about forwarding his letters, he went back to Edinburgh 
to see if the letter had not gone there before he went to the 
Bridge of Allan; and it was evident that that letter, so eagerly 
looked for, was in some way or other to regulate his motions. 
Well, a letter did come on the Friday, addressed to him at. his 
lodgings, and was duly forwarded to him at the Bridge of 
Allan, and on the Sunday night L’Angelier unexpectedly 
returned, and when his landlady expressed surprise, answered, 
“Tt was the letter which brought me home.” He looked well, 
and said himself he was much better. As to the statement that 
he had purchased laudanum twice on the road that night, his 
lordship thought the jury would be satisfied that that was a 
mistake. L’Angelier left the house at nine o’clock at night, 
taking his latch-key with him, as he expected to be late. Well, 
he had come back with some object, and he intends going off 
next morning. There is nothing occurring to lead any one to 
imagine that he intended to remain in Glasgow, in the expecta- 
tion of any illness coming on from the symptoms he had during 
the day. The next fact was his coming home ill about half-past 
two in the morning, and his getting worse through the night, 
or morning rather. He told his landlady he thought it was bile, 
and that was important, as showing the absence of any belief 
in his mind that he had received anything from the prisoner 
to hurt him. His landlady’s question, whether he had taken 
anything to disagree with him, would naturally have brought 
to his mind having received anything from the prisoner had 
he been with her, but he alluded to nothing of the kind. It 
was of great importance that the jury should not be led away 
by the notion that it was the deceased who bought the laudanum 
in the two shops on the Coatbridge Road, for when the doctor 


279 


Madeleine Smith. 


Lord prescribed laudanum for his sickness he would have been sure 
Justice-Clerk to have said, “Oh, I’ve had too much of that already; it’s 
done me no good, and it may make me worse.” While reading 
the portion of the landlady’s evidence relating to sending for 
the doctor, he said they would judge whether L’Angelier’s 
anxiety for a doctor was like the conduct of a man who had 
taken arsenic to accomplish his own death. His lordship next 
read the evidence relating to the letter found in L’Angelier’s 
vest-pocket in the lodgings, and which had been sent by Thuau 
to the Bridge of Allan, beginning, “ Why, my beloved, did you 
not come to me?” and fixing an appointment for the next night. 
After reading this letter, his lordship said—Now, it is not proved 
that he got any other letter. He got this letter on the Sunday 
morning. He had complained in a letter to Miss Perry on the 
Friday that he had lost an appointment which had been made 
for the Thursday evening owing to not getting the note till 
the Friday. And that this man, ardent to see this girl again, 
hoping to get the satisfactory answer which she had promised 
to give to his questions as to forming an engagement with 
Minnoch, should hurry home on the Sunday night, and go 
out from his lodgings in the hope that he would find her wait- 
ing, and that there was the greatest probability of his seeing 
her, was, he thought, the only conclusion they could come to 
upon the matter. L’Angelier goes out apparently as soon as he 
changed his coat, and makes some arrangements about tea or 
. something else. And it was for the jury to say whether they 
doubted that that letter brought L’Angelier into Glasgow on 
that Sunday night taking the mail train, and walking from 
Coatbridge; but here the proof stopped. 

And, supposing the jury were quite satisfied that the 
letter did bring him into Glasgow, were they in a condition 
to say, with satisfaction to their consciences, that, as an 
inevitable and just result from this, they could find it proved 
that the prisoner and deceased had met that night? That 
was the point in the case. That you may have the strongest 
moral suspicion that they met—that you may believe that he 
was well able, after all this clandestine correspondence, to 
obtain the means of an interview, especially as she had com- 
plained of his not coming on the Thursday, said she would wait 
again to-morrow night, same hour and place, and talked of 
wishing him to clasp her to his bosom—that you may suppose 
it likely that, although he failed to keep his appointment on 
Saturday, she‘would be waiting on the Sunday, which was by 
no means an uncommon evening for their appointment—all that 
may be very true, and probably you will all think 80, but: 
remember you are trying this case upon evidence that must 
be satisfactory, complete, and distinct. A jury, said his lord- 
ship, may safely infer certain facts from correspondence. They 


280 


The Lord Justice-Clerk’s Charge. 


may even safely infer that meetings took place when they Lord 
find these meetings either mutually appointed or arranged for Justice-Clerk 
by the parties. But it is for you to say here whether it has 
been proved that L’Angelier was in the house that night. If 
you can hold that that link in the chain is supplied by just 
and satisfactory inference—remember I say just and satisfac- 
tory—and it is for you to say whether the inference is satis- 
factory and just, in order to complete the proof—if you really 
feel that you have the strongest suspicion that he saw her, 
for really no one need hesitate to say that, as a matter of moral 
opinion, the whole probabilities of the case are in favour of it— 
but if that is all the amount that you can derive from the 
evidence, the link still remains awanting in the chain, the 
catastrophe and the alleged cause of it are not found linked 
together. And therefore you must be satisfied that you can 
here stand and rely upon the firm foundation, I say, of a just 
and sound, and, perhaps I may add, inevitable inference. That 
a jury is entitled often to draw such an inference there is no 
doubt; and it is just because you belong to that class of men 
to whom the Lord Advocate referred, namely, men of common 
sense, capable of exercising your judgment upon a matter 
which is laid before you to consider—it is on that very account 
that you are to put to yourselves the question, “Is this a satis- 
factory and just inference?” If you find it so, I cannot tell 
you that you are not at liberty to act upon it, because most of 
those matters occurring in life must depend upon circumstantial 
evidence, and upon the inference which a jury may feel bound 
to draw. But it is an inference of a very serious character— 
it is an inference upon which the death of this party by the 
hand of the prisoner really must depend. And, then, you will 
take all the other circumstances of the case into consideration, 
and see whether you can from them infer that they met. If 
you think they met together that night, and he was seized and 
taken ill, and died of arsenic, the symptoms beginning shortly 
after the time he left her, it will be for you to say whether, 
in that case, there is any doubt as to whose hand administered 
the poison. 

But, then, there is another part of the case to which your 
attention has been directed. There is another circumstance 
spoken to by the policeman and another witness, which I shall 
afterwards bring before you, as to where he was going. Pro- 
ceeding to quote the remainder of the landlady’s evidence, his 
lordship noticed particularly the portion referring to his refusal 
to take laudanum, as showing that, whatever might have been 
his former practice, L‘Angelier was not, at this period, in 
the habit of taking laudanum, and had a great aversion to 
taking it. On finishing the reading of the landlady’s evidence, 
he said—This is a very important witness in the case; she 

281 


Madeleine Smith. 


speaks to his habit and character, to his not taking medicine, 

Justice-Clerk to his aversion to laudanum at this period, and to the important 
fact that L’Angelier said “the letter you sent me brought me 
home,” when she expressed surprise at his early return. She 
was a very intelligent witness, and not inclined to press any- 
thing against the prisoner, or rather showing no desire to make 
out anything wrong in the case, though plainly she had sus- 
pected something wrong (as you cannot but do), from the fact 
of his having twice come home ill after being out at night. 
Then there was the evidence of the baker and the flesher, 
proving the purchase of the articles bought from them 3h of 
the lady who lived in Edinburgh, and who spoke of him lodging 
in her house; of the shopkeeper who spoke to seeing him in his 
shop in Edinburgh; and of the woman in Bridge of Allan who 
said that L’Angelier “left the Bridge of Allan after the church 
came out in the afternoon.” It was said that he must have 
given a false account to Ross when he said he had walked 
fifteen miles. But he might have walked to Alloa, and then to 
Stirling, and so made out the fifteen miles. Then there was 
the evidence of the postmaster, who spoke to his calling for a 
letter; of the guard of the mail train, who spoke as to @ 
foreigner joining the mail train; and of Ross, who stated dis- 
tinctly that his fellow-traveller to Glasgow from Coatbridge 
went into no house or shop on the road. Was that a matter 
in which Mr. Ross could possibly be mistaken? If the man who 
accompanied him had fallen ill, and had gone into a druggist’s 
shop, was that a matter which Ross could possibly have forgot? 
Or could he have forgot that he went into a second druggist’s, 
in order to do which he must have gone off the main road? He 
says he did not, and the evidence given as to going into these 
shops seemed to, be merely the recollection that a man with a 
moustache, who resembled the photograph, did enter these 
shops that day. It is not at all probable that the man was 
the same person who accompanied Ross. A few minutes after 
taking a hearty dinner was not a very likely occasion for a man 
pouring laudanum down his throat. 

Alluding next to Mr. Stevenson’s evidence, his lordship said 
he intended here to make some remarks on a course of pro- 
cedure which, at an early part of the case, appeared to be more 
material than was actually the case. At first it did look as if 
there was much more confusion about these letters, and that 
the prisoner had greater occasion to complain than it turned 
out she had. But there were serious defects in the mode of 
procedure in regard to these documents. When these letters 
were seized by warrant of the Sheriff, an inventory should have 
been taken by the officer of the Sheriff—the clerk ; not that he 
was to be the custodier of them, so as to prevent the Procura‘or- 
Fiscal having access to them—quite the reverse—but in order 

282 


The Lord Justice-Clerk’s Charge.. 


really and properly to ascertain what was found. No inventory Lerd 
of that kind ever was made up at all. But that they had al] Justice-Clerk 
the letters that were found, he thought, could not be doubted 
in the face of the evidence. He did not at all enter into the 
argument of the Dean of Faculty as to the loss of the letter 
written upon the Thursday night, and posted on the Friday. 
He did not think the Crown was responsible for that at all, and 
the letter was of no great value except as a loss to the Crown, 
because it might have so explained the hour and place of 
meeting on the Thursday night as to suggest how he could 
accomplish his object on the Sunday night. But there was 
another great defect, and it was this—As soon as things were 
recovered, and brought properly to the office of the Procurator- 
Fiscal, the letter and the envelope in which it was found ought 
to have been marked by the samme numbers at the time. That 
would not have excluded the chance and hazard of L’Angelier 
putting a letter in the wrong envelope, but it would have given 
them the certainty that from the time they were taken posses- 
sion of by the Crown the same letters remained in the same 
envelopes in which they were found. He did not allude to this 
matter because the prisoner had sustained any grievance, but 
it might have been otherwise. It was quite obvious that, after 
taking possession of these documents, these officers sat down 
at their leisure—taking a little time one day and a little time 
another—till about a fortnight was lost in this irregular pro- 
cedure. There seemed to be a great want of superintendence 
on the part of the three Sheriffs, as not one of them seemed 
to have superintended the examination of the witnesses, or the 
collection of these documents, which were relied upon by the 
Crown as most material evidence. 

Passing next to the medical testimony, his lordship said he 
did not know if he should go over these long reports and the 
medical testimony. He understood it not to be disputed by the 
counsel for the panel that he died of arsenic. 

Mr. Youne—Not at all. 

The Lorp Justice-CLerk—Then that relieves us from going 
over that part of the case. It is proved by the clearest evidence 
that he died of arsenic; and there is no occasion for discussing 
the question as to the appearance of jaundice if it is proved 
and admitted that the death was caused by arsenic. He referred 
next to the evidence as to the colouring matter, noticing the 
statement made as to the extreme difficulty of taking out the 
colouring matter, although a professional chemist might take 
most of it out by dexterous manipulation. Noticing next the 
medical evidence as to the articles found in L’Angelier’s lodgings, 
he directed attention to the fact that none of them could destroy 
life except the aconite, and the quantity of it was too small for 
that purpose. In regard to the evidence as to arsenic being 


283 


Lord 
Justice-Clerk 


Madeleine Smith. 


used as a cosmetic by the prisoner, in consequence of having 
read of the Styrian peasants, who, by taking it, became rosy 
and plump in complexion, his lordship remarked that any one 
using arsenic as a cosmetic must have known that it was to 
be taken inwardly, and that the desired result could only arise 
from its long-continued and persistent use in small quantities. 
He could not imagine that this girl, reading the journals and 
magazines on the subject, could suppose that by laying arsenic 
into a basin and using it all at once by washing in the water, 
she could possibly improve her complexion. And, as to his 
friend Dr. Lawrie’s experiment about the arsenic used in that 
way not having a bad or irritating effect if washed off immedi- 
ately, and also the remarks of his friend the Lord Advocate 
telling Dr. Lawrie that he might expect his face wonderfully 
changed, he looked upon all that as absurd. It was quite 
evident that the prisoner could not expect that a single applica- 
tion of arsenic externally in the way mentioned could possibly 
improve the complexion. All that they might consider as an 
extreme idea in this case. As to the question of how large a 
quantity of arsenic might be held in suspension, he directed 
attention to the fact that it was admitted that the thicker the 
stuff more would remain suspended, and less would be dissolved. 
Dr. Penny thought that a large quantity might be kept in 
suspension in such a fluid as cocoa. Then the medical testimony 
showed—and this went again to the question how the arsenic 
could have been given, or how he could have been induced to 
take so much—that in all probability there would be as much 
thrown in vomiting as would remain in the body, which would 
make a very large quantity indeed. Then there was some 
evidence as to the time betwixt the taking of arsenic and the 
appearance of the symptoms of poisoning. They knew very 
well, however, that he went out of his lodgings well, without 
arsenic, about nine o’clock, and that he came home ill about 
half-past two o’clock. It was clear that the illness must have 
intervened, but whether it was half an hour or two hours after 
the arsenic was taken was really immaterial. It was quite clear 
that he did not take it before he left the Bridge of Allan, 
because exercise would have accelerated the action of the poison ; 
and it was therefore certain that he arrived in Glasgow without 
arsenic, and that he left his lodgings without it, after changing 
his coat. 

Alluding next to the evidence of M. Thuau, his lordship said 
that, though it was obtained through an interpreter, he did not 
think, somehow or other, that they had got it satisfactorily. 
In going over the evidence of M. de Mean, the French Consul, 
in reference to that part of it in which he says—“ Sometime 
after L’Angelier had spoken of his relations with Miss Smith, 
I told him I thought he should go to Mr. Smith and tell him 


284 


The Lord Justice-Clerk’s Charge.. 


that he was in love with his daughter, and that he wanted to Lord 
marry her ”—his lordship observed, I don’t think there is any Justice-Clerk 
proof at all that the father was ever aware of his daughter’s 
intimacy with L’Angelier, although the mother may have known 
it; and, however painful it might have been, I think it would 
have been a satisfactory thing to have got her father’s state- 
ment, when, I have no doubt, it would have been seen that her 
connection was wholly unknown to him; for I cannot but 
think that he would have taken stronger measures than the 
poor mother did if he had known of it at all. L’Angelier, how- 
ever, told De Mean that Miss Smith had asked her father’s 
consent several times, and he refused it. De Mean went to 
Mr. Smith and told him of L’Angelier’s death. Next day, after 
being in Huggins’s office, and hearing “certain rumours,” he 
called on Miss Smith, mentioned L’Angelier’s death, and told 
her that it was said that he had come from the Bridge of Allan 
the day before his death in consequence of an invitation froin 
her. “Miss Smith told him that she was not aware that 
L’Angelier had been at the Bridge of Allan, and denied that she 
had given him an appointment for Sunday. She said she wrote 
him on the Friday evening, giving him an appointment for the 
following day, Saturday.” This, said his lordship, was a curious 
thing, and contrary to the theory of the Dean of Faculty as to 
the letters, that the first letter was intended for a meeting on 
Friday night, while she told the witness that she had given him 
an appointment for the Saturday. 

Mr. Youne—The appointment in the first letter, my lord, was 
for Thursday night; and it is the second letter that she was 
speaking of, as appointing the Saturday, and that squares 
exactly with the Dean’s theory. 

The Lorp Justice-CLuerK, on reading the following statement 
of this witness—‘“ She told me that L’Angelier had never entered 
into the house, meaning, as I understood, the house in Blyths- 
wood Square,” remarked—Now, really, gentlemen, the state- 
ment of the Dean of Faculty that this girl starts into a heroine 
at this moment is an exaggeration which I did not think to 
hear from my learned friend. Why, if you believe Christina 
Haggart, he did enter the house, and was a whole hour with 
her on one occasion, and this supposed instance of the indignant 
denial by an innocent girl is a falsehood. Whether, then, this 
is anything more than a mere denial to this gentleman, who, 
she may lave thought, had no right to question her as he did, 
you will not pay much attention to it, especially if you believe 
the fact that she had at least one long interview with him in 
the house. De Mean having spoken of L’Angelier’s sudden 
illness one Sunday afternoon in 1855, after having remained at 
the bottom of the stair of witness’s house with a female for 
some time, his lordship said—In the case of so extraordinary 


285 


Lord 


Madeleine Smith. 


and sudden a death as this you cannot lay aside these violent 


Tustice-Clerk j]/nesses, coming on so unexpectedly, and apparently reducing 


him very much at the time; I do not think that bile will account 
for it; it appears to indicate something internally wrong. In 
reference to L’Angelier’s discussion with De Mean about arsenic, 
in which “he maintained that it was possible to take it in 
small quantities without injury,” his lordship said, it was per- 
fectly obvious that if he ever practised taking that drug, 
which, notwithstanding his vapouring in Dundee about using 
it himself and giving it to horses, he still thought doubtful— 
if ever he did take it, it was only in small quantities—that 
he ever took it in such an overdose as was stated by the Dean 
in this case, 200 or 250 grains, there was no ground for 
supposing. After finishing De Mean’s evidence, he said—I have 
already said that I think the prisoner derives no benefit from 
her denial to De Mean, that she ever admitted the deceased into 


‘her father’s house; on the other hand, it is quite clear that 


this man had threatened not to give up her letters, and had 
made her aware that he would never allow her to marry another 
man. Therefore, there is probability in the supposition that 
despair and a feeling of revenge may have prompted her to 
endeavour to get rid of him; but her object was to get back 
her letters, and she could not do that, even by his death, so 
long as they were kept in the clerk’s desk in Huggins’s office. 
After reading the evidence of Mr. O’Neill, who made the plan 
of the house, he came to the Declaration of the prisoner. This, 
he said, was a very important document in every case, and 
especially in such a case as this, where the prisoner is in 
possession of arsenic, and where there are circumstances appear- 
ing to connect that party with the death of another. It 
certainly was of great importance in the case of a girl, who 
was a very unlikely person to be employed to purchase arsenic 
for killing rats, but who stated that she had bought it for that 
purpose. He then began to read the prisoner’s Declaration, 
and having proceeded to that part of it where she says— 
“L’Angelier was very unwell for some time, and had gone 
to the Bridge of Allan for his health, and he complained of 
sickness, but I have no idea what was the cause of it ”’—his 
lordship said he could not explain that statement in the same 
way as the Dean of Faculty—that she had heard of his being 
at the Bridge of Allan, after he had been there and come back. 
According to his reading, the passage meant that she knew he 
had been there for his health; and, if so, it contradicted the 
statement which she had made to M. de Mean. The statement of 
the prisoner as to her having given L’Angelier a cup of cocoa 
at her window between ten and eleven o’clock at night, which 
she had prepared herself, was very remarkable, but became 
more important still when taken in connection with her state- 


286 


The Lord Justice-Clerk’s Charge. 


ment further on in the Declaration, that she thought her 
using it must have been known to the servants, as the package 
containing it lay on the mantlepiece in her room, no one in 
the family using it except herself. Now, said his lordship, that 
poor girl’s young sister was brought in to say that she drank 
the cocoa at breakfast time, and that it was openly known in 
the family. There was a fire in her room, while she merely 
stated that she got hot water from the servants. In reference 
to her statement that she had been advised to use arsenic as 
a cosmetic, by washing the face, by a young lady, the daughter 
of an actress, while at school, he did not think there was 4 
particle of truth in it, neither had any newspaper been dis- 
covered in which there was a single word recommending the 
practice. Then the prisoner’s alleged object in writing the first 
letter to the Bridge of Allan was to have a meeting with 
L’Angelier, to tell him of her engagement to Mr. Minnoch ; but, 
if that was her only object, could she not have told him so in 
writing? On the supposition that that was her object, her 
language was most unaccountable. According to that, it was 
to clasp him to her bosom, and tell him she was engaged to 
another man—a very odd mode of making known her engage- 
rent. He then went over the evidence of Miss Jane Buchanan, 
who had accompanied the prisoner into Currie’s shop when 
she bought the arsenic. She stated that the shopman had sug- 
gested phosphorus, and the prisoner then said, “that they 
were leaving their town house, and that there would be no 
danger in laying the arsenic in the cellars.” In reference to 
the denial of Miss Guibtlei (now Mrs. Walcot) that she had 
ever advised the prisoner to use arsenic a8 a cosmetic, it was 
certainly very plausible that the daughter of an actress should 
have been fixed upon to recommend its use for that purpose ; 
but unfortunately the statement was disproved by the lady 
herself—a most respectable-looking person. The panel also 
said that she had read recommendations to this effect in 
certain publications. In reference to the latter assertion, his 
lordship remarked that not one af the publications produced 
contained anything of the kind. With regard to the young lady 
designated as the daughter of an actress, she was a very 
respectable lady of very prepossessing appearance, married to 
an English solicitor, and she distinctly declared that she had 
never had any conversation with the prisoner on the subject of 
cosmetics. William Murray, her father’s page, deponed to having 
been sent on one occasion for prussic acid by the prisoner, who 
told him that she wanted it for her hands. That, said his 
lordship, was another extraordinary use to which to apply the 
poison. Having adverted to the evidence of the druggists 
from whom the arsenic had been purchased by Miss Smith, 
he read that of William Campsie, the gardener at Rowaleyn, who 
287 


Lord 
Justice-Clerk 


Lord 
Justice-Clerk 


Madeleine Smith. 


said he never had got any arsenic from Miss Smith to kill 
rats, and who himself used a paste mixed with phosphorus for 
that purpose. His lordship said there was rather an odd cir- 
cumstance which struck him at the time this statement was 
made. He had no idea that the prisoner was intending to 
escape when she left her father’s house on the Thursday morn- 

ing after L’Angelier’s death. The Dean of Faculty had said 
that she was fleeing from the shame of exposure; but his lord- 
ship’s opinion was that, having made a statement already about 
getting arsenic for the gardener to kill rats, and knowing that 
if it. were discovered that he had got no arsenic from her for 
such a purpose, unpleasant consequences might follow, she 
wished to see him in order to make an arrangement by which 
that statement might be borne out. The steamer in which she 
went only sailed from Helensburgh to Gareloch and back; 

therefore, escape by it was nearly impossible; and, in point 
of fact, he did not believe she had any intention of attempting | 
it. He then came to the evidence of Mr. Minnoch, who, he 
said, was in a very painful position. After stating that the 
prisoner had accepted him on the 28th of January, his lordship 
read the affectionate letter which she had sent to that gentleman 
from the Bridge of Allan, and in which she expressed her warm 
attachment to him, rejoicing that their marriage day was fixed, 
and said that the occasion of her last long walk with him was 
the happiest day of her life, “and all that sort of thing.” His 
lordship then sqid there was a good deal of other evidence, 
but he found that he was utterly unable to finish it that even. 
ing. He did not think it right to go on with it in his present 
exhausted state, and he therefore proposed to reserve it until 
next day, when he would endeavour to be as brief as possible. 
He did not think it would be necessary to go over the corre- 
spondence: in detail, unless the jury especially wished it; and 
they would be prepared to let him know when he came to that 
as? of the case whether they considered it necessary for him 

to do so. 


288 


The Lord Justice-Clerk (The Right Hon. John Hope), 


Ninth Day—Thursday, oth July. 
The Court met at Nine o'clock. 


The Lorp Justice-CLerk resumed his charge. He said it was Lord 
a remarkable fact that not one of L’Angelier’s letters was Justice-Clerk 
found in the prisoner’s room, although she evidently had them 
all in her possession up to the 12th of February, when she told 
him that, if he brought her letters on the Thursday, she would 
return his along with his photograph. Next, in noting the 
irregularities connected with the collection of the letters, he 
said he did not think the panel had suffered any prejudice, 
however loose, irregular, and slovenly the whole proceedings 
were. Nor did it appear that much difficulty had arisen from 
the delay in identifying and marking the letters. One important 
letter was only dated Wednesday, while the post-mark was not 
legible, and it was only from the contents they could ascertain 
the date, if it could be ascertained; but most of the letters, 
even though they were not in their own envelopes, were of 
such a nature as to make the precise date of comparatively 
little consequence, unless the letters at the close, the dates of 
which were sufficiently ascertained from the contents. The 
evidence of Christina Haggart, his lordship next remarked, 
distinctly proved the fact of an interview between the parties 
in the house, and he thought the only conclusion to which the 
jury could come from all this ‘was, that the panel had ample 
facilities for admitting L’Angelier into the house, if she wished 
it; and therefore, if there was evidence otherwise, no practical 
difficulty lay in the way of his having an interview with her in 
the house on that Sunday evening—certainly there was nothing 
in the form or arrangement of the house to exclude his being 
there. That, however, would not supply the want of evidence 
of the fact ; and. if they did find that evidence, the mere facility 
would prove nothing. The witness never saw any colouring 
matter in the water in the prisoner’s basin, but really he did 
not think there was much in that, for he was disposed to look _ 
on it all as a false pretencé—an excuse got up to account for 
her possession of the arsenic. As to L’Angelier being at 
the house in Blythswood Square on the Sunday night, there 
was evidence by two witnesses that they saw L’Angelier after 
he left his lodgings on the Sunday night in that quarter of the 
town; and the important fact was that, having gone out well 


T 289 


Lord 
Justice-Clerk 


Madeleine Smith. 


at night, after he returned from the Bridge of Allan, he had gone 
in the direction of the panel’s residence. It was plain that he 
had been too early at nine o’clock. He had been too impatient 
to wait; and, finding he was too early, he went and endeavoured 
to find his acquaintance M‘Alester. When he came to the 
evidence of Mr. M‘Donald, of the Glasgow Post Office, with regard 
to the post-marks on the letters, his lordship said that now, 
after the remarks from Lord Campbell, and from himself, in 
a communication to the Postmaster-General, on the necessity 
for having the marks distinct, he hoped this would be the last 
occasion on which the post-marks would be so carelessly 
impressed as they had been, and that the attention of the Post 
Office authorities would be still more directed to a matter of 
such great importance. In Miss Perry's evidence mention was 
made of a letter written by L’Angelier to her, in which he says— 
“T received a letter too late to enable me to see some one.” 
That he alluded to the panel no one, looking to her Declaration, 
could doubt. That, of course, plainly was the first letter sent 
to him in his absence. He did not start for Glasgow on receiving 
it, because he got it too late to enable him to keep his appoint- 
ment. The letter which actually brought him to Glasgow was 
also too late, if it referred to Saturday night; but it was not 
surprising that, on receiving this second letter, couched in such 
urgent terms, and go passionately imploring him to come, that 
she might clasp him to her bosom—it was not surprising that 
he should immediately start for Glasgow on receiving it, even 
although he understood the appointment to be for Saturday 
night, and knew that he was again too late. Miss Perry, and 
her sister, Mrs. Towers, both spoke of L’Angelier having 
remarked that ‘he was made ill by the cocoa and coffee, Miss 
Perry said, from the prisoner. That was good, competent 
evidence, and the jury would judge of its weight. In Miss 
Perry’s evidence relating to her visit to Mr. Smith’s house after 
L’Angelier’s death, his lordship directed attention to the ques- 
tion put to Miss Perry by Miss Smith, “Is there anything 
wrong?” as a very important piece of evidence. Why should 
Miss Smith suspect that there was anything wrong? She had 
not seen Miss Perry for a time, and there was nothing in the 
fact of her calling to suggest such a question. As to Miss 


. Perry’s reasons for recollecting the date of the illness on the 


19th, his lordship thought she had stated in her evidence very 
fair grounds for the recollection of that date. It is true, he 
continued, that this lady is exposed to the observation that 
she had encouraged a clandestine correspondence and engage- 
ment between these parties, had allowed the panel to visit her, 
and had written ; and certainly that was very strange conduct in 
& person of her station, respectably connected, and at her time 
of life, as she was not a young girl. But sometimes you have 
290 


The Lord Justice-Clerk’s Charge. 


seen that ladies of that time of life have a good deal of interest Lord 
in such matters, and this lady seems to have had a sort of Justice-Clerk 
pleasure in being a confidante in this affair. The question, 
however, was, did the evidence of Miss Perry and the others 
amount to more than giving rise to grave suspicions? The jury 
must remember that, although he was ill upon these occasions, 
and seemed to have ascribed his illness to the cocoa and coffee 
he got from the panel, there was no proof that his illness was 
really caused by arsenic upon either of these occasions. The 
symptoms corresponded with the effects of arsenical poisoning, 
but then so did many of the symptoms with bilious attack. And 
as there was no examination of the matter vomited from the 
stomach, they would have to consider whether they were 
warranted from his statement, however honestly made to Miss 
Perry, in holding that these attacks were caused by some poison- 
ous substance administered by the panel. It had not been shown 
that the panel was possessed of arsenic before the 19th. Any 
poisonous substances, however, would be comprehended in the 
charge. Arsenic she did buy on the 21st of February, before that 
second illness, and therefore the fact of her possession of 
arsenic before the second occasion, of course, gave much greater 
strength and point to his remark, that he did receive something 
from her which had made him ill upon the 22nd of February. 
Coming to the evidence for the defence, and referring to Mr. 
Pringle’s statement about L’Angelier’s pointing a counter-knife 
to his throat in Mr. Laird’s shop, his lordship said he should 
think, according to all one’s knowledge of human nature, that 
the man who talked in this way of suicide—of throwing himself 
over the Dean Bridge, and over the window of his bedroom, six 
storeys high—of drowning himself if he should be jilted, after, 
in reality, he had been jilted, was not a man very likely actually 
to commit suicide. The jury would consider whether all that 
was merely the mere vapouring of a loose, talkative man, fond 
of awakening interest in the minds of others about himself, or 
whether it afforded any indications that he was likely to commit 
suicide. With regard to L’Angelier’s statement to Mr. Ogilvie, 
assistant teller in the Dundee Bank, as to giving horses arsenic 
in France, that was a very odd story, too, for in most places 
on the Continent there were well-regulated posts, and it was 
nonsense to talk of a small quantity of arsenic making the 
horses long-winded, as it was only the long use of it in small | 
guantities which could produce any effect. He said to this 
man, “Oh, I take arsenic myself.” Evidently that was to keep 
up the truth of his vapouring story, and to remove the force of 
Mr. Ogilvie’s remark about arsenic being dangerous. That 
evidence was brought forward in order to support the notion 
that the deceased poisoned himself with arsenic, but he did not 
think it had much bearing upon the matter. Unless they were 
291 


Madeleine Smith. 


Lord satisfied that he took up and had a purpose of suicide in his 
Tustice-Clerk mind, his vapouring about it was of no consequence. No doubt 
it did not lie upon the prisoner to show that the deceased 
poisoned himeelf; it was enough that she satisfied the jury that 
it was not proved that it was she who poisoned him. But it 
was certainly a very unlikely thing that L’Angelier, after coming 
to Glasgow to see her, should have poisoned himself in the street, 
nobody knew where, and that he carried about with him such a 
quantity of the white powder and swallowed it. He thought, 
therefore, the case stood far better for the prisoner to take her 
stand on the point that the guilt could not be brought home 
to her, which was really the point on which the matter turned. 
Ris lordship thought it was not unlikely that L’Angelier had 
talked to the panel about the use of arsenic as a cosmetic, and 
this may have led her to use it; or it may, on the other hand, 
have suggested this excuse to her. The question was, whether 
there was anything in the whole character of the deceased which 
looked like a person who was in any danger of committing 
, suicide; or whether he was not a man of far too much levity 
to do so. From all they knew of him, he believed he was not 
the man to do so. There seemed to be no reason for any depres- 
sion of spirits on his part, so far as his worldly circumstances 
were concerned. He had a salary of £100 a year—was better 
off than he had ever been in his life before, and had every 
reason to congratulate himself, instead of being cast down or 
denressed. Dr. Girdwood, Falkirk, deponed to having been 
applied to by several parties for arsenic to use as a cosmetic 
after an article had appeared in Chambers’s Journal on the 
subject. That many silly women, after seeing things talked 
about in the newspapers, may have tried whether arsenic would 
improve their complexions might be true enough; but he did 
not think that would satisfy them that that was the object of 
the prisoner in purchasing it. His lordship then referred to 
the evidence of Dr. Adam and the other druggists whose shops 
he was said to have visited on his way from Coatbridge to 
Glasgow. The stories told by them were certainly very odd. 
Mr. Ross had seen him at the inn eat a quantity of roast beef 
and drink some porter—he had walked with him all the way to 
Glasgow, conversed cheerfully on several subjects, and never 
went into any shop on the road. Were they to believe, in opposi- 
tion to this, that only 600 yards or 700 yards from the inn at 
Coatbridge he entered a druggist’s shop and swallowed 25 drops 
of laudanum? At Baillieston, again, wholly inconsistent with 
Ross’s statement, it was asserted that he went into another shop, 
bent with pain, and got 25 or 30 drops more of laudanum. His 
lordship thought there must be some mistake on the part of 
these people; their evidence, both as to the day and the man, 
was indistinct and indefinite. Miss Kirk said that a gentleman 


292 


The Lord Justice-Clerk’s Charge. 


like the photograph shown her came into her shop a little before Lord 
or after eight o’clock, and bought some medicine—she thought /ustice-Clerk 
® powder, but if that powder had been arsenic surely the woman 
would have remembered it. She was bound to write it down, and 
she must have known that. Dr. Paterson, of Leith, had 
described several cases of poisoning by arsenic which had come 
under his own observation among the girls employed at colour- 
works, and in‘ these cases, though the victims denied having 
taken the poison, they submitted to medical treatment just like 
any other patient. None of them, however, had desired a doctor 
to be called. Now, L’Angelier never objected to a doctor being 
sent for, and at last became urgent to see one. Dr. Lawrie, 
of Glasgow, stated that he had washed his face and hands in 
a basin into which half an ounce of arsenic had been thrown, 
and experienced no bad effects. That was just what might have 
been expected from a single application; but whether the con- 
tinued use of it in this way would produce any beneficial effect 
on the skin, either disagreeable or beneficial, was a totally 
different matter. Dr. Maclagan, of Edinburgh, also said that 
so little arsenic would be dissolved in cold water that washing 
in it would not likely have any appreciable effect. He stated 
also that the organic matter in cocoa or coffee would lessen, 
instead of augmenting, its dissolving power; a considerable 
quantity would, however, be dissolved if it were boiled in these 
vehicles. His lordship next directed attention to the corre 
spondence. On this point he observed—The Lord Advocate 
states his theory of the case thus—the panel became acquainted 
with L’Angelier, the acquaintance went on very rapidly, and 
ended in an engagement; they corresponded frequently 
and clandestinely ; on the 6th May, 1856, he got possession of 
her person; the engagement was discontinued once or twice; 
the family did not know of it, and the letters continued on her 
part in the same terms of passionate love ror a very consider 
able time—I say passionate love, because, unhappily, they are 
written without any sense of decency, and in most licentious 
terms. After a certain time Mr. Minnoch’s attentions to the 
girl becume very marked ; she saw there was no chance of marry- 
ing L’Angelier even if she continued to like him sufficiently ; 
but the other was certainly a most desirable marriage for her 
to make. The Lord Advocate says that her object then was to 
extricate herself from tho position in which she was placed ; 
that she first makes an appeal to L’Angelier to give up her 
letters; she writes then very coldly, and says the attachment 
has ceased on her part, and she thinks on his part also ; certainly 
there was no reason to suppose that, though he frequently 
blamed her conduct; but that is what she states. The Lord 
Advocate says that by these cold letters she was trying to make 
him give her up and to give up her letters. She failed in that. 


293 


Lord 
Justice-Clerk 


Madeleine Smith. 


The Lord Advocate says that then she proceeded to write in 
as warm tones as ever, and to talk of their embraces, as she 
had done ‘before. She does not succeed by that tone, and then 
she receives him, as he says must be inferred and is proved, 
into her house for the purpose of gaining her object. She has 
to leave Glasgow, and he, too, has to go to Edinburgh. She 
returns, and she understands that he returned, and she writes 
letters for the purpose of having interviews with him. The Lord 
Advocate says that, on the former occasion, when she failed 
in getting the letters, out of resentment she had administered 
the poison to him on the 19th and 22nd; and, aware that no 
allurements, or enticements, or fascinations from her would 
get the letters from him, she had prepared for the interview 
which she had expected on the 22nd March by another purchase 
of arsenic, and with the intention to poison him. The Lord 
Advocate’s theory and statement is that, the interview having 
taken place, she did accordingly administer that dose of arsenic, 
from which, howsoever administered, he died. All this, on the 
other hand, is treated as a totally incredible supposition by the 
counsel for the prisoner. It is said that she could not have had 
such a purpose—that it is something too monstrous to believe 
or inquire into, even. Gentlemen, it is very difficult to say 
what might not occur to the exasperated feelings of a female who 
had been placed in the situation in which this woman was placed. 
And there it is that the correspondence comes to be of much 
importance in ascertaining what sort of feelings this girl 
cherished, and what state of mind and disposition she was of, 
and whether there is any trace of moral sense or propriety to 
be found in her letters, or whether they do not exhibit such a 
degree of ill-regulated, disorderly, distempered, licentious feelings 
as to show that this is a person quite capable of cherishing any 
object to avoid disgrace and exposure, and of taking any revenge 
which such treatment might excite in the mind of a woman driven 
nearly to madness, as she says she was. I shall not read many 
of these letters, but there are some characteristics of the char- 
acter of the panel—displaying her mind and feelings—which, 
I think, it is of importance to place before you, as showing the 
progress of this attachment and the manner in which it was 
carried on by her. It is very curious that the first letter is 
written by her; and L’Angelier replied as you might expect 
® young man of his temperament to do. His lordship then 
read one of the letters, ending with “fond embraces, kisses,” 
&c., remarking that it seemed that the girl’s ill-regulated pas- 
sions broke out months before any sexual intercourse had taken 
place; the expressions used in that and following letters 
were most singular, as passing between two unmarried people. 
His lordship here read part of the letter of 30th April, 1856— 
“My own, my beloved Emile—I wrote you on Sunday night 


294 


The Lord Justice-Clerk’s Charge. 


for you to get my note on your birthday (to-day), but I could Lord 


not get it posted. Disappointment it was to me; but ‘ better 
late than never.’ My beloved, may you have many happy 
returns of the day. . . . P. has not been a night in town 
for some time, but the first night he is off I shall see you. 
We shall spend an hour of bliss. There shall be no risk ; only 
C. H. shall know. . . . Only fancy, in turning out an old 
box yesterday, I got an old notebook three years old, and in 
going over it many of the pages had the name L’Angelier on 
them. I did not. think I had been so fond of my darling 
then. I put it in the fire, as there are many names in it I 
would not like to see beside yours, my own, sweet, darling 
husband. Now, this is a very long letter to-night. I must 
conclude with a fond, fond embrace, a sweet kiss. 1 wish it 
were to be given, not sent. Kindest, warmest love to you, my 
husband dear. A kiss. Another; oh, to be in thy embrace, my 
sweet Emile. Love again to thee, from thy very fond, thy 
loving and ever devoted Mini, thine—Own Wife.” 

Why, what else could be expected? It may well be asked 
what else did she intend or wish than sexual intercourse, after 
thus provoking and inviting it? We heard, said his lordship, 
a good deal said by the Dean of Faculty as to the character 
of this panel; we have no evidence on the subject except what 
these letters exhibit, and no witness to character was brought ; 
but certainly these letters show as extraordinary a frame of 
mind and as unhallowed a passion as perhaps ever appeared in 
a Court of Justice. Can you be surprised, after such letters as 
those of the 29th /pril and 3rd May, that on the 6th of May, 
three days afterwards, he got possession of her person? On the 
7th of May she writes to him, and in that letter is there the 
slightest appearance of grief or remorse? None whatever. It 
ia the letter of a girl rejoicing in what had passed, and alluding 
to it, in one passage in particular, in terms which I will not 
read, for perhaps they were never previously committed to 
paper as having passed between @ man and a woman. What 
passed must have passed out of doors, not in the house, and 
she talks of the act as hers as much as his. His lordship here 
read the letter and observed—This is a letter from a girl, 
written at five in the morning, just after she had submitted to 
his embraces; can you conceive or picture any worse state of 
mind that this letter exhibits? In other letters she uses the 
word “love” underscored, showing clearly what she meant by 
it; and in one letter she alludes to a most disgusting and 
revolting scene between them which one would have thought 
only a common prostitute could have been a party to, and 
exhibiting a state of mind most lamentable to think of. Certainly 
such a sentence was probably never before penned by a female 
to a man. There are many other letters, all written in the same 


295 


Justice-Clerk 


Madeleine Smith. 


Lord strain, and certainly exhibiting a state of mind which it was 
Justice-Clerk fearful to contemplate. If, while he was correcting her bad 
habits, he was, as is said, undermining her principles; still, 
so far as these letters go, they certainly prove that she was in 
a most depraved state of mind. Of that there can be no 
doubt. Probably it was not the less so, if he had been 
endeavouring to undermine her principles and virtue. Of that, 
however, there is no proof whatever—not the slightest. These 
letters go on in the same way until November and December. 
Afterwards they are very much in the same style—all alluding 
to meetings which they had had, and to arrangements for 
meetings in the future, although of these meetings we had no 
proof beyond the letters, until the time that Christina Haggart 
lets him in. The same strain of passionate love continues until 
the 2nd of February, when L’Angelier became jealous of the 
attentions which were being shown her by Minnoch, and returns 
her letter. Then, indeed, she writes in a very different strain, 
and asks the engagement to be broken off, to which he will not 
consent, and she appeals to him to return the letters—a request 
with which he will not comply; and finally, returns to her old 
style, signing herself as his “beloved.” And, with respect to 
this, the Lord Advocate says, she wrote thus for the purpose 
of luring him back to her arms, in order that she might get 
her letters back, and go accomplish the purpose which she had 
in vain endeavoured to achieve by the first means she adopted. 
Coming down to the closing letters of February and March, his 
lordship said he did not think it was very material what the 
Lord Advocate insisted upon, as to the dates of the letters, in 
which she says she must give him a loaf of bread; still it 
must be borne in mind that her allusion to his illness confirms 
the statement which he makes about the same time to one of 
the witnesses—that he had become ill in the presence of a lady. 
Following the course of the letters, we come to the first one 
addressed to L’Angelier from the Bridge of Allan, in which she 
employs the same terms of affection, and to that of the 16th, 
in which she addressed Mr. Minnoch as “ My Dear William,” 
but still fails to obtain from L’Angelier, by the new policy on 
which she has entered, the return of her letters. That she is, 
then, acting a part there can be no doubt. I think that is as 
clear as letters can establish. On the 16th she writes to 
Minnoch—“ My Dearest William,” and these expressions here 
happen at the time the arrangements are going on for her 
marriage ; and in the meantime she gets no return of her letters, 
and she makes no excuses about that ; and there is a letter 
written which we have seen came to his lodgings on the evening 
of Thursday. Then he was very anxious to get his letters, and 
on the morning of the 19th he went to the Bridge of Allan, 
and comes into Stirling to see if the letter was there, but, finding 


296 


The Lord Justice-Clerk’s Charge. 


there ie none, he returns in the afternoon to the Bridge of Allan. Lord 
That letter is the one that reached him at Stirling next morning. Justice-Clerk 
And then she wrote to him again, and that was the letter 
plainly that she wrote, addressed to him at Franklin Place. It 
was posted on the 21st March, deliverable that night, and the 
envelope in which it was enclosed by Thuau bears the date of 
21st March, and must have been posted between 2.15 and 6 p.m., 
when the post left Glasgow and reached the Bridge of Allan 
early in the morning of the 22nd. (Reads the letter again.) 
She says in her Declaration that the object of writing was to 
tell him that she was engaged to Minnoch. I put to you yester- 
day what a marvellous statement she makes. To want to be 
clasped to the heart of a man to whom she was to say “I am 
engaged to another.” His lordship remarked on the fact that 
in the letter in which the prisoner said she would give the 
deceased a loaf of bread the next time he came, she said she 
would give him it before he went “out”—showing that it 
was intended he should be let into the house. Well, then, that 
letter brought him to town. I think, said his lordship, upon 
the evidence that I have read to you, that there can be no doubt 
of that. It is the conviction which flashed on Stevenson’s mind 
the moment the letter was found. In the ordinary matters of 
life, when you find the man came to town for the purpose of 
getting a meeting, you may come to the conclusion that they 
did meet; but, observe, that becomes a very serious inference 
indeed to draw in a case where you are led to suppose that 
there was an administration of poison, and death resulting 
therefrom. It may be a very natural inference looking at 
the thing morally. None of you can doubt that she waited for 
him again, and if she waited the second night, after her first 
letter, it was not surprising that she would look out for an 
interview on the second night after the second letter. 

The Duan or Facutry—She did not wait the second night 
after the first letter. She waited only one night. 

The Lorp Justicz-Cierx—I am sure the jury understood what 
I meant. 

The Dsan or Facuttr—It is the turning point of the case, 
because the slightest difference of expression may convey & 
different meaning. 

The Lorp Justice-Cuarzc—She says—“I shall wait again 
to-morrow night, same hour and arrangement.” And I say 
there is no doubt—but it is a matter for the jury to consider— 
that after writing this letter he might expect she would wait 
another night—that is the observation I made, and therefore 
it was very natural that he should go to see her that Sunday 
night. But, as I said to you, this in an inference only. If you 
think it such a just and satisfactory inference that you can 
rest your verdict upon it, it is quite competent for you to draw 


297 


Lord 
Justice-Clerk 


Madeleine Smith. 


such an inference from such letters as these, and from the 
conduct of the man coming to Glasgow for the purpose of seeing 
her, for it is plain that that was his object in coming to 
Glasgow. It is sufficiently proved that he went out immediately 
after he got some tea and toast, and had changed his coat. 
But then, gentlemen, in drawing an inference, you must always 
look to the important character of the inference which you are 
asked to draw. If this had been an appointment about business, 
and you found that a man came to Glasgow for the purpose 
of seeing another upon business, and that he went out for that 
purpose, having no other object in coming to Glasgow, you 
would probably scout the notion of the person whom he had 
gone to meet saying, “I never saw or heard of him that day” ; 
but the inference which you are asked to draw is this, namely, 
that they met upon that night, where the fact of their meeting 
is the foundation of a charge of murder. You must feel, 
therefore, that the drawing of an inference in the ordinary 
matters of civil business, or in the actual intercourse of mutual 
friends, is one thing, and the inference from the fact that he 
came to Glasgow, that they did meet, and that, therefore, the 
poison was administered to him by her at that time, is another, 
and a most enormous jump in the category of inferences. Now, 
the question for you to put to yourselves is this—Can you 
now, with satisfaction to your own minds, come to the con- 
clusion that they did meet on that occasion, the result being, . 
and the object of coming to that conclusion being, to fix down 
upon her the administration of the arsenic by which he died? 
Now, then, gentlemen, let us take the three charges in the 
indictment. The first charge is that she administered poison 
on the 19th or 20th February, 1857. Probably you will be of 
opinion, on the evidence of Miss Perry and others, that he did 
see her on that occasion, as well as on the 22nd; but, as to the 
19th, she was not proved to have had arsenic or any other poison 
in her possession; and what I attach very great importance to 
is, that there is no medical testimony, by analysis of the matter 
vomited, that that illness did proceed from the administration 
of arsenic. If the doctor had examined the matter vomited, 
and said there was certainly arsenic here, I am afraid the 
case would have been very strong indeed against her, as having 
given him coffee or something immediately before his illness 
on that occasion. But it is not proved that the illness arose 
from the administration of poison; arsenic she had not, and 
there is no proof of her having possessed anything else 
deleterious. It is not even proved that there was oxalic acid in 
the house for cleaning boot-tops, or such purposes. Therefore, 
I have no hesitation in telling you that that charge has failed. 
He had thrice before been seized with illnesses of this descrip- 
tion—at M. de Mean’s, at Mr. Roberts’, and in his own lodgings, 


298 


‘The Lord Justice-Clerk’s Charge. 


as spoken to one by one of the Bairds—which are not alleged Lord 
to have been caused by arsenic. And therefore I have no hesita- Justice-Clerk 
tion in telling you as to that, that I think that charge has 
failed. I think it is my duty to tell you, as a judge, that on 
that charge you should find her not guilty. But we are in a 
very different situation as to the illness of the 22nd and morning 
of the 23rd. In one respect it is not proved to be from the 
administration of any deleterious substance; and perhaps you 
may think it safer not to hold, in such a case as that, that it 
was the result of the administration of arsenic or of any 
poisonous substance. But what would connect the prisoner 
with that is, I think, much stronger—that is to say, connect her 
with a meeting with him that night. If you should think 
you can acquit her of the first, and that there is too much doubt 
to find the second proved, why, then, you will observe how 
much that weakens all the theories that may be raised on the 
correspondence of a purpose and a desire of revenge, or of some- 
thing arising from the change of tone, and a desire to allure 
him again to her embraces and her fascinations, which cannot 
be accounted for except on this supposition; in that view 
undoubtedly the foundation of the case is very much shaken, 
and will not lead you to suppose that the purpose of murder 
was cherished on the 22nd. Then as to the charge of murder, 
gentlemen, the point for you to consider—surrounded as the 
panel is with grave suspicion, with everything that seems to 
militate against the notion of innocence, upon any theory that 
has been propounded to you—is this, are you prepared to say 
that you find an interview with the deceased, on the night of 
the 22nd March, proved against her? She had arsenic before 
the illness of the 22nd February, and I think you will consider 
that all the excuses which she made about having arsenic are 
just as groundless as those which she stated to the apothecaries. 
She bought arsenic again on the 6th, and certainly it is a very odd 
thing that she should buy more arsenic after she came back 
to Glasgow on the 18th of March. It is true she says she washed 
her hands with the whole ounce that she bought before she 
went to the Bridge of Allan; but, then, if you take that view of 
her disposal of the arsenic, it would be on the supposition that 
she truly used it for this purpose. She has arsenic before the 
22nd, and that is a dreadful fact, if you are quite satisfied that 
she did not get it and use it for the purpose of washing her 
hands and face. It may create the greatest reluctance in your 
mind to take any other view of the matter than that she was 
guilty of administering it somehow, though the place where 
may not be made out, or the precise time of the interview. 
But, on the other hand, you must keep in view that arsenic 
could only be administered by her if an interview took place 
with L’Angelier ; and that interview, though it may be the result 


299 


Madeleine Smith. 7 


Lord of an inference that may satisfy you morally that it did take 
Justice-Clerk place, still rests upon an inference alone; and that inference is 
to be the ground, and must be the ground, on which a verdict 
of guilty is to rest. Gentlemen, you will see, therefore, the 
necessity of great caution and jealousy in dealing with an 
inference which you may draw from this. You may be perfectly 
satisfied that L’Angelier did not commit suicide, and, of course, 
it is necessary for you to be satisfied of that before you could 
find that anybody administered arsenic to him. Probably none 
of you will think for a moment that he went out that night, 
and that without seeing her, and without knowing what she 
wanted to see him about if they had met, that he swallowed 
above 200 grains of arsenic on the street, and that he was 
carrying it about with him. Probably you will discard that 
altogether, though it is very important, no doubt, if you come 
to the conclusion that he did not swallow arsenic; yet, on the 
other hand, gentlemen, keep in view that that will not of itself 
establish that the prisoner administered it. The matter may 
remain most mysterious—wholly unexplained; you may not be 
able to account for it on any other supposition; but still that 
supposition or inference may not be a ground on which you 
can safely and satisfactorily rest your verdict against the panel. 
Now, then, gentlemen, I leave you to consider the case with 
reference to the views that are raised upon this correspondence. 
I don’t think you will consider it so unlikely as was supposed 
that this girl, after writing such letters, may have been capable 
of cherishing such a purpose. But still, although you may take 
such a view of her character, it is but a supposition that she 
cherished this murderous purpose—the last conclusion, of course, 
that you ought to come to merely on supposition, and inference, 
and observation, upon this varying and wavering correspondence 
of a girl in the circumstances in which she was placed. It 
receives more importance, no doubt, when you find the purchase 
of arsenic just before she expected, or just at the time she 
expected, L’Angelier. But still these are but suppositions— 
these are but suspicions. Now, the great and invaluable use of 
a jury, after they direct their minds seriously to the case with 
the attention you have done, is to separate firmly—firmly and 
clearly in their own minds—suspicion from evidence. I don’t 
say that inferences may not competently be drawn; but I have 
already warned you as to inferences which may be drawn in the 
ordinary matters of civil life, and those which may be drawn 
in such a case as this; and, therefore, if you cannot say we 
find here satisfactory evidence of this meeting, and that the 
poison must have been administered by her at a meeting— 
whatever may be your suspicion, however heavy the weight 
and load of suspicion is against her, and however you may have 
to struggle to get rid of it, you perform the best and bounden 
300 


The Lord Justice-Clerk’s Charge. 


duty as a jury to separate suspicion from truth, and to proceed Lord 
upon nothing that you do not find established in evidence againat Justice-Clerk 
her. I am quite satisfied that whatever verdict you may give, 
after the attention which you have bestowed upon this case, 
will be the best approximation to truth at which we could 
arrive. But let me say also, on the other hand, as I said at 

the outset, that of the evidence you are the best judges, not 
only in point of law, but in point of fact; and you may be 
perfectly confident that, if you return a verdict satisfactory 

to yourselves against the prisoner, you need not fear any con- 
sequences from any future, or imagined, or fancied discovery, 
whick may take place. You have done your duty under 
your oaths, under God, and to your country, and may feel 
satisfied that remorse you never can have. 


The Lord Justice-Clerk having concluded his charge, the jury 
retired into an adjoining room to consider their verdict. 

The jury having returned into Court, they all answered to 
their names, and gave in the following verdict :— 


“The jury find the panel not guilty of the first charge in 
the indictment by @ majority; of the second charge not proven; 
and by a majority find the third charge also not proven.” 


The Court assoilzied the panel simpliciter, and dismissed 
her from the bar. 

The jury then received the thanks of the Court for the great 
trouble and attention they had paid to the case, and were 
informed that, in consequence of the length of their attendance, 
each of them would be held as entitled to be excused from 
serving as jurymen before the Court for five years to come; 
and further, that a recommendation would be given to the 
Sheriffs of the respective districts to excuse them from serving 
as such in all criminal cases before their Courts for the same 
period. 


301 


oe? ei ona toe 


£ tpt dao 


7 eich? = 
a ets Ovo. ' 
ePoi i...“ € aoe A 
we Re ee ee 
tial.” Gye) Hie were 
= a 
' SS 


ee ee nS Farts ae papcee’ or 
ie a ae ga e erie AEE | ee ve ~~ aii 7 
pins te De beats" | lee. Sees tt 

= ie 5 Ned, zheng at . 


‘ ie pert; A cinta ahiealins 


i ye ee ty 30 ( Uiertegzapeg? Kee 
. : 7 
» of 
= Tia" 
we? 
2 vy 
; : 
oo 
t 
4 
\ 


~¥ <= a 


APPENDICES. 


APPENDIX I. 


CORRESPONDENCE 
Referred to on page 147. 


Now 


Envelope addressed—‘‘ Emile L’Angelier, Esqr. 10 Bothwell 
Street, Glasgow.” 


[Lerrer. ] 


My Dear Emile,—I do not feel as if I were writing you for the 
first time. Though our intercourse has been very short, yet we 
have become as familiar friends. May we long continue so. 
And ere lang may you be a friend of Papa’s is my most ernest 
desire. We feel it rather dull here after the excitement of a 
Town’s Life. But then we have much more time to devote to 
stedy and improvement. I often wish you were near us, we 
could take such charming walks. One enjoys walking with a - 
pleasant companion, and where could we find one equal to 
yourself ? 

I am trying to break myself off all my very bad habits, it is you 
I have to thank for this, which I do sincerely from my _ heart. 
Your flower is fading. 


‘““T never cast a flower away, 
The gift of one who cared for me 
A little flower, a faded flower, 
But it was done reluctantly.” 


I wish I understood Botany for your sake, as 1 might send 
you some specimens of moss. But alas! I know nothing of that 
study. We shall be in Town next week. We are going to the 
Ball on the 20th of this month, so we will be several times in 
Glasgow before that. Papa and Mama are not going to Town 
next Sunday. So of course you do not come to Row. We shall 
not expect you. Bessie desires me to remember her to you. 
Write on Wednesday or Thursday. I must now say adieu. 
With kind love, believe me, your very sincerely, 

MADELEINE. 


*The letters throughout are represented by odd numbers, the even numbers 
ER ed tar to pei 4 of the originals officially made for purposes of the trial. 


U 395 


Madeleine Smith. 


No. 3. 


Envelope addressed—‘‘ Emile L’Angelier, Esq., 10 Bothwell 
Street, Glasgow.” 


[Posted at Sub-office, of which name illegible, and came through 
the Helensburgh Post-office to Glasgow; dated at Helensburgh 3rd 
April, 1855; arrived at Glasgow same day between 1 and 2 p.m.] 


[Lerrer. ] 


My Dear Emile,—Many thanks for your last kind epistle. We 
are to be ‘in town to-morrow (Wednesday). Bessie said I was not 
to let you know. But I must tell you why! Well, some friend 
was kind enough to tell papa that you were in the habit of walking 
with us. Papa was very angry with me for walking with a 
Gentleman unknown to him. I told him he had been introduced, 
and I saw no harm in it. Bessie joins with Papa and blames me for 
the whole affair. She does not know I am writing you, so dont 
mention it. We are to call at our old quarters in the Square on 
Wednesday about quarter past 12 o’c. So if you could be in Mr. 
M‘Call’s Lodgings—see us come out of Mrs. Ramsay’s—come after 
us—say you are astonished to see us in Town without letting you 
know—-and we shall see how Bessie acts. She says she is not going 
to write you. We are to be in Town all night. We are to be with 
Mrs. Anderson. Rest assured I shall not mention to any one that 
you have written me. I know from experience that the world is not 
lenient in its observations. But I don’t care for the world’s remarks 
so long as my own heart tells me I am doing nothing wrong. Only 
if the day is fine expect us to-morrow. Not a word of this letter. 
Adieu till we meet. Believe me, yours most sincerely, 

MADELEINE. 


No. 5. 


Envelope addressed—‘‘ Emile L’Angelier, Esq. 
Botanical Gardens, Glasgow.” 


Clark, Esq., 


[Posted at Row, Helensburgh post-mark, 18th April, 1855; reached 
Glasgow 6.45 p.m. same day; deliverable next morning by first 
delivery, which commences at 1.15 a.m.] 


My Dear Emile,—I now perform the promise I made in parting 
to write you soon. We are to be in Glasgow to-morrow (Thursday). 
But as my time shall not be at my own disposal, I cannot fix any 
time to see you. Chance may throw you in my way. 


306 


Appendix I, 


I think you will agree with me in what I intend proposing, viz., 
That for the present the correspondence had better stop. I know 
your good feeling will not take this unkind, it is meant quite the 
reverse. By continuing to correspond harm may arise. In dis- 
continuing it nothing can be said. It would have afforded me great 
pleasure to have placed your name on— 


[The Lorp Apvocate then tendered the production No. 7 of 
inventory to be read. 

The Dean or Facutty—The production is described as “ a 
letter or writing, or copy of a letter or writing.”’ Under 
which description is it tendered ? 

The Lorv ApvocaTz—It is tendered as a writing in the 
handwriting of the deceased, and found in his repositories. 
It does not profess to have been sent. 

The Dean or Facutty—We do not know that it ever was 
intended to be sent. We know that the deceased was deter- 
mined never to return the panel’s letters. In this he must 
have had some object. What that was has not indeed been 
disclosed ; but this may have been written in furtherance of 
that object. It is written in the handwriting of the deceased, 
and the date, instead of being at the commencement in the 
regular way, is down in the middle of the writing. 

The Lorp Apvocate—Whether it has been sent or not we 
cannot tell, as we have no counterpart; but can it be said not 
to be material in an inquiry into the death of the deceased, 
that such a document was found in his repositories? 

The Dean or Facutty—I do not understand what is meant 
by ‘‘ inquiry into the death of the deceased.’’ This is a trial 
for murder. 

The following opinions were delivered :— 

The Lorp Justicz-Ciarx—I wish to give no opinion as to 
any other writing found in the repositories of the deceased. 


‘This appears to be a draft of what was intended to be 


a 


addressed to the panel, and which may have been so addressed, 
although there is no evidence that it was ever sent. It is 
plainly a scroll or draft. It is incomplete, and parts are 
scored out. In what light, then, can it be tendered? It 
bears to be addressed to the prisoner, but there is no proof 
that it was ever sent; still less is there any proof that she ever 
received it, or saw the observations there made upon herself. 
It may have been merely the outpouring of momentary 
exasperation. On thinking more of the subject, the writer 
may have thought it unjust and groundless, and withdrawn 
the next moment what he had written in a hasty fit of passion. 
It is not a proper narrative or statement, and ought not to 
be admitted in evidence. 
307 


; Madeleine Smith. 


Lord Ivory—I cannot say that I differ, although I have 
some hesitation. Had the letter been nearer in point of time 
to the res geste, my opinion might have been otherwise ; but 
I see no evidence of any connection of the prisoner with this 
document, and I think the safest course is not to receive it. 
It really amounts to no more than this, that, in the reposi- 
tories of the deceased were found some irregular memoranda, 
the purpose and purport of which we do not know. 

Lord Hanpysipp—lI agree. I also would confine myself to 
the document immediately before us. It is not a copy of a 
letter addressed to the panel. It does not bear to be so, and, 
externally, it appears to be a scroll of what may have been 
intended to be addressed after being copied over, but it goes 
no further. There is no endorsation bearing that it was a 
copy of what had been addressed to the prisoner, and there is 
no particular date, nor does it bear to be a reply to a letter 
from the prisoner of any particular date. It is a mere memo- 
randum or scroll. There is no evidence that it ever was sent, 
or that the mind of the writer continued such as this docu- 
ment would lead us to suppose it was when it was written. 

The objection was therefore sustained, and the document 
rejected. } 


No. 7. 
{Lerren on Copy Lerrer. ] 
(Date.) 


Glasgow, 10 Bothwell Street, 
19th July, °55. 

In the first place, I did not deserve to be treated as you have 
done. How you astonish me by writing such a note without con- 
descending to explain the reasons why your father refuses his consent. 
He must. have reasons, and I am not allowed to clare myself of 
accusations. 

I should have written you before, but I preferred awaiting untill 
I got over surprit> your last letter caused me, and also to be able 
to write you in a calm and a collected manner, free from any ani- 
mosity whatever. 

Never, dear Madeleine, could I have believed you were capable 
of such conduct. I thought and helieved you unfit for such a step. 
I believed you true to your word and to your honour. I will put 
questions to you which answer to yourself. What would you think 
if even one of your servants had played with any one’s affections 
as you have done, or what would you say to hear that any lady 
friends had done what you have—or what am I to (think) of you 

308 


Appendix I. 


now? What is your opinion of your own self after those solemn 
vows you uttered and wrote to me. Shew my letters to any one, 
Madeleine, I don’t care who, and «if any find that I mislead you I 
will free you from all blame. I warned you repeatedly not to be 
rash in your engagement and vows to me, but you persisted in that 
false and deceitful flirtation, playing with affections which you knew 
to be pure and undivided, and knowing at the same time that at a 
word from your father you would break all your engagement. 

You have deceived your father as you have deceived me. You 
never told him how solemuly you bound j urself to me, or if you 
had, for the honour of his daughter he could not have asked to break 
of an engagement as ours. Madeleine, you have truly acted wrong. 
May this be a lesson to you never to trifie with any again. I wish 
you every happiness. I shall be truly happy to hear that you are 
happy with another. You desire and now you are at liberty to 
recognise me or cut me just as you wish—but I give you my word of 
honour I shall act always as a Gentleman towards you. We may 
meet yet, as my intentions of going to Lima are now at an end. I 
would have gone for your sake. Yes, I would have sacrificed all to 
have you with me, and to leave Glasgow and your friends you de- 
tested so very much. Think what your father would say if I sent 
him your letters for 4 perusal. Do you think he could sanction your 
breaking your promises. No, Madeleine, I leave your conscience to 
speak for itself. 

I fiatter myself he can only accuse me of a want of fortune. 
But he must remember he too had to begin the world with dark 
clouds round him. 

I cannot put it into my mind that yet you are at the bottom of 
ali this. 


No. 9. 


Envelope addressed—‘‘ Emile L’Angelier, Esq., No. 10 Bothwell 
Street, Glasgow.” 

Wednesday. 
My dearest own Emile,—Another letter 80 soon. You will be 
astonished I am sure. But I find that I must go from home. B. 
has changed her mind and won’t go—so I must. My brother John, 
a Lady from London, and myself are to take a trip, so I have got 
the charge of them. This is the short tour I propose. (I must be 
back on Friday, as I have an engagement for dinner.) We go in our 
own carriage to Luss, get the steamer there to Inversnaid, to Loch 
Katrine, to the Trossachs, to Callender, to Bridge of Allan. I shall 
stay there all night. Next morning I shall go to Stirling, and from 
there I shall go to Glasgow on Friday. I rather think I shail only 
have time to catch the train at G. for Greenock. If I find I have 
any time I shall let you know. I wish I could just see you for a 


309 


Madeleine Smith. 


second. But I fear I shall not have this pleasure. I should so wish 
to have you with me on this short trip, but perhaps some day we 
may go over the same ground together. That would be delightful, 
would it not, dearest? All will end well yet, I am sure. It will 
neither be my fault or yours if we do not become happy some day. 
You must excuse this short note. I did not like to disappoint you. 
I shall write you on Saturday to tell you of my safe arrival home. 
Adieu, my sweetest, dearest Emile, and believe me your own true 
Mint. 


P.S.—I passed such a plesant hour last evening—reading all your 
dear kind letters. I began with that little note—which you gave to 
Bessie. I can not fancy how I became the possessor of it. I often 
thank God that you gave us that note, or I should not have known 
you. But I should have come to know you. I am sure, beloved 
Emile, ever since I became acquainted with you I have felt much 
happier than I did before. I love you with my whole heart and, 
soul, This is rather a long P.S.—but again adieu, with my kind 
love and good wishes for your welfare. Believe me, beloved of my 
soul, to be your devoted Mim. 


No. 11. 


Letter addressed—‘‘ Miss Perry.” 


Dearest Miss Perry,—Many kind thanks for all your kindness to 
me. Emile will tell you I have bid him adieu. My papa would not 
give his consent, so I am in duty bound to obey him. Comfort dear 
Emile. It is a heavy blow to us both. I had hoped some day to 
have been happy with him, but alas it was not intended. We were 
doomed to be disappointed. You have been a kind friend to him. 
Oh! Continue so. I hope and trust he may prosper in the step he 
is about to take. I am glad now that he is leaving this country, 
for it would have caused me great pain to have meet him. Think my 
conduct not unkind. I have a father to please, and a kind father 
too. Farewell, dear Miss Perry, and with much love believe me, 
yours most sincerely, Mr. 


No. 13. 
Envelope addressed—‘‘ Mr. L’Angelier, Post-office, Jersey.” 


[Post-mark, Helensburgh, Sepr. 4, 1855; bears London and Jersey 
post-marks. ] 
(Lerten. } f 
Monday, 3rd. 
My dearest Emile——How I long to see you. It looks an age 
since I bid you adieu. Will you be able to come down the Sunday 
310 


Appendix I. 


after next? You will be in Town by 14th. I do not intend to say 
anything till I have seen you. I shall be guided by you entirely, 
and who could be a better guide to me than my intended husband? 
I hope you have given up all idea of going to Lima. I will never be 
allowed to go to Lima with you—so I shall fancy you want to get 
quit of your Mimi. You can get plenty of appointments in Europe— 
any place in Europe. For my sake do not go. John M‘Kenzie has 
been staying with us. Papa invited him—he has taken quite a fancy 
for M‘K. He leaves for Ireland on the 17th, so we shall not see 
any more of him—until he returns from the Crimea. He has got a 
Commission in the 30th. We are to be very gay all this week. I am 
quite tired of company. What would I not give for to be with you 
alone. Oh! would we not be happy. Ah! happy as the day was 
long. Give dear Miss P. my love and a kiss when you write. I 
love her so. What a friend she would be to us. I feel very nervous 
to-day. My hand shakes so. I have not felt well since I got your 
last letter, and I try to appear cheerful before my family, and 
it is not easy to appear in good spirits when there is a pain at the 
heart. It will break my heart if you go away. You know not how 
I love you, Emile. I live for you alone. I adore you. I never 
could love another as I do you. Oh! dearest Emile, would I might 
clasp you now to my heart. Adieu for to-day—if I have time I 
shall write another note—before I post this. If not—I shall have a 
letter at the Garden for you. So adieu, dearest love, and a fond 
embrace. Believe me your ever devoted and fond Mimi. 


Tuesday Morning. 


Beloved Emile,—I have dreamt all night of you, I hope you are 
well. How you must be enjoying yourself with all your dear, kind 
friends. How glad they must be to have you with them. Have 
you met many young ladies since you have been away? We have 
most delightful weather. We can be only one day in Town at the 
time of the Association. We are to have so many friends that week 
that we cannot possibly leave. There is to be a “full dress” 
meeting in the ‘‘ M‘Lelland Rooms” on the 13th, and I think Papa 
would like if we would go, but I have not made any arrangements 
as yet. If I thought you were to be there I would go. Though I 
could not speak to you, yet I would see you—you would try and get 
an introduction that evening. How happy I should be. Papa 
would be sure to be in good temper. Let us hope. I am most anxious 
to receive your next Letter. I am in too low spirits to write, so 
adieu, dearest. May God bless you and prosper you. A kiss. Your 
true fond Mr. 


311 


Madeleine Smith. 


No. 15. 


Envelope addressed—‘‘ Mr. L’Angelier, 10 Bothwell Street, 
Glasgow.” 


[Posted at Receiving-office, Glasgow, Dec. 3d, 1855; deliverable 
between 3 and 5 p.m. same day.} 


(Lerten. | 
Tuesday, 2 o’c. 

My own darling husband,—I am afraid I may be too late to 
write you this eveng, so as all are out I shall do it now, my sweet 
one. I did not expect the pleasure of seeing you last evng., of 
being fondeled by you, dear, dear, Emile. Our Cook was ill, and 
went to bed at 10—that was the reason I could see you—but I trust 
ere long to have a long, long interview with you, sweet one of my 
soul, my love, my all, my own best beloved. I hope you slept well 
last evng., and find yourself better to-day. I was at St. Vincent 
Street to-day. B/ and M/ are gone to call for the Houldsworths 
and some others. Never fear me, I love you well, my own sweet 
darling Emile. Do go to Edr. and visit the Lanes—also, my 
sweet love, go to the Ball given to the officers. I think you should 
consult Dr. M‘Farlan—that is, go and see him, get him to sound you, 
tell you what is wrong with you. Ask him to prescribe for you—and 
if you have any love for your Mimi follow his advice, and oh! sweet 
love, do not try and Dr. yourself—but oh! sweet love, follow the 
MD. advice—be good for once, and I am sure you will be well. Is 
it not horrid cold weather? I did, my love, so pity you standing 
in the cold last night, but I could not get Janet to sleep—little stupid 
thing. This is a horrid scroll, as I have been stoped twice with that 
bore—visiter. My own sweet beloved, I can say nothing as to our 
marriage, as it is not certain when they may go from home, or when 
I may go to Edr. it is uncertain. My beloved, will we require to be 
married (if it is in Edr.) in Edr. or will it do here? You know I 
know nothing of these things. I fear the Banus in Glasgow, there 
are so many people know me. If I had any other name but Madeleine 
it might pass—but it is not a very common one. But we 
must manage in some way to be united ere we leave Town. How 
kind of Mary to take any trouble with us. She must be a dear, good 
creature. I would so like to visit her, but no, I cannot. I shall 
never forget the first visit I paid with my own beloved husband, 
my own sweet, dear Emile—you sweet, dear darling. If ever I 
again I show temper (which I hope to God I wont), dont mind it— 
it is not with you I am cross. Sweet love, I adore you with my 
heart and soul. I must have a letter from you soon. I am engaged 
up till Friday night. Sweet pet, will that be too soon for you to 
write. I have written a great many letters to-day. I am much 
behind in my correspondence. I do hope your finger is better, take 

312 


Appendix I. 


care of it. When may be may we meet again?—soon, soon I hope 
and trust. Sweet darling, you are kind to me, very kind and 
loving. I ought never in any way to vex or annoy you. My own, 
my beloved Emile, I wish to get this posted to-night, as I dont 
understand the post. I posted your Saturday note before 12, and you 
did not get .it till Monday. We have had a great many letters go 
astray lately. I got a letter on Monday morning written six weeks 
ago. Are these Officers nice fellows? Why are they here. How is 
your mother and sister—well, I hope, my own sweet. But, pet, I 
must stop, as they will be in shortly. If I do not post this to-night 
you shall have a P.S. Much much love kisses tender long embraces 
kisses love. I am thy own thy ever fond thy own dear loving wife 
thy Mimr L’ANGELIER. 


No. 17. 


Envelope addressed—‘‘ Mr. L’Angelier, 10 Bothwell Street, 
Glasgow.”’ 


{Helensburgh post-mark, April 30, 1856; reached Glasgow about 
half-past 4 same day; deliverable between 6 and 8 same evening. | 


(Lerrer. } 
Tuesday, 29th April, ’56. 

My own, my beloved Emile,—I wrote you Sunday night for you 
to get my note on your birth day (to-day), but I could not get it 
posted. Disappointment it was to me—but ‘‘ Better late than 
never.” My beloved, may you have very, very many happy returns 
of this day—and each year may you find yourself happier and better 
than the last, and may each year find you more prosperous than 
the last. I trust, darling, that on your next birth day I may 
be with you to wish you many happy returns in person. May you, 
dearest, have long life. My constant prayer shall be for your welfare 
and continued good health. I hope you continue to feel better. My 
cough is a little better, sometimes quite away, and on the cold days 
it comes back. On Sunday I was at church, and in the afternoon 
Jack and I had a walk of four miles. Now, when I can walk 4 with 
a brother I could walk 8 with my own beloved husband and not be 
fatigued. Yes, darling, we shall take very long walks. P/ is not 
at all well and very cross, and he wont go to bed and get better. So 
I tell him he deserves to be ill. To-morrow Houldsworth, senor., 
is to be with us, and some more old gentlemen I dont know, and a 
good many of the Row people to dinner, and on Monday we are to 
have a host of friends from Perthshire. I cannot tell you how 
tired I am off friends. I wish we were more alone. I wish I were 
with you alone, that would be true happiness. Dearest, I must see 
you, it is fearful never to see you—but I am sure I don’t know when 


313 


Madeleine Smith. 


T shall see you. P/ has not been a night in town for sometime, but 
the first night he is off I shall see you. We shall spend an hour 
of bless. There shall be no risk, only C. H. shall know. Friday is 
a holiday, so James and Janet are to come down on Thursday. Poor 
Jack cannot get away now. Do you know the office he has gone to— 
M‘Clelland, Ingram St. Have you heard of de M. since his marriage. 
I see by the papers he was not married in church. Why not? I 
dont like marriages in the house. I have never seen a marriage in 
Scotland. I have been to many in London. Dearest, how I picture 
our marriage day. Where would you like to go the day we are 
married? I dont fancy a place in particular, so you can fix that 
when the time comes. I hope it may yet turn out Sept. I asked 
P/ if I were to be married if the banns would be in Row Church? 
And he said No, I had nothing to do with the Row parish, I did 
not belong to it. So, darling, it would not require to be here—it 
could never be here—it would not do. I dont in the least mind if 
they wont give their consent, for I know very well they shall be the 
first to give in. I have got my ‘‘ Chambers Journal ”’ for this month, 
and the article you mention is not in the April number, so it shall be 
in the May vol. I have been reading ‘‘ Blackwood ”’ for this month. 
B. is a favourite publication of mine, in fact I think it is the best 
conducted monthly publication. I have only got the length of Henery 
8th in ‘‘ Hume,” and I agree with you it would not nfake a careless 
person become good. But it is a well written history. Have you 
read Macualey’s 3 & 4th vols.? I like the 4th very much, but I 
don’t mind the 3rd much. I am rather fond of comparing different 
authors on the same subject, so I am at present comparing ‘‘ Alison,” 
‘“* Hume,”’ and ‘‘ Macauley.’ Only fancy, in turning out an old box 
yesterday I got an old note-book three years old, and in going over it 
many of the pages had the name L’Angelier on them. Now, that 
is long before I knew you. I did not think I had been so fond of 
my darling then. I put it in the fire, as there are many names in it 
I would not like to see beside your’s, my own sweet darling hus- 
band. Now, this is a very long letter to-night. I must conclude 
with a fond, fond embrace, a dear, sweet kiss. I wish it were to 
be given, not sent. Kindest, warmest love to you, my husband 
dear. A kiss. Another. Oh to be in thy embrace, my sweet Emile. 


Love again to thee from thy very fond, thy loving and ever de- 
voted Mimi, Thine Own Wire. 


No. 19. 
Letter addressed—‘‘ Miss Perry.”’ 


Dearest Mary,—Emile will have told you that it has been dis- 
covered that we correspond. I am truly glad that it is known, 
but strange to say a fortnight has passed and not a word has been 

314 


Appendix I. 


said to me. I cannot understand it, but now that it is known I 
dont mind. TI intend to take a firm part, to state in plane terms 
that I intend to be dear Emile’s wife. Nothing this time shall fear 
me. [I shall be of age soon, and then I have a right to decide for 
myself. Can you blame me for not giving in to my parents in a 
matter so serious as marriage? It was expected I would marry a man 
with money—but is my happiness not before all fortunes. In marring 
Emile I take the man I love. I know that all my friends shall forsake 
me, but for that I dont care. So long as I possess the affection of 
Emile I shall be content. But to possess and retain his affection I 
shall be obliged to study to please him in all things. I shall try 
and do it. As yet I fear I have done little to please him. But he 
has forgiven me all my faults. I have acted in many things foolishly, 
unwisely. I fear I must leave town without seeing you. I cannot 
express how sorry I feel that I have not been able to see you. I 
am going into Edinburgh on Monday for a week or ten days. After 
our return we are going home for the summer. [I shall be pleased 
to leave Glasgow. With kindest love, believe me, dearest Mary, 
yours most affectionately, Moa. 


No. 21. 


Envelope addressed—‘‘ Mr. L’Angelier, 10 Bothwell Street, 
Glasgow.” 


{Helensburgh post-mark, May 3, 1856; reached Glasgow 6.45 same 
evening; deliverable next morning, first delivery.] 


[Letree. } 
Friday. 

My own, my beloved Emile,—The thought of seeing you so soon 
makes me feel happy and glad. Oh! to hear you again speak to 
me—call me your own wife—and to tell me you love me. Can you 
wonder that I feel happy. I shall be so happy to see you. I cannot 
tell how I long to see you—it looks such an age since I saw you, my 
own sweet pet. I am well. Cold quite gone. P/ has been in Bed 
two days. If he should not feel well and come down on Tuesday 
it shall make no difference, just you come—only, darling, I think if 
he is in the Boat you should get out at Helensburgh. Well, 
beloved, you shall come to the gate (you know it) and wait till I 
come. And then, oh happiness wont I kiss you, my love, my own 
beloved Emile, my husband dear. I don’t think there is any risk. 
Well, Tuesday, 6th May. The Gate, half-past 10. You understand, 
darling. I hope you are well—no cold. Take care of yourself. I 
have nothing new to tell you. I have been rather busy all this week. 
I shall expect you to have a letter for me. The weather is so 


315 


Madeleine Smith. ~ 


fine. I have been a great deal out this week, looking after out 
door arrangements. I have got a new employment—The ‘‘ Hen 
Yard.’’ I go there every morning. You can fancy me every morning 
at 10 o’c seeing the Hens being fed and feeding my donkey. I dont 
get on very fast with it—I fear it has little affection—do for it what 
I shall it only appears to know me, and come to me when I call. My 
beloved Emile, I feel so delighted at the idea of seeing you I cannot 
write. I hope you will be able to tell me that you shall get married 
in Spt. Darling, I love you, and shall for ever remain true. Nothing 
shall cause me to break my vows to you. ‘‘ As you say,’ we are 
Man and Wife. So we are, my pet. We shall, I trust, for ever 
remain se. It shall be the happiest day of my life the day that 
unités us never more to separate. I trust atl pray we shall for 
ever remain happy and loving. But there is no fear of that, we are 
sure to do so, love—are we not? But I must stop, as P/ wishes me 
to go and read the Papers to him—it is 11 o’c night. So if I dont 
write any more, forgive me love. Beloved of my soul, a fond embrace, 
a dear kiss till we meet. We shall have more than one love dearest 
from thy own thy ever devoted & loving wife thine for ever, 
MinrE. 


“ 


Written on inside of envelope, 
“Tuesday, half-past 10 o’c.’’ 


No. 23. 


Envelope addressed—‘‘ Emile L’Angelier, Esqr., No. 10 Bothwell 
Street, Glasgow.”’ 


[Helensburgh post-mark, 7th, month not legible, 1856; reached 


Glasgow, 14th June, 1856, 4 past 4 p.m.; deliverable between 6 and 
8 same evening. ] 


(Lerrer. ] 


Wednesday Morning, 5 o’c. 

My own, my beloved husband,—I trust to God you got home 
safe, and were uot much the worse of being out. Thank you, my 
love, for coming so far to see your Mimi. It is truly a pleasure to 
see you, my Emile. Beloved, if we did wrong last night it was in 
the excitement of our love. Yes, beloved, I did truly love you with my 
soul. I was happy, it was a pleasure to be with you. Oh if we could 
have remained, never more to have parted. But we must hope the 
time shall come. I must have been very stupid to you last night. 
But every thing goes out of my head when I see you, my darling, 
my love. I often think I must be very, very stupid in your eyes. 
You must be disappointed with me. I wonder you like me in the 

316 


Appendix I. 


least. But I trust and pray the day may come when you shall like 
me better. Beloved, we shall wait till you are quite ready. I shall 
see and speak to Jack on Sunday. I shall consider about telling 
Mama. But I dont see any hope from her—I know her mind. You, 
of course, cannot judge of my parents. You know them not. I did 
not know (or I should not have done it) that I caused you to pay 
extra Postage for my stupid, cold letters—it shall not occur again. 
Darling Emile, did I seem cold to you last night. Darling, I love 
you. Yes, my own Emile, love you with my heart and soul. Am 
I not your wife. Yes I am. And you may rest. assured after what 
has passed I cannot be the wife of any other but dear, dear Emile. 
No, now it would be a sin. I am sorry you are going to lose your 
kind friends the Sievwrights. I am so glad when you have kind 
friends, for then I know you can go there of an evening and be 
happy. I often, often think of your long evening by yourself. What 
a happy day de M— marriage day must have been. I have a regret 
that it was not ours—but the time shall pass away. I dread next 
Winter. Only fancy, beloved, us both in the same town and unable 
to write or see each other, it breaks my heart to think of it. Why, 
beloved, are we so unfortunate? I thank you very much for your 
dear, long letter. You are kind to me, love. I am sorry for your 
cold. You were net well last night, I saw you were not yourself. 
Beloved pet, take care of it. When may we meet foh that blot] 
again. A long time, is it not sad. I weep to think of it, to be 
separated thus—if you were far away, it would not be so bad, but 
to think you near me. I cannot see you when you come to Miss 
White’s, as you could not be out so late. They cannot keep us from 
each other. No, that they never shall. Emile, beloved, I have some- 
times thought would you not like to go to Lima after we are married? 
Would that not do. Any place with you, pet. I did not bleed in 
the least last night—but I had a good deal of pain during the night. 
Tell me, pet, were you angry at me for allowing you to do what 
you did—was it very bad of me. We should, I suppose, have waited 
till we were married. I shall always remember last night. Will 
we not often talk of our evening meetings after we are married. 
Why do you say in your letter—“‘If we are not married ” I would 
not regret knowing you. Beloved, have you a doubt but that 
we shall be married some day. I shall write dear Mary soon. What 
would she say if she knew we were so intimate—lose all her good 
opinion of ys both—would she not. My kind love to your dear sisters 
when you write. Tell me the names of your Sisters. They shall be 
my Sisters some day. I shall love if they are like their dear Brother, 
my dear husband. I know you can have little confidence in me. 
But dear I shall not flirt. I do not think it is right of me. 1 
should only be plesant to Gentlemen. Free with none, my pet, in 
conversation but yourself. I shall endeavour to please you in this. 
Now, will you tell me at the end of the Summer if you have heard 


317 


| Madeleine Smith. 


any thing about me 4lirting. Now, just you see how good your 
Mimi shall be. Pet, I see you smile and say, “‘ if she has a chance.” 
Try and trust me—love me. Beloved, adieu. I have your little note 
this morning and last night with the greatest of pleasure. What 
a kind letter Mary’s. I wont come out in the serious light again. 
I must have been sad when I wrote her last letter. I am sorry for 
it. But you should not have given it to her. Adieu again, my 
husband. God bless you and make you well. And may you yet 
be very, very happy with your Mimi as your little wife. Kindest love, 
fond embrace, and kisses from thy own true and ever devoted Mimi, 
Thy faithful Wire. 


[The public prosecutor having tendered the production, 
No. 25 of inventory, to be read, being a letter bearing to be 
from the deceased to the panel, it was objected for her that 
it could not be received, having been found in the deceased’s 
lodgings, and there being no evidence of its having been sent. 

In support of this objection, the Dean or Facuuty con- 
tended that this document followed the rule laid down in the 
objection to No. 7. This document was proved to have been 
also found in the repositories of L’Angelier. It was not 
signed by any one, but was proved to be in the handwriting 
of the deceased. The only difference between this and the 
other document which was rejected was, that this one was 
enclosed, or said to have been ‘enclosed, in an envelope, 
bearing the simple word ‘‘ Mimi.’”’ It did not seem to have 
passed out of the repositories of the writer. 

The Lorp ApvocaTtE—This case is very different from the 
former ; for not only is it enclosed in an envelope bearing the 
name ‘‘ Mimi,’’ which is proved to be the name by which 
L’Angelier addressed the panel, but it refers to inquiries con- 
tained in the letter just read. 

The Dean or Facutty—lIs it tendered as an original, or as 
a@ copy? 

The Lorp ApvocatE—We believe it to be a copy, and we 
tender it as such, but it contains intrinsic evidence of 
L’Angelier’s feelings when he received the letter just read. 

The Dzan or Facunty—Then the only difference between 
this case and the last is, that there is intrinsic evidence that 
this was written after the other letter had been received. 

The Court decided that it ought not to be read. 

The Lorp Justice-CLerx said—There is undoubtedly con- 
siderable difference as to the circumstances in which this letter 
or scroll is tendered, and those as to the document which we 
have already rejected. But a majority of the Court is of 
opinion that the document cannot be received. We have had 
considerable difficulty in coming to this conclusion; and Lord 

318 


Appendix I. 


Ivory still thinks that the writing is receivable in evidence. 
But both Lord Handyside and myself think that, in the 
circumstances, it cannot be received. } 


No. 25. 
Envelope addressed—‘‘ Mimi.”’ 
(LerrTer. ] 


My dearest and beloved Wife Mimi,—Since I saw you I have been 
wretchedly sad. Would to God we had not met that night—I would 
have been happier. I am sad at what we did, I regret it very much. 
Why, Mimi, did you give way after your promises? My pet, it ‘s 
a pity. Think of the consequences if I were never to marry you. 
What reproaches I should have, Mimi. I never shall be happy again. 
If ever I meet you again, love, it must be as at first. I will never 
again repeat what I did until we are regularly married. Try your 
friends once more—tell your determination—say nothing will change 
you, that you have thought seriously of it—and on that I shall 
firmly fix speaking to Huggins for Sepr. Unless you do something of 
that sort, Heaven only knows when I shall marry you. Unless you 
do, dearest, I shall have to leave the country; truly, dearest, I am 
in such a state of mind I do not care if I were dead. We did wrong. 
God forgive us for it. Mimi, we have loved blindly. It is your 
parents’ fault if shame is the result; they are to blame for it all. 

I got home quite safe after leaving you, but I think it did my 
cold no good. I was fearfully excited the whole night. I was 
truly happy with you, my pet; too much so, for I am now too sad. 
I wish from the bottom of my heart we had never parted. Though 
we have sined, ask earnesbly God’s forgiveness and blessings that 
all the obstacles in our way may be removed from us. I was dis- 
appointed, my love, at the little you had to say, but I can under- 
stand why. You are not stupid, Mimi, and if you disappoint me 
in information, and I have cause to reproach you of it, you will 
have no one t& blame but yourself, as I have given you warning 
Icng enough to improve yourself. Sometimes I do think you take 
no notice of my wishes and my desires, but say yes for mere matter 
of form. Mimi, unless Huggins helps me I cannot see how [I shall 
be able to marry you for years. What misery to have such a 
future in one’s mind. Do speak to your brother, open your heart 
to him, and try and win his friendship. Tell him if he loves you 
to take your part. And besides, my dear, if once you can trust, 
how pleasant it would be for you and me to meet. I could come 
over to Helensburgh when yon would be riding or driving, or of a 


319 


Madeleine Smith. 


Sunday (thought I stoped with the Whites) I could join you in a 
walk of a Sunday afternoon. Mimi, dearest, you must take a bold 
step to be my wife. 1 entreat you, pet, by the love you have for 
me, Mimi, do speak to your mother—tell her it is the last time 
you ever shall speak of me to her. You are right, Mimi, you 
cannot be the wife of any one else than me. I shall ever blame 
myself. for what has taken place. I never never can be happy until 
you are my own, my dear fond wife. Oh! Mimi, be bold for once, 
do not fear them—-tell them you are my wife before God. Do not 
let them leave you without being married, for I cannot answer what 
would happen. My conscience reproaches me of a sin that marriage 
can only efface. I can assure you it will be many days before I 
meet such nice people as the Seaverights, especially the daughter. I 
longed so much to have introduced *you to her, to see the perfect 
Lady in her, and such an accomplished young person. My evenings, 
as you say, are very long and dreary. We must not be seperated 
all next winter, for I know, Mimi, you will be as giddy as last. 
You will be going to public balls, and that I cannot endure. On 
my honour, dearest, sooner than see you or hear of you running 
about as you did last, I would leave Glasgow myself. Though I have 
truly forgiven you, I do not forget the misery I endured for your 
sake. You know yourself how ill it made me—if not, Mary can tell 
you, my pet. Dearest Mimi, let us meet again soon, but not as last 
time. See if you can plan anything for the Queen’s birthday. I 
intend to be in Helensburgh some night to cross over with Miss 
White to Greenock. I could refuse stoping with them, and come 
up to see you, but I cannot fix the day, and as I do not know how 
to let you know except by sending a newspaper to B/, and the 
evening after the date of the newspaper would be the evening I 
would come, or tell me a better arrangement. Do you not think it 
would be best to meet you at the top of the Garden, same as last 
Summer? Remember, if the newspaper answers be sure and repeat 
the arrangement, that I may see we agree. 

My dear wife, I could not take you to Lima. No European 
women could live there. Besides, I would live 3 or 4 thousand 
miles from it, far from any white people, and no Drs. if you were 
ill or getting a baby. No if we marry I must stay 
in Glasgow until I get enough to live elsewhere. Besides, it would 
cost £500 alone for our bare passage money. I do not under- 
stand, my pet, your not bleeding, for every woman having her 
virginity must bleed. You must have done so some other time. 
Try to remember if you never hurt yourself in washing, &. I am 
sorry you felt pain. I hope, pet, you are better. I trust, dearest, 
you will not be ——. Be sure and tell me immediately you are 
ill next time, and if at your regular period. I was not angry at your 
allowing me, Mimi, but I am sad it happened. You had no reso- 
lution. We should indeed have waited till we were married, Mimi. 

320 


Appendix I. 


It was very bad indeed. I shall look with regret on that night. 
No, nothing except our Marriage will efface it from my memory. 
Mimi, only fancy if it was know. My dear, my pet, you would be 
dishonoured, and that by me! Oh! why was I born, my pet? I 
dread lest some great obstacle prevents our marriage. If Mary did 
know it, what should you be in her eyes? My Sisters’ names are 
Anastasie and Elmire. I cannot help doubting your word about 
flirting. _ You promised me the same thing before you left for Edin., 
and you did nothing else during your stay there. You cared more 
for your friends than for me. I do trust you will give me no cause 
to find fault again with you on that score, but I doubt very much 
the sincerety of your promise. Mimi, the least thing I hear of you 
doing, that day shall be the last of our tie, that I swear. You are 
my wife, and I have the right to expect from you the behaviour 
of a married woman—or else you have no honour in you; and more, 
you have no right to go any where but where a women could go with 
her husband. Oh! Mimi, let your conduct make me happy. Re- 
member when you are good how truly happy it makes Emile— 
but remember this, and if you love me you will do nothing wrong. 
Dearest, your letter to Mary was very pretty and good. I 
thought a great deal of it, and I like its seriousness. Fancy how 
happy I was when Mary told me the other day how Mimi was 
improving fast; she could tell it by her letters. 


For Gods sake burn this, Mimi, for fear any thing happening to 
you, do dearest. 


No. 27. 
[Lerrer. ] 


My Dear Mary,—I cannot thank you enough for writing to me 
in such a free and friendly style as you have done in your last 
note. I have reason to believe you a friend indeed. I was de- 
lighted to see dear Emile looking so we'l—_much better than I 
expected to see him. My Dear friend, it shall be my constant 
endeavour to practise economy for Emile’s sake. I proposed Lodg- 
ings because I thought they would be less expensive than a house, 
and if there should be a little discomfort attending our residing in 
lodgings, we must just put up with it for a time. In time Emile’s 
income shall increase. I dont fear but that we shall get on very 
well—with economy. I have taken the charge of Mama’s house 
for the last two years. I should very much liked to have had a 
chat with you on these matters, but alas! that is impossible. It 
vexes me much to think I have so very few opportunities of seeing 


x 321 


Madeleine Smith. 


my dear Emile. He tries to make up in some measure by being 
most attentive in writing me. But I must finish. With kind 
love, believe me, yours most affectionately, Mrmt. 


No. 29. 


[Letrer. ] 
Monday Night. 

My Dearest Mary,—A thousand thanks for your dear, kind note 
and good wishes for my happiness. I hope there are many, many 
happy days in store for me. I know I shall be happy with my 
dear Emile. We love each other, and that shall constitute our 
happiness. I trust the day is not far distant when you shall see 
us living happly together. I had a conversation with Mama, but 
I received no hope from her. She shall never consent to our 
marriage. I told her my mind was made up—nothing would change 
me. {I shall be the wife of dear Emile. I made him once unhappy. 
But I vowed I would never do so again by breaking my vows to him. 
Dear Mary, nothing, I fear, shall move my parents. They are 
against our union, and I fear they shall continue so. I saw you 
for a moment at the station in Edr. I cannot see you, so our 
acquaintance cannot be cultivated at present. We must have patience 
for a little. I am going away soon. I shall be deprived of seeing 
much of Emile. Do give him advice to take care of himself. He 
is not well at present. The summer may restore him to good health. 
I trust so. If he would only be kind to himself. I must conclude. 
With kindest love and many sincere thanks for your good wishes, 
Believe me, dear friend, yours most affcty., Mian. 


No. 31. 


Envelope addressed—‘‘ Emile L’ Angelier, Esquir, Botanical 
Gardens, near Glasgow.” 


[Helensburgh post-mark, 14th of the month and year not legible ; 
reached Glasgow 14th June, 1856, 4 past 4 p.m.; deliverable be- 
tween 6 and 8 same evening. ] 


(Letrer.] | 


My own, my darling husband,—To-morrow night by this time I 
shall be in possession of your dear letter. I shall kiss it and press 
it to my bosom. Hearing from you is my greatest pleasure, it is 
next to seeing you, my sweet love. My fond Emile Are you well, 

322 


Appendix I. 


darling of my soul? This weather is enough to make one ill, is it 
not? We have had most dull, wet days—but I have had time to 
read and practise, which is a comfort to me. I am well. I am 
longing so to see you, sweet pet—to kiss and pet you. Oh! for the 
day when I could do so at any time. I fear we shall spoil each 
other when we are married,.we shall be so loving and kind. We 
shall be so happy, happy in our own little room—no one to annoy 
us, to disturb us. All to ourselves, we shall so enjoy that life. 
The thought of these days makes me feel happy. If it were not 
for these thoughts I should be sad, miserable, and weary of this cold, 
unfeeling, thoughtless world. Wealth is the ruling passion. Love 
is a second consideration, when it should be the first, the most 
important. De M. is home. P/ told me so—he spoke to him. 
Jack also saw him, and many of the other Gentlemen told me they 
had seen him. How happy he must be, though I think he would 
have been happier if he and Bride had been in a house by them- 
selves. What think you, my darling? In our case, I know I 
would rather be by ourselves. I have no news. Friends, friends 
staying with us, which is a great annoyance to me. I am weary 
of it now. I did like this way of living at one time, but I hate 
it now—it makes me long for your own quiet home. Sweet that name 
shall sound when I am with you. Telling how you are getting on— 
what you are reading. How is Mary? Love to her, and to your 
sister when you next write, sweet one. I love you much fondly 
dearly sincerely. I’m thy Wife thy own true Mma. 


Tine and constant shall I prove. Dont fear me. I shall he 
thine. Dont give ear to any reports you may hear. There are 
several I hear going about regarding me going to get married— 
regard them not. A kiss dear love from thy devote and loving, 
much attached wife, thine own Mot. 


Heaven bless you, love, with everything you might wish for. 
May heaven be thy guide and protector. Take care of yourself. 
Adieu. Farewell. A fond, dear embrace. I am thine, untill death 


do seprate us, thy . Mimi. 
No. 33. 
Envelope addressed—‘‘ Mr. L‘Angelier, 10 Bothwell Street, 
Glasgow.” 
[Letrsr. ] 


M. 
My own, my dearest, my kindest husband,—How I have re- 


proached myself all week for writing you such unkind letters. Will 
you, darling Emile, pardon me for them? I was a little annoyed, 
323 


Madeleine Smith. 


but it is all over now. Dearest, I love you more, ah! more, if it 
were possible, than ever. You are my own, my true husband, 
Emile. No one can or shall prevent us being one. No darling, 
we are man and wife now, dearest. How are you—better, my love. 
I had written to you to say I could see you on Monday night, but 
P/ is to be home by the late Boat, so we cannot meet. But you 
may be sure, my own darling, I will meet you as soon as I can, my 
own sweet pet. I thought I would see you. That is my reason for 
not asking a letter from you, love. Emile, I wish I could convince 
you that I live, but for you alone. In whatever recreation I am 
employed, my thoughts are of my own Emile. I am thoughtless, 
but believe me, I never forget you, my own, my only love. Yes, 
my only love—you are the only man I love, or can ever love. What- 
ever your lott may be, I shall be thine, and however humble your 
home shall be mine. I shall share your couch, no matter where. 
I have thought well of all this, and I shall never repine though my 
husband is poor—no, it shall be my duty to make him happy, make 
him forget all the sorrows of the past, and look to a bright and 
happy future. Emile, nothing shall change me, nothing tempt me 
ever to prove untrue to you. No wealth shall ever cause me to forget 
that I am the wife of my own, my ever darling Emile. I swear to 
you that no man shall ever Jove me but you. Emile, I dote on you. 
I adore you with my heart and soul. I love you. I weep to think 
I have caused you grief. I cannot express how sorry I am that I 
should have neglected to write Mary, Dear Mary, our true friend— 
forgive me for this. I am very sorry about it, I assure you. We 
have not got to Arrochar. M/ wont allow us to leave when we 
have friends in our own house, so I dont know when we may go. I 
do wish she would go, and then I would see you, be pressed to your 
heart, be kissed by you, my own, my beloved, my fond Emile. I 
am excited much to-night. you here I would love 
you with my heart and soul. I am _ better—indeed, almost well. 
What weather! Aunt wrote me this week—she had seen you—and 
that you were looking very well—paid you a pretty little compliment, 
which I wont tell you, my love. Now, my sweet pet, you are 
wrong in thinking I am not preparing in the least. I am. I have 
got very many things, so dont fear for me. I shall be quite ready 
by Sept. If you are—happy time! How I look forward to our 
happy union. It cannot but be happy, we shall love each other so. 
And believe me, it shall be quite different. I shall be beside you, 
so if I do anything wrong, and you check me, I shall never, never, 
do it again. I shall be all you could wish. You shall love me and 
I shall obey you. I shall leave all, Sacrifice friends, relations, 
family, and everything for your sake, for the love I have for you. 
I shall never regret it. I have reflected well. It is a most important 
step. I have given it much consideration, and I always come to 
the same conclusion—that I love you, and shall be your wife. Jack 
324 


Appendix I. 


told me he saw Madame de M. this week, looking so pretty. He 
must be very happy, so must she. I have never met her since her 
marriage, but I am only in Helensburgh in the morning, and always 
driving. I have not been ridding. No one knows why I have not 
been ridding, not even P/ or M/, but I shall tell you. The Wilsons 
and Mr. Young asked me to allow them to ride with me. I knew 
you would not like this, and it would cause people to make remarks. 
I dont think I shall ride this summer—unless it may be with Jack—no 
other one. Belove, give me a letter for next Wednesday. Is this a 
long letter? I shall write Mary. Give her my love, also your sister 
when you write. I hope your mother is well. Have you heard 
lately from Rose? Tell me, darling, how you are? Do you sleep 
better than you did? I must say Good night. With very much 
fond love, I am thy true, thy loving, thy devoted and repenitant 
wife, thy own dear Mo. 


God bless you and prosper you, keep you in health, and give you 
all you desire. Adieu, my husband dear. A kiss. A fond 
embrace. I am thine for ever, Moa L’— 


No. 35. 


Envelope addressed—‘‘ Mr. L’Angelier, Botanical Gardens, 
Glasgow.”’ 
M. L’—. 


[Helensburgh post-mark, June 27, 1856; reached Glasgow 6.45 
same evening; deliverable next morning, first delivery. ] 


[Lerrter. } 
Friday Night. 

Beloved, dearly beloved husband, sweet Emile, how I long to 
call you mine, never more to leave you. What must occur ere that 
takes place, God only knows. I often fear some cloud may yet 
fall on our path and mar our happiness for a long time. I shall 
never cause you unhappiness again. No, I was unkind, cruel, un- 
loving, but it shall never be repeated. No, I am now a wife, a 
wife in every sense of the word, and it is my duty to conduct myself 
as such. Yes, I shall behave now more to your mind. I am no 
longer a child. Rest assured I shall be true and faithful wherever 
you are, dear love—my constant thought shall be of my Emile, 
who is far, far away. I only consent to your leaving if you think 
it will do you good—I mean, do your health good. Your income 
would be quite enough for me—dont for a moment fancy I want 
you to better your income for me—no, dearest, I am quite content 


325 


Madeleine Smith. 


with the sum you named. When I first loved you I knew you 
were poor. [ felt then I would be content with your lot, however 
humble it might be. Yes, your home, in whatever place or what- 
ever kind, would suit me. If you only saw me now—I am all alone 
in my little bedroom—you would never mention your home as being 
humble. I have a small room on the ground floor, very small, so 
dont fancy I could not put up in small rooms and with humble fare. 
But if you think it will do you good a tour, go by all means for 
six months or so. I trust you will take great care of yourself, and 
not forget your Mimi. Oh! how I love that name of Mimi. You 
shall always call me by that name—and, dearest Emile, if ever we 
should have a daughter I should like you to allow me to call her 
Mimi for her father’s sake. You like that name, and I love it. You 
think I dont confide in you, sweet pet; it would, I thought, annoy 
you if I were to tell you all my little trifles—you would sometimes 
think me stupid. I know you would, but I shall do it, as you ask 
me. I knew, dearest, you regretted knowing me and being engaged 
to me during the winter the time I was in Edr. Emile, that time 
was the only period since I have known you in which I: felt the least 
degree of coolness for you. When I saw you angry with me, I felt 
cool. Nay, more—one day I met you in Glasgow; you looked so 
cross at me that when I went home I wrote you a note taking fare- 
well of you, as I thought you would be delighted to get quit of 
me. Something struck me it was unkind of me doing so. I 
went to bed, I dreamt of you, I fancied you still loved me, and in 
the morning all my love for you returned. Never again did I feel 
cool towards you, though I may have made you fancy so by my 
cool letters, &. But I assure you I love you more and more each 
day. Not an hour passes but I think of you, of you, my best, my 
kind, dear Emile. But the past we shall both forget—though we 
may often refer to it—and after our marriage we shall then laugh 
at all our anxious fears. We shall make up for all the past then 
by our loving each other with a sincere heart. We must trust each 
other. You shall then know all my thoughts. I shall have you 
near me, so I can tell you them—it is difficult to put thoughts on 
paper, at least some thoughts. We shall be the envy of many—of 
B/ I know. Emile, never fear my friends and family casting me 
off. If they do so, then I shall know they are not worth having 
for friends. If they will cast me off because we are poor—why, they 
will be much better away from me. If it is only for money that 
your friends love you, their friendship is unworthy. I will not love 
you less because you are poor. No, I shall love you even more, try 
to make you happy and comfortable, try to make you forget you are 
poor. As you ask me, I shall burn your last letter. It was my cold 
which prevented my. going to Arrochar. I dont know when we 
may go now—perhaps not at all. I have promised to go to Stirling 
326 


Appendix 1. 


to pay a visit in August. B/ had an invitation to go to Edinburgh 
Castle next week. The Major knew I would not go, so did not 
invite me. I dont think she will go. P/ wont allow her by herself, 
and I wont go, so I think she will have to stay at home—which is 
much better, don’t you think so? James goes to Edr. to school in 
August. I think he will go far astray from home and every one— 
but P/ will have all the blame if the Boys are not what they should 
be. Jack is not near so nice as he was. I think I have answered 
all your questions. I was ill the beginning of this week, so if I 
should have the happiness to see you tuesday night I shall be quite 
well. I think I feel better this week. I cannot eat. I have not 
taken any breakfast for about two months, not even a cup of tea— 
nothing till I get my luncheon at 1 o’c. I dont sleep much. I 
wonder, and so does M/, that my looks are not changed, but I look 
as well as if I eat and slept well. I dont think I am any stouter, 
but you can judge when you next see me; but I must go to bed, as 
I feel cold—so good night. Would to God it were to be by your 
side—I would feel well and happy then. I think I would be wishing 
you to love me if I were with you—but I dont suppose you would 
refuse me. For I know you will like to love your Mimi. Adieu, 
sweet love, kind pet husband my own true Emile. I am thine for 
ever, thy wife, thy devoted, thy own true Mima L’ ANGBLIER. 


Good night. God bliss you. A kiss, pet love. 


If, dear love, you could write me as I might get it Tuesday 
morning it would be best, but if you cannot say then Wednesday. 
Farewell, dear husband of my soul, my own dear love, my pet, my 
fond Emile. A kiss. A fond embrace. Good night. A kiss. 


1 o’c morning. 


Envelope addressed—‘‘ Mr. L’Angelier, 10 Bothwell Street, 
Glasgow.” 


[Helensburgh post-mark, 15th July, 1856; reached Glasgow 6.45 
same evening; deliverable next morning, first delivery. ] 


[Lerrers. ] 


Dearest & beloved Emile,—I shall begin and answer your 2nd 
sheet to me. I was rather stupid our last meeting. But I had a 
cold and did not feel in good spirits, but I shall make up for it our 
next meeting. My promise to you I mean to keep not to break 

327 


Madeleine Smith. 


them. I shall do all you ask me my own sweet darling, my ever 
dear and fond husband. I shall save as much of my money as I 
can. Would you wish me to buy things for myself, clothes, &c. I 
could do it quite easily—as you like love. Emile you have made 
a rash promise to me in your last letter. You say though you 
were dead Mini I shall never marry again this I swear. Now this 
is wrong of you, to say so. You will promise me—that if I should 
die you will marry, and that as soon as you can. Is not a man 
more happy with a wife. Is she not a happiness and a comfort to 
him—a solace to him in his sad hours—a help to him in his old 
age—a blissing to him if he has a family. No darling Emile you 
will not promise me such a thing. I think every man as soon as 
he can afford to keep a wife should take a wife—and it would be 
more beneficial to you than to others, as you have no mother nor 
sister here to take care of you. And darling Emile never repeat 
again to me ‘that life is a burdén to you.’ Remember you have 
a wife to think of now. Yes a wife who loves you fondly truly— 
loves you with a heart which burns with pure love for -you my only 
love. When you are sad think of your Mimi. How I wish I were 
with you to comfort to cheer you my sweet one. Would 1 not pet 
and fondle and dove you. Yes darling those shall be happy happy 
days, which I hope shall not be long of coming. Do not fear, I 
shall be so kind to you—when you are cross I shall give you a kiss 
and ask you to be my own sweet dear little Emile. When you 
smile no one can help loving you—you look so kind so loving— 
just as I like to see you look my fond my ever dear dear husband. 
I asked Jack yesterday if he had seen you. He said Yes I saw him 
on Friday in a cab with a Lady and Gentleman. Said how did he 
look—and he said he thought very cross. He has- got a very fast 
look Jack of late—he is not improving, and James is just a very 
bad little fellow, he swears and goes on at a great rate. P/ thinks 
it clever. But he will be broken in when he goes to school. I 
think he will be a little Blackguard if he goes on at the present 
style. When I am away your letters will be quite safe. I go on 
Wednesday—return on Friday. I don’t know if, I shall be able to 
write you, but shall if I can. We are to have some Edr. friends 
on Friday so we must be home. Minnoch was here to-day again 
(Monday). Only left on Saturday and back to-day again. He was 
here for four hours. He brought a fellow Weymiss with him. I 
think he might have a little better feeling than come so soon knowing 
that every one down here has heard the report regarding myself 
and him—even for the people on our own place. P/ and M/ were 
much displeased at him—they said nothing, but M / said it was 
enough to make people think there was something in the report. 
Say nothing to him in passing—it will only make him rude if you say 
anything. Adieu dear love. I shall answer the rest of your letter 
328 


72 


Appendix I. 


again. Adieu sweet one of my soul, my own ever dear & ever beloved 
husbard, much much love to you beloved pet. I am thy own true 
wife thy fond and ever devoted and loving 

Mm L’ ANGELIER. 


My sweet beloved & dearest Emile, I shall begin and answer 
your dear long letter. In the first place, how are you—better, [ 
trust. Yor know I did feel disappointed at our marriage not taking 
place in Spt But as it could not, why, then, I just made up my 
mind to be content, and trust that it may be ere long. We shall fix 
about that our next meeting, which I hope wont be long. Emile, 
dear husband, how can you express such words—that you mar my 
amusements ané¢ that’ you are a bore to me? Fie, fie, dear Emile! 
You must not say so again, you must not even think so—it is so very 
unkind of you. Why, I would be very unhappy if you were not 
near me. I did augh at your pinning my little flower to your shirt. 
I always put your flowers into Books in the Drawing-room—there I 
can go and look at them at any time. Do not weep, darling, fond 
husband—it makes ne sad to think you weep. Do not do it, darling. 
A fond embrace anc dear kiss to you, sweet and much-loved Emile. 
Our intimacy has no beeu criminal, and I am your wife before God 
—so it has been no sin—our loving each other. No, darling, fond 
Emile, I am your wife. I shall cease to be childish and thoughtless. 
I shall do all I can to please you and retain your truly dear, fond 
tove. You know I hive wished as much as you do to give you my 
likeness But I have not had an opportunity. J promise you you shall 
have it some day—so hat promise wont be broken. If I did not 
sign my name, it was or no reason. Unless it is to a stranger, I 
never do put Smith—orly Madeleine. You shall, dear love, havé 
all your letters back. Emile, love, you are wrong. If I did feel 
cool towards you in winter, I never gave one thought of love to any 
other. No other image has ever filled my heart since I knew you. I 
might admire some people but, on my soul, I never did love, since 
I knew you, any but you my own dear fond and ever beloved Emile. 
I am so glad you go and take a walk on Sunday. I would rather 
you did so as go to Church, as I think the country air would do you 
more good, and you can read prayers to yourself in the evening. 
Yes dear pet I long to sleep ia your bosom—To lay my head on your 
arm. Ah I would feel safe and happy there. It will be a delightful 
bliss our union. We can not out love each other, and we shall be 
so kind to each other, so happy I think when they see us (P/ and 
M/) so happy and content they will give in. They must in time love 
you. We shall be the envy of many. My love burns for you—it 
increases daily. Oh! to be with you this night. But I fear I would 
ask you to love me, and that would not do. No no we must not 
till we are married. It is hard to restrain one’s passions. I do 
love you fondly, truly. You will not leave me your wife—with no 

329 


Madeleine Smith. 


Guide, no friend, no protector, no one to love me—no one whe cares 
for me, no one to tell me my faults. Emile, my love, my husband, 
you must not go. Stay with me, near me, I shall be happy. qT 
shall do all you ask. I shall behave as you wish me—remain 
here, and you will trust me—and see me. Adieu for the present 


your wife. Your Mint L’ ANGELIER. 
No. 39. 
Envelope addressed—‘‘ Mr. L’Angelier, 10 Bothwell Street, 
Glasgow.”’ 
[Lerrer. ] 


Friday Evening. 

My beloved, my ever darling Emile,—I got home this evening, 
but with a very bad cold. I feel quite ill to-night—sick and head- 
ache. I got my feet damp, but I shall take cars and be soon well. 
Darling pet, how are you? It was impossible for me to write you 
for Saturday, as I would have been obliged to nave given my letter 
to one of the family—to Post. 1 did not see the post-office. You 
will, I know, darling, sweet Emile, excuse me, and say nothing about 
it. Oh! sweet, dear love, how very much J love and adore you. 
You are my own, yes, my own dear, sweet Lusband, my Emile. I 
was much charmed with the fine scenery all about Arrochar on 
Thursday, a pretty fine day. We went to tke top of Lech Lomond, 
driving, and had Luncheon in one of the beattiful glens, and returned 
to Arrochar in the afternoon. Our party were some people from 
Perth I did not know, and the two Griersons (your friend’s brothers). 
Do you know Henry Grierson well? Instead of driving all the way 
home to-day, I went on board of the steamer at Tarbet, and went 
out at Luss, and drove home in our owa carriage. The Griersons 
came with us—they went on to Glasgow. I shall tell you something 
that will please my own sweet husband—I was the only Lady of the 
party who received no kisses from the gentlemen. I would not have 
done such a thing—and, of course, when I said I would not allow 
such a thing no one asked me. Now, Emile darling, tell me how 
you are, and where you are going to lodge. My own, my ever beloved 
Emile, I never meet with any one like you, my. own love. No, 
Emile, I never met with any one, but I compare you—and they 
are all so far inferior. I think myself fortunate in having got such 
a nice, dear, sweet, loving, little pet husband. I do love you with 
my heart and soul. You are my all, the only one I love, the only 
one I long to be with. My love increases daily. You ‘will not 
have been busy this week. I do so hope you shall often not be 
busy after we are married, then I shall have you all to myself. I 
shall have you all the day by my side—but that would spoil me. 

330 


Att ee a 


Appendix I. 


I fear you will be too kind to me. I shall be so devoted to you, 
my own sweet, dear pet. I wish you were here. I would ask 
leave to write no more, as I feel ill, really ill, with cold. I got my 
feet wet in crossing a stream, and had to drive 15 miles without 
getting them dried. I was very glad I was not ill, or I might have 
been very unwell—but that won’t be till next week. Love, excuse 
me to-night; you shall have an extra-letter for it. Now, sweet pet, 
God bliss you and prosper you. Take care of yourself. Much 
love and fond embraces from thy devoted wife, thy true and faithful 
Mr. 
Adieu, sweet love, my own dear Emile. I wish I were with 
you to-night—it would make me feel well. Adieu, sweet love. 
A kiss. 
Saturday Morning. 
Dearest and ever beloved,—I am just going down to Helensburgh. 
I feel better this morning, but not well. But M/ is so ill she can 
not go out, so I must go. Darling, I know you would be dis- 
appointed at not having a letter from me this morning, but, darling, 
I could not. I must stop, as M/ is beside me. Adieu, dear love. 
I am thy true wife, thy own fond, devoted 
Mma L’ ANGELIER. 


No. 41. 
[Post-mark, July 24, year illegible>} 


[Lerrer. ] 
Tuesday Morning, 
July 24th. 

My own beloved Emile,—I hope and trust you arrived safe home 
on Monday. I did so enjoy your kind visit on Sunday. It makes 
me feel in good spirits for a week after seeing you. Oh! I wish I 
could see you often—it would be such a comfort to both of us. 
But I hope there is happiness in store for us yet. When we are 
married it will be my constant endeavour to please you and to add 
to your comfort. I shall try to study you, and when you get a 
little out of temper I shall try and pet you, dearest—kiss and fondly 
you. I was not astonished at your thinking me cool, for I really 
have been in fault. But it is my way. But I must change it to 
you. I shall try and be more affectionate for the future. You know 
I love you dearly. Ah! Emile, you possess my love. I could 
not love any other as 1 do you, and believe me, I shall ever remain 
true to you. I think a woman who can be untrue ought to be 
banished from society. It is a most heartless thing. After your 
disappointment, dearest Emile, I wonder you would have had any 
confidence in another. But I feél that you have confidence in me, 
or you would not love me as you do. I long for the day when 

331 


Madeleine Smith. 


we shall be always together. When I left you on Sunday I was just 
in time to meet papa in the Drawing Room. After luncheon two 
Gentlemen, my little brother James, and myself, went and had a 
walk of 7 miles—across the hill to Loch Lomond. How often I 
wished you had been with me, I cannot tell. I do not enjoy any 
other one’s company, but yours. Your likeness is such a comfort to 
me. When ever I think of my own dear Emile, J go and look at 
you, I never saw such a good likeness, I love it truly. I owe you 
very many thanks for it. I shall try and get mine for you before 
you leave. Tell me beloved if there is anything I can do to please 
you. Do tell me if you love me. B. told me she saw you. On 
Sunday, one of the ladies in Mama’s carriage saw you and fancy she 
fell in love with your appearance. I did not wonder at that in the 
least—as I was quite charmed with you—I do not wonder at young 
ladies admiring you. I feel quite proud at the thought’s of having 
such a very nice-looking husband. But it is not only your apper- 
ance that makes me feel proud of you—but your superior mind, and 
ways of thinking from other young men. I look upon ‘ fast’ young 
men now with horror. I shall expect a letter from you on Saturday 
first the (28th)—Miss Bruce, P—O—Row. I shall write you before 
that. All our friends left us yesterday. I think B. and some of 
the family are going to the Bridge of Allan this week—on Wednes- 
day to be home on Saturday. Mama does not like me to leave home 
much—as she says things go all wrong when I am away. She depends 
too much on me. I can assure you it is no easy work to manage 
such a large household. I often feel glad that I have been accus- 
tomed to house-keeping—as I shall find the use of it some day. Now 
this is a very long letter for me and written so small. Adieu 
beloved. May God bless you is my earnest prayer. And with kind 
love and a fond embrace Believe me to be your devoted Mim. 
Miss Bruce 
Post Office 
Row 
Saturday the 28th. 


No. 43. 


Envelope addressed—‘‘ Mr. L’Angelier, 10 Bothwell Street, 
Glasgow.”’ 


[Posted at Row; Helensburgh post-mark, day not legible, July, 
1856; reached Glasgow July, 1856.] 


(Lerresr. ] 


Saturday Night, 11 0’c. 
Beloved and darling husband, dear Emile,—I have just received 
your letter. A thousand kind thanks for it. It is kind, and I shall 
332 


Appendix I. 


love you more for writing me such a letter. Dearest, I do love 
you for telling me all you think of me. Emile, I am sorry you 
are ill. I trust to God you are better. For the love of heaven 
take (care) of yourself. Leave town for a day or two. Yes, darling, 
by all means go to Mrs. M‘Lan’s. It will do you much good 
—only, come back to me. Yes, Emile, you ought, in those sad 
moments of yours, to consider you have a wife. I am as much your 
wife as if we had been married a year. You cannot, will not, 
leave me, your wife. Oh! for pity’s sake do not go. I will do 
all you ask—only remain in this country I shall keep all my 
promises. I shall not be thoughtless and indifferent to you. On 
my soul, I love you and adore you with the love of a wife. I will 
do anything, I will do all you mention in your letters to please 
you, only do not leave me or forsake me. I entreat of you, my 
husband, my fondly loved Emile, only stay and be my guide, my 
husband dear. You are my all, my only, dear love. Have confi- 
dence in me, sweet pet. Trust me. Heaven is my witness, I shall 
never prove untrue to you — I shall, I am your wife. No other 
one shall I ever marry. I promise I shall not go about the sts., 
Emile, more than you have said. We went about too much. I shall 
not go about much. Bnt one you must promise me is this, that 
if you should meet me at a time in B/ St. or 8/ St. you will not 
look on me crossly. For it almost made me weep on the st. last 
winter sometimes when you hardly looked at me. I shall take lessons 
in water colours. I shall tell you in my next note what I intend 
to study. It will rather amuse you. P/ gave me the dog “ Sambo,”’ 
Skye breed, ‘‘ Pedro,” the coachman got for me, English Breed. 
They had their names when I got them. I am sorry you dislike 
melons, a8 they are rather a favourite of mine. I hope, dear pet 
Emile, you will get nice Lodgings. I always thought the Gardens 
were too far away from your office. How nicely the 12/. would 
suit us at Hillhead. I hope we may meet soon. P/ or M/ are 
not going from home. We intended to post to Arrochar, so it would 
be no use your being in the Boat. I shall not see you till the nights 
are a little darker. I can trust C.H.—she will never tell about our 
meetings. She intends to be married in November. But she may 
change her mind. Now, Emile, I shall keep all my promises I 
have made to you. I shall love and obey you—my duty as your 
wife is to do so. I shall do all you want me. Trust me, keep 
yourself easy. I know what awaits me if I do what you disapprove 
—off you go. That shall always be in my mind—Go, never to return. 
The day that occurs I hope I may die. Yes—I shall never look 
on the face of man again. You would die in Africa. Your death 
would be at my hands—God forbid! Trust me, I love you—yes, love 
you for yourself alone. I adore you with my heart and soul. Emile, 
I swear to you I shall do all you wish and ask me. I love you more 
than life. I am thine, Thine own Mimi L’Angelier. Emile, you 


333 


Madeleine Smith. 


shall have all your letters the first time we meet. It may cost me 
a sigh and pang, but you shall have them all. I wonder what you 
would do with one of my drawings—a stupid, black-looking thing. 
Minnoch left this morning—say nothing to him in passmg. It will 
only give him cause to say you did not behave in a gentlemanly 
manner. Do not do it. He said nothing to me out of place, but 
I was not a moment with him by myself. I did not wish to be alone 
with him. MHorrock’s is gone to England, so you need not put 
yourself about to ask if he shewed the letter. M‘K. saw it. They 
were all with me when M‘K. spoke to me. He will never be a 
gentleman, even with the Red Coat & 30th Regt. He goes to Ireland 
in three weeks—he is in London now. We have an old gentleman of 
86 years in the house just now, and he is trying, as he says, to make 
love to me. Poor old man, it is wonderful to see him. He has 
taken a lot of your last kisses from me. But you would not mind 
that if you saw the poor old man. His brother is here, too; he is only 
74. Their name is Bald. I shall do all I can with Janet, poor 
child. She fell down the back stairce., and has hurt her leg very 
much—so much so that she was obliged to go to bed. You will 
see her in Sept. She goes to school then. I shall answer your letter 
the next time I write. Love, my pet, my husband, my fond and 
ever dearly beloved Emile. Good night. May God grant you better 
health. Be happy. I will do all you wish, I shall keep my promise— 
this I swear. Be happy—weep no more. Adieu, sweet one. I am 
thy wife, thy own fond pet— 
Madeleine Smith, aliag Mum L’ ANGELIER. 


No. 45. 
os (Letter. ] 


Dearest Mary,—What a length of time since I have written you! 
But Emile told me you were at Gourock. I hope you enjoyed your 
visit and felt benefited from the change of air. What fine weather 
we have now, though it has been long in making its apperance. 
To-day is charming. They have all gone out driving, and I am 
obliged to remain at home, as we expect some friends, and it does 
not look very hospitable for visitors to arrive and find no one to 
receive them. That is why I am not out. Were you in Helensburgh 
one day about ten days ago. I thought it was like you, but I could 
not say. My sister and I were at Arrochar last week. I had never 
been there, and I was quite delighted with the wild highland scenery. 
We were on Loch Lomond—it is indeed the Queen of Scottish Lakes. 
The water was like a sheet of glass—the sky so blue and clear—in 
fact it was more like a picture than reality. Nothing I enjoy so 
much as fine scenery, and next to the scenery itself comes a fine 


334 


Appendix I. 


picture of the same subject. I have been too busy for sometime, so 
have not had so much reading as I should like. Mama has not 
been well, and that has occupied a good part of my time; but next 
week I shall begin again, as by that time I think she shall be 
quite convalescent. Since I last wrote you I have read ‘Sidney 
Smith’s Life,”’ and I like it very much. I have also read ‘‘ Life of 
Lord Cockburn,’’ which I did not much like. The characters men- 
tioned are all too old for me to remember, so I could not take the 
same interest in it an older person would. I am now at the life 
of ‘“‘Sir R. Peel,’’ but there is so much regarding Politics in it, 
that I find it rather dry sort of reading; but papa asked me to read 
it, so I shall do it. 

““T have got two dogs now to make pets of, ‘‘ Pedro” and 
“*Sambo,”’ both of them terriers. They are most affectionate. Their 
great delight is killing rats, and I assure you I gratify them in 
their desire. I fear I shall not have the pleasure of seeing you 
yet this summer, as I know of nothing that shall call me to Glasgow, 
till I come for the winter. I do long to be acquainted with you, 
and I don’t see how it can be managed. I think I must just have 
patience, and wait for a little time yet. All things may yet end 
well, but I rather fear dear Emile and I shall have annoyances 
yet. But we must hope for the best. Adieu for the present. With 
kind love, I am, dear Mary, your affectly., Mono. 


Friday afternoon. 


No. 47. 


Envelope addressed—‘‘ For Mr. L’Angelier, 10 Bothwell Street, 
Glasgow.”’ 


{Helensburgh post-mark, August, 1856, day illegible; reached 
Glasgow, 6.45 p.m., 14th August, 1856; deliverable next morning 
by first delivery. ] 


[Lertree. | 


Wednesday afternoon. 


Beloved & ever dear Emile,—All by myself. So I shall write to 
you, dear husband. Your visit of last night is over. I longed for 
it. How fast it passed—it looked but a few minutes ere you left 
me. You did, love, look cross at first, but thank Heaven you looked 
yourself ere you left—Your old smile. Dear fond Emile, I love you 
more and more. Emile, I know you will not go far away from me. 
I am your wife. You cannot leave me for ever. Could you, Emile? 
I spoke in jest of your going last night. For I do not think you will 


335 


Madeleine Smith. 


go very far from me, Emile, your wife. Would you leave me to 
end my days in misery. For I can never be the wife of another 
after our intimacy. But; sweet love, I do not regret that—never 
did, and never shall. Emile, you were not pleased because I would 
not let you love me last night. Your last visit you said ‘“‘ You would 
not do it again till we were married.’’ I said to myself at the time 
well, I shall not let Emile do this again. It was a punishnient to 
myself to be deprived of your loving me, for it is a pleasure, no 
one can deny that. It is but human nature. Is not every one that 
loves of the same mind? Yes, I did feel so ashamed after you 
left of having allowed you to see (any name you please to insert). 
But as you said at the time, I was your wife. Emile, you must con- 
sider about leaving me. I do not think you need expect to get the 
Australian situation—there are always people ready to fill such situa- 
tions, friends of those connected with it. You have given up your 
situation in Huggins. Get another you say not in Glasgow. Well, 
try some other Town in Scotland, or if you would go to England, 
then we might have a chance of seeing each other sometimes. But 
to go to Australia never more to come back to your wife, your Mini 
—tinkind of you, Emile, to think of such. Will nothing persuades 
you to remain in Huggins? Emile, my husband, I do not intend to 
make any promises, as I know you won’t receive them or believe 
them (fearful thing, but it is my own fault). But I know now 
pretty well what you would like me to do, and what you dislike, 
so I shall by actions try and retain your dear love. I shall do all 
I can that I know shall please you. I shall not go out as I did, 
but I need you make promises. It shall be actions. What made me 
feel a little vexed with you last night was this—You went back on 
last winter, and that you promised me you would not do. I have 
done all I could to try and make myself better. I hope you got home 
safe, and were none the worse of it. How kind of you, sweet love, 
to come so far to see me. Thank you, love. A fond dear embrace— 
a kiss, dear love, my own sweet Emile, my best loved husband. 
Forgive me—and be what we once were. I thank you so much for 
these grapes, they were so very nice and cool. I shall not wear 
“ Crinoline,”’ as you. dont like it. It is off to-day. No one heard 
you last night. Next night it shall be a different window; that one 
is much too small. I must see you before you go to Badgmore. I 
am so glad I have your letters, as they are such a pleasure to me. I 
read and read them over and over again—and I love them so. I 
hope you will correct the person who told you of our having been 
at the Tweedie’s and Raits. I have seen Mr. Rait in the shop—when 
I was in with Papa—but that is all. And I have heard M/ say she 
. has met Mrs. Rait at parties, but that is all. I never spoke to Miss 
Rait. I knew her by sight, but that is all. James called at the 
Tweedies while they were at Stone. I dont like the family—there 
is no great respect attached to Mr. T.’s name. As for Tweedie, 


336 


Appendix I. 


junr., I dont know him even by sight. So, sweet love, you may hear 
much that is false when you have heard of two such simple things 
being wrong. I shall tell Jack some day you know Miss Dougall, 
the Dr. daughter in Elembank Place. I remember long long ago 
of seeing you meet that young Lady opposite to Aunt’s windows, 
whether by appointment or not I cannot say. Aunt told me then 
you were engaged to her. I had a letter from Aunt this morning, 
in which she says she saw you—but you did not look well. Your 
hair is so long that it makes you look (now dont be angry) not near 
so good looking. Are you cross at me for saying that. No, love, 
you are not. ‘I must have a letter from you very soon—the beginning 
of the week, perhaps Wednesday, Miss Bruce P.O., Row. You shall 
tell me all your arrangements. I was in Helensburgh this morning 
early—making markets. I wonder often what they would do if I 
were not here. M/ never goes to a shop herself. I must stop. 
Adieu, love. Adieu, sweet husband. I am thy Wire, tHy Mii. 


Wednesday night, 11 o’clock. 


Beloved husband,—This time last night you were with me. To- 
night I am all alone. Would we had not to part. How happy, 
happy we would be. Yes I long for the time when we shall be 
united never more to part. I long for it every day. I would give 
the world to be with you—yes, my love, to be near you—to live 
with you. Time, I hope, will pass quickly when we shall be one, 
sweet dear love. You must not leave me to go out of Europe, Emile, 
consider your old Mother, if you go you will never see her more, and 
your dear sisters, and your Mini. Can you leave me for ever. Could 
you come ard take farewell of Mini for ever. Could you break my 
heart by telling me “this, Mini, is the last time I shall see you.” 
Could you do this, Emile—Emile, my only love, my sweet dear 
husband? I love you more this night than ever. Do, beloved, stay 
near me, my only friend, my only love. My friends, every one of 
them, are nothing to me compared with you. You, and you only, 
are the only being I love—on this Earth. You could not live in 
a far country, you would die. Emile give one serious thought to 
it, and make the resolve that you will not leave England. Thank 
you again for coming to see me. I shall never be able to thank 
you for all your kindness to me, my love, my own beloved Emile. 
Dear, fond pet, I trust to God you are well. I shall wait with 
anxiety till Wednesday for your letter. I could not ask if before that 
day, as you might not have time. Sweet dear love, Good night. ~ 
May heaven guide you and change your mind. May God prosper 
-you, and may you long health—long life and prosperity. Adieu, dear 
love. A fond embrace. A dear sweet kiss to thee my Husband, my 
only love. Adieu, I am thy Wire, tHy Mint L’ ANGELIER. 


I shall write you Friday for Saturday to Mrs. Jenkins. Adieu 


sweet love adieu a kiss. 
Y 337 


Madeleine Smith. 


No. 49. 


Envelope addressed—‘‘ Mr. L’Angelier, at 10 Bothwell Street, 
Glasgow.” 


~[Row, Helensburgh, and Glasgow post-marks, both illegible; Row 
post-mark also illegible. ] 


{Lerrer. ] 
Thursday evening. 

-My own dear Emile, how must I thank you for your kind, dear 
letter. Accept a fond embrace and dear kisses and assurances that 
I love you as much as ever and have never regretted what has 
occurred. I forgive you freely from my heart for that picture— 
never do the same thing again. I am better, though I have still cold 
—it is more my cough that annoys me. I do wish I could get rid of 
that cough. I often fear it is not a good cough; it has been going 
and coming all summer, but I shall take great care dear love for 
your sake. I hope you will get away—do you not find the horror of 
being obliged to ask a master leave to go from home for a short 
time. I do wish you were your own master. Will you not try when 
in England to get some other situation with a larger income. I wish 
you could get one out of Glasgow. You dislike Glasgow, and so do 
I—try and see what you can do while you are away. I cannot see you 
ere you go, for which I am sorry. You forget that my little sister 
is in my Bed Room, and I could not go out by the window or leave 
the house and she there. It is only when P. is away I can see 
you, for then Janet sleeps with M. You see I cannot see you. If 
you go.on Monday, dont write me again till I tell you. If you 
do not go, write me so as I may not write to Badgemore C.H. I 
shall not write to Badgemore till the end of the week. I like Miss 
Williams letter. I think she is very nice. I like her ere I have 
seen her. Excuse me, but I always just say what I think, but I 
dont like the other young lady. I cannot tell you what it is, but 
there is something I dont like. I judge much of a person from their 
letters and handwriting. I maybe wrong—she may be nice. Jack 
is still in pain with his leg, but quite able to walk with a halt. 
What a stupid boy you are. I told what I liked in the August 
“Blackwood.” I shall read the Sept. one on Monday. I think 
you should not mind getting a Ring, but you shall have the size. I 
dont (know) which finger it ought to be I am sure. I have never 
noticed these things. I did tell you at one time that I did not like 
William Minnoch, but he was so pleasant that he quite raised him- 
self in my estimation. I wrote to his sisters to see if they would 
come and visit us next week, also him, but they can not. I hope 
you shall have fine weather while you are away. It will do yon 
so much good, and cheer you up—wont it, love? You ask me what 
I have been reading. Well then I shall tell you. The lives of 
‘“Lenardo de Vinci,’’ and ‘‘M. Angelo,’’ also ‘‘ Andrea del Sarto ”’ 


338 


Appendix I. 


—all first-class painters. I am fond of reading the lives of painters. 
The life of Andrea del Sarto quite makes me feel melancholy. His 
life was a life of unhappiness—he was a prey to sorrow—he never 
knew what it was to be happy—he died early deserted by all— 
even by his wife—yes by his wife, the one who should have stayed 
by him—and shared all his sorrows and anxieties. Mrs Grierson has 
not come. She will be to-morrow—we have people from the Highlands 
with us. This is such a horrid cold night—the wind is howling— 
and rain—it makes me feel so sad. There are two things I dislike— 
the noise of waters and the wind—perhaps you may like them both 
do you, love? I must stop as my candle is just going out—so dear 
darling Emile I shalt wish you good-night wishing you were here 
by me. God bliss you and make you happy. I shall write you for 
Monday. Adieu, my sweet, my ever dear and fond Emile. A kiss 
a fond embrace much dear love from me your own for ever, your 
truly fond and devoted Mrmr L’ ANGELIER. 


After I am your wife I shall be obliged ‘to sign my name as 
Madeleine Mimi L’ Angelier—will that be the way. Dont you think 
it will be long enough without my 4th name of Hamilton. 

M.M.H.L. 

Adieu, sweet love a kiss my pet fond and ever dear husband my 

own dear Emile yours for ever. 


Saturday, night, half-past 12 o’clock. 

My own dear Emile,—I must bid you adieu in this note. May you 
enjoy your trip, be happy with your friends, and may you again 
return in health, safety, and happiness to Glasgow. I hope and 
trust the change may do you good, that you shall put in a stock 
of health for the winter months. I hope you feel well and strong. 
I am better though still cold. When I get into a breeze I cough— 
but I shall be all well soon. Adieu, my dear love. May you escape 
all danger—be careful of yourself for my sake. We have a lot of 
friends to dinner to night. I do wonder if you are in Helensburgh 
to-night. I fancy no—something says you are not. J had an 
invitation yesterday from some friends in London to go and pay 
them a visit (not Bessie), but M. would not allow me—so I have 
declined, for which I am very sorry: We. are to have friends from 
Ireland next week, among the number a very nice young fellow 
with large moustache. If you wish to cut all the hair off your face, 
why then do it, but I am sure it wont improve your appearance 
in the least. Now be a dear good little husband mine, and excuse 
me writing you a longer note—it is so late. A fond dear embrace, 
much love and lots of kisses. Adieu my sweet love, take care of 
yourself. A kiss, a fond embrace from Thy ever true and ever 
devoted dear Moa L’ AncEtmr. 


I shall write to you to Badgemore the end of the week, about 
Thursday. Adieu sweet love ever and ever yours Mimi L. 
339 


Madeleine Smith. 


No. 51. 
Envelope addressed—‘‘ Mr. L’ Angelier, 10 Bothwell Street, Glasgow. 


[Helensburgh post-mark, Sept. 29, 1856; reached Glasgow 6.45 
same evening; deliverable next morning, first delivery. ] 


[Lerrer. } 


My own ever dear Emile,—I did not write you on Saturday as 
C. H. was not at home, so I could not get it posted. I hope, love, 
you are home and well—quite well—and quite able to stand all 
the cold winds of winter. I am quite well—quite free of cold. i 
dont think I cau seé you this week. But I think next Monday night 
I shall as P/ and M/ are to be in Edr., but my only thought is 
Janet—what am I to do with her? I shall have to wait till she is 
asleep, which may be near 11 o’C. But you may be sure I shall 
do it as soon as I can. I expect great pleasure at seeing you. As 
a favour do not refer to what is past. I shall be kind and good, 
dear sweet love, my owa my best loved husband—I do love you 
very much. What cold weather we have had. Mr. Minoch has 
been here since Friday—he is most agreeable—I think—we shall 
see him very often this winter—he says we shall—and P/ being so 
fond of him I am sure he shall ask him in often. I hope to hear 
from you very soon. Will you love write me soon. You know 
how much I love to hear from you. Nothing gives me more 
pleasure—sweet love, my own dear Emile. There is a chance I may 
be in Glasgow to-morrow, but I am not sure till I see P/ to-night, 
but B. is with me, and I would not see you. I may not go, but I 
think we shall. There is a chance of our being in Glasgow the end 
of Oct. P/ is not well, and he finds it too much going up and down 
—but I can write no more at present, so with very kind much love 
and kisses a fond embrace Believe me, ever yours, most truly 
and fondly your own, your ever dear Mint. 

I have just got word of the death of my old sweetheart in Edr. 
for which I am not in the least sorry—love again to you sweet love. 
Adieu, ever yours, Mimi. 


No. 53. 


Envelope addressed—‘‘ Mr. L’Angelier, Mrs. Jenkins, 11 Franklin 
Place, Great Western Road, Glasgow.”’ 


[Helensburgh post-mark, October, day and year illegible; reached 
Glasgow, October 8, year illegible; deliverable next morning, first 
delivery. ] 

[Lerter. } 
Tuesday morning. 

My dear Emile,—The day is cold so I shall not go out—so I shall 
spend a little time in writing you. Our meeting last night was 

340 


Appendix I. 


peculiar. Emile you are not reasonable. I do not wonder at your 
not loving me as you once did. Emile I am not worthy of. you. 
You deserve a better wife than I. I see misery before me this 
winter. I would to God we were not to be so near to Mr. M. 
You shall hear all stories and believe them. You will say I am 
indifferent because I shall not be able to see you much. I forgot 
to tell you last night that I shall not be able of an evening to let 
you in—my Room is next to B. and on the same floor as the front 
door. I shall never be able to spend the happy hours we did last 
winter. Our letters I dont see how I am to do. M. will watch 
every post. I intended to speak to you of all this last night—but 
we were so engaged otherways. I do hope you got home safe, and 
that you have got no cold—tell me love. I could not sleep all 
night. I thought of your unhappy appearance—you shed tears love 
—but I did not. Yes, you must think me cool—but it is my nature. 
I never did love any one till I loved you—and I shall never love 
another. Love, Emile, my sweet Darling, causes unhappiness in 
more ways than one. I know you will, I feel sure you will, quarrel 
with me this winter. I know it well, sweet love—but God only 
knows, dearest, that I have no desire ever to be parted from you, 
so, Emile, my own sweet Emile, if we should ever part it will be 
on your side, not mine. I sometimes fancy you are disappointed 
with me. I am not what you once thought I was. I am too much 
of a child to please you. I am too fond of amusement to suit your 
fancy. I am too indifferent, and I do not mind what the world 
says, not in the ieast—I never did. I promise to marry you knowing 
I would never have my father’s consent. I would be obliged to marry 
you in a clandestine way. I knew you were poor. All these I did not 
mind. I knew the world would condemn me for it but I did not: 
mind. I trust we have days of happiness before us—but God knows we 
have days of misery too. Emile, my own, my ever dear husband, I 
have suffered much on your account from my family. They have 
laughed at my love for you—they taunted me regarding you. I was 
watched all last winter. I was not allowed out by myself for fear I 
should meet you—but if I can I shall cheat them this winter. I shall 
advoid you at first, and that may cause them to allow me out by 
myself. I shall write you as often as I can—but it cannot be three 
times a week as it has been. And speaking of writing you, I intend 
to change the day—Monday, it is not convenient for to post a letter 
for you on Sunday—so it shall rather be Tuesday. I thank you very 
much, my dear love, for being at such trouble to come and see me 
I thank you truly from my soul & do accept a dear embrace. ~ I 
shall never forget last night. There is a sentence still in my ear 
you said about God stricking you dead if ever you meet me again. 
Since my childhood that is a sentence I have shuddered to hear 
expressed. When I was very young, about 5 years, a woman made 
use of that sentence on my Grand papa’s farm, and she was struck 


341 


Madeleine Smith. 


dead that hour—it has never left me since. I heard you say it. 
I do hope you were none the worse of coming out, were you— 
darling Emile, believe me, I love you—yes, I do, and that most 
sincerely. I have come to the conclusion that you do not know 
me. If you were with me long you would know me better—it is 
only those I love that I am indifferent too—even my Dog—which I 
love—sometimes I hate it, and for no reason—it is only a fancy 
which I cannot help. To strangers it is different. I do love you 
truly fondly. Do you still wish to show your Likeness to a friend? 
I hope 1 did not show much temper to you last night did I sweet 
love? Adieu for the present. A very fond embrace to you, sweet 
dear husband. I am thy ever true and ever loving and dear 
Mint L’. 


Wednesday. 
My own dear Little Pet,—I:hope you are well. M/ and P/ got 
home last night. I don’t know if I should send you the note I 
wrote yesterday. If you dont like it burn it, like a dear. I am 
well—and I do love you very very much. I hope to have a letter 
from you some day next week—C.H. Sweet dear, we are quite full 
of company. Saturday and Monday we are to have a large dinner 
party. I shall tell you in my next letter the way I think we shall 
do with your Letters in the next winter. Adieu dear love a very fond 
embrace—much much love and kisses, your own your ever dear 

loving little Mini. 


No. 565. 


Envelope addressed—‘‘ Mr. L’Angelier, Mrs. Jenkins, 12 s:10u..un 
Place, Great Western Road, Glasgow.” 


{Helensburgh post-mark, Oct. 20, 1856; reached Glasgow 6.45 
same evening; deliverable next morning, first delivery. ] 


[Lerren. } 


Sunday evening, 11 oc. 

My very dear Emile,—This has been a long wet nasty day. I 
would have given the world if you had been here to talk to me, I 
have been so stupid it would only have been you that could have 
made me feel alive. I hope you are quite well. Is not this horrid 
bad weather. Next Sunday about this time you shall be with me 
love, D.V. I hope to God we may enjoy the meeting. P/ and M / 
leave this on Saturday to return on Monday. If to-morrow is fine 
I am going down to Dumbarton to pay several visits—we have a 
dinner party in the afternoon. I think we shall leave this for Town 
in three weeks, that is, if the house shall be ready for us. P/ is 
very busy with some matters connecting the coming Elections—so 
we wont be able to go to Bridge of Allan. James is liking school 
very much—only, poor boy, he complains of not getting enough 

342 


Appendix I. 


sugar or Butter—fancy, he pays £80 for his board alone—it is far 
too much for such a boy—Is it not. Janet is not well—she has a 
dreadful bad cold. Do you know I have taken a great dislike to 
C.H. I shall try and do without her aid in the winter. She has 
been with us four years, and I am tired of her, but I wont show it 
to her so dearest love be easy on that point. I know who it was 
that saw me walking to Helensburgh, and told you. It was the 
Kennedys. A few minutes before I met them I had been jumping 
and running with my large Newfoundland Dog ‘‘ Major,’’ and when 
I saw it was them I thanked my stars I was walking—their brother 
was with them—I did not know them. B/ knew them, and told me 
it was them. P/ has sold his horse, and the one he has got he is 
not going to bring down here this season. I am to have a pony to 
myself next summer. I told a horse jockey man to look out for one 
yesterday. I think P/ means to drive a pair next summer. Any- 
thing for a little more expense. Dear love I love you so very much, 
I cannot tell you how much. You are my very dear little husband, 
my very dear sweet Emile—nothing I know will change you— 
you are my dear only love—I am yours, yes, your very own 
Mimi. 

So you still like your Lodgings. If you are not coming on the 
Sunday night but Saturday, remember you are to come on which 
ever night suits you. 

Monday morning. 

Write me for Saturday if you are to be on Saturday — night. 
If I dont hear from you then you will be on the Sunday. I am just 
going off to Dumbarton. The carriage will be here in ten minutes, 
and I am to have breakfast before I go—so with love. I am just 
up, half-past 10 o’c—you are horrified—a kiss darling of my soul. 


Adieu my pet my love ever your own fond & dear 
Moo L’ ANGELIER. 


No. 57. 


Envelope addressed—‘‘ Mr. L’Angelier, at Mrs. Jenkins, 11 
Franklin Place, Great Western Road, Glasgow.” 


[Posted at Glasgow, N ovember, day and year not legible; deliver- 
able between half-past 1 and 3 p.m.) 


[Lerrer. } 
Friday night, 12 o’c. 
My own darling, my dearest Emile,—I would have written you 
ere this, but as I did not intend to be out till Saturday, I saw no 
use in writing. I have not been out since Wednesday, when I was 
in a cab, and I thought I saw you in St. Vincent Street, but I was - 
not sure. Derest love, I hope you are more cheerful, and not sad. 


343 


Madeleine Smith. 


Oh, for your own wife’s sake do not be sad; it makes your Mimi 
feel sorry to think her husband is sad. Darling, try and not get low 
spirited. I hope your colds are better. It is horrid, cold weather. 
I have a fire night and day in my Bed Room, yet I am cold. I 
dislike winter weather. Sweet love, I have thought more of you for 
this last fortnight than ever I did—you are my constant thought. 
Emile is the only name ever on my lips. A fond embrace, sweet 
darling. Did you go to the concert? I did. Jack went, he came 
in, had ordered the cab, and brought me my gloves—(he always 
does that when I am going out with him) so I went and B/. I 
looked at every one but could not see my husband. Mr. M. was 
there with his horrid old sister—but I only bowed to them. I 
have not seen any of them yet. I dont understand why P/ has not 
asked him to dinner yet. Mr. Kirk was ill with cold, and so he 
stayed at home with P/ and M/. I shall send you the likeness some 
night soon, perhaps next week, but you shall have it. I shall send 
it to your Lodging. There is rather a coolness with us and Aunts 
this season. We shall not see them much. We have only seen 
them once. Sweet love, you should get those brown Envelopes— 
they would not be so much seen as white ones put down into my 
window. You should just stoop down to tie your shoe, and then 
slip it in. The backdoor is closed. M/ keeps the key for fear our 
servant boy would go out of an evening. We have got blinds for 
our windows. What queer girls those M‘Leans are opposite us—so are 
the Hamiltons. I have read over your last Letters to me so often, 
they are so kind and affete. I do love you very, very much my 
own sweet love. When you write William give him my very kind 
love. I should so much like to know the kind friend of my dear 
husband. Tell him how glad I shall be to become friends with him. 
I am so glad you did not go out to him. Dear love, a kiss. I saw 
Robert Anderson the ather day—he was speaking of Huggins, but 
he did not speak of you. I am so fond to hear any one speak of my 
own Beloved Mr. L’Angelier. He fancies I am going to take Mr. 
M. I am sure you wont like me in my jacket. I dont like it— 
both P/ and M/ do. My Bonnet is fawn. B/ has a pink one, and 
M/ wanted me to have pink, but I knew you would think pink very 
vulgar—Dear love, when I am your wife I shall require you to tell 
me what I am to wear, as I have no idea of dress myself. M/ and 
B/ do all that for me. My dress for the winter is to be dark grey 
Tweed—you will like that, I am sure. Emile, I know you wont 
look on my likeness with pleasure—it is so cross—but love when it 
was done, I had been in the horrid man’s place from 12 o’c, and I 
had it closed at 4 o’c—I had had no food from the night before, 
and I was very furious. I am just looking as cross as I did that 
night at you. I feel so ashamed, dear love, of having showed 
temper to you. But now you know it love. TI was at M/ to-day 


344 


Appendix I. 


about painting, and she said, nonsense, I did not require it. I told 
her she had promised, and then she said, “ Oh, well, there is plenty 
of time before we go home.’’ Emile, I shall tell you in confidence, I 
dont think we shall ever live at Row again. P/ is going to look at 
some property on Monday near Edr., and if he can get a nice large 
place Row will be sold. But he wont sell it till he gets another. 
Well, dearest love of a husband, I am going to bid you good-night. 
Would you were beside me, and I would fall asleep on your bosom, 
dearest love. What would I not give to place my head on your 
breast, kiss and fondel you—and then I am sure you would kindly 
love me—but some night I hope soon we may enjoy each other— 
what delightful happiness to be loved by a dear, sweet husband— 
our love then shall be more than we shall be able to express. I can 
fancy the first night we spend in each other’s arms. Emile, my love 
my all, my husband, if you were here now I am sure I would allow 
you to love me—I could not resist you, my love, my own beloved 
Emile. I have been ordered by the Dr. since I came to town to 
take a fearful thing called ‘‘ Peice Meal,” such a nasty thing, I am 
to take at Luncheon. I dont #fink I have tasted breakfast for 
two months. But I dont think I can take this Meal. I shall 
rather take Cocoa. But, dearest love, fond embraces much love 
and kisses from your devoted wife. Your loving and affet. wife, 
Mint L’ ANGELIER. 


No. 59. 
{Lerrer WRITTEN IN PEnNctt. | 


Beloved Emile,—I hope you will have this to-night—Accept it 
with my best, my kindest love. A kiss, sweet darling—I dont know 
if you shall have a letter from me again before Monday, but I shall 
try—I was at the Concert, M/ was with me.—Jack and B/. I have 
put up this likeness in a Old Book so that it may not be felt to be 
glass. I am just going out. Adieu, dearest love, a kiss, a fond 
embrace. Ever thine, thy own fond wife, Tuy Mrz. 

12 o’c Thursday. 


No. 61. 
Envelope addressed—‘‘ Mr. L’Angelier, 10 Bothwell Street, 
Glasgow.” 


[Posted Sauchiehall Street Receiving Office, Glasgow, Nov. 18; 
reached General Post Office same evening; deliverable next morning 
first delivery. ] 

[ Lerten. ] 
Monday evening. 

My own sweet darling,—I am at home all safe—and very well. 
I do assure you it was with no small pleasure I received your note 

345 


Madeleine Smith. 


to-day—it is such a time since I have heard from you. But we 
must so contrive that I shall hear from you every week. But I 
must. see all about it first, and shall let you know as soon as I can— 
derest love, it shall be as you want. Though I think it is a great 
piece of self-denial not to meet each other, Sweet love we must 
submit. I should so much like to see you. Do you not think I 
could sometimes see you at a window of a Sunday, and know (sic) 
one would know of it? I would see you, love, and that would be 
enough. My own sweet darling husband, I long to be your wife. I 
shall be thine, my own Emile, whenever you like, and, as you say, 
we shall do all our courting over again. We have had little of that. 
May our courting days last all our life; that would be happiness 
indeed; it must be all honeymoon with us, sweet love. You are a 
dear, sweet, good little pet. I dont like this house, it is not at all 
to my mind. M‘K. was two days with us; he was staying in 
Stirlingshire at Ashburn Hall with B/, and J— went to a large 
dancing party witb us on Friday, and then he posted home about 30 
miles on Saturday, and he left us in the afternoon. He has gone 
to Gibralter to-day. Though P/ did not look ill, yet he was. ill. 
Could you believe it, I walked 8 miles yesterday (Sunday), and did 
not feel tired. I am very good to write you to-night, as I am very 
tired, but I know you would like to hear from me—so I do think I 
am good—am I not, sweet little dear pet of a husband? You are a 
naughty boy to go and dream of me—and get excited. I shall tell 
you in my next note of a poor young fellow at Stirling who has 
fallen in love with your Mini. But dont fear, it is not returned. 
I was sorry for him—but good-night, much love, kisses, fond 
embraces, all good wishes, much warm, dear love to you, my only 
dear love, my life, my all, my own ever beloved and ever fond and 
affecte. husband. I am thy loving Wife, thy 
Mrmr L’ ANGELIER. 

First letter I have written in Blythswood Square house. Good- 
night my very sweet love. A kiss, Adieu, dear pet, my little 
husband, thy Mint. 


No. 63. 


Envelope addressed—‘‘ Mr. L’Angelier, 10 Bothwell Street, Glasgow.” 


[Posted Sauchiehall Street Receiving Office, Glasgow, November 
21, 1856; reached General Office about 7 p.m.; deliverable next 
morning, first delivery.] 


[Lerrer. ] 


Thursday Evening, 11 o’c. 
My very dear Emile,—I do not know when this may be posted, 
perhaps not to-morrow. But, love, you must remember that it is 


346 


Appendix I. 


not easy for me to post letters for you. I can have no fixed day— 
but depend on me, sweet. darling, you shall have a letter whenever 
I can—and if you do not get one it wont be your Mini’s fault. 
Now, love, you must not be angry with me—sweet ‘love—I do love 
you so much, I do so wish you were with me, how happy we should 
be in each others embraces. When shall that be, I wonder, dear 
Emile?—It may be a long time yet, God only knows, but hope for 
the best all may end well. I feol quite ill in this horrid place, 
Glasgow. I hate it so. I never thought the people looked so 
vulgar as they do now. They are a most vulgar-looking set. I 
was out for a time on Tuesday, but I have not been out since. 
I think we shall be in Town to-morrow. Jack and (I) were at a 

oncert on Wednesday evening. I hope you, sweet pet, are well; 
free from all colds. Nice, kind letter of Miss Lane’s; she is a nice 
creature, I am sure. How is Mary? Now, about writing. I wish 
you to write me and give me the note on Tuesday evening next. 
You will about 8 o’c come and put the letter down into the window 
(just drop it in, I wont be there at the time), the window next 
to Minoch’s close door. There are 2 windows together with white 
blinds. Dont be seen near the house on Sunday, as M/ wont be 
at Church, and she will watch. In your letter, dear love, tell me 
what night of the week will be best for you to leave the letter 
for me. If M/ and P/ were from home I could take you in very 
well—at the front door, just the same way as I did in India St. 
—and I wont let a chance pass—I wont, sweet pet of my soul, 
my only best loved darling. Oh, Emile, I wish I could throw 
myself in your arms and ask you to Jove me as my dear husband. 
I blush to think I write thus free to you; but, sweet love, are 
you not my own sweet husband? You will tell me if I am too 
free. You sweet, dear love—would we could meet, but it is better 
not—it would be a constant quarrel, and that is not plesant. I 
shall do all you ask me if I can; I shall try and do all I can 
to please you, my own sweet love. I wish I were out of this 
horrid town—what a place it is—I would not like to spend my 
life in such a place. I was to tell you about the poor young 
fellow at Stirling. Well, he, poor, stupid boy, would keep so near 
me—only speak to me—and to finish all he told me he could only 
ever love me. I told him I did not care a bit for him—and, only 
fancy, he began to weep. I was near weeping too, for I feel so 
sorry always to see a man shed tears. After a little I told him 
he was very foolish, and that he was never to think of me again. 
The day we came home he rode for about six miles after our 
carriage—and then returned—but I expect he will be coming to 
call one of these days soon—but I promised him I would not tell 
any of my family as they would laugh at him so. You are the only 
(one) I would tell. Is it not fun?—but I must say good-night, dear 


347 


Madeleine Smith. 


love. Much, much love and kisses, fond dear embraces. A kiss, 
adieu, good-night, your love, your own dear wite, your fond 
Mint L’ ANGELIER. 


Now you understand me, Tuesday evening next between 7 and 8 
o’C. Drop the note in between the Bars on the Street, and I shall 
take it in. The window with white blind next to Billy’s door. 
Adieu, dear love, a kiss, adieu. 


No. 65. 
Envelope addressed—‘‘ Mr. L’ Angelier, 10 Bothwell Street, Glasgow.’’ 
[Lerrer. ] 


Tuesday afternoon.—I received your note my own, my ever 
darling and dearest Emile. I thank you much for being so kind 
in writing me in such a dear, kind way. Thank you, dear love, 
you are kind to me. But I shall be so to you, my own, my ever 
darling. I am so glad you are enjoying yourself. I do like to 
hear that you are happy and well. I am so glad that you have 
met so much nice company. Do you not, sweet love, forget your 
Mini when you are among all these young ladies? do you never wish 
you were free to love another? But it is not fair of me to speak to 
you so, you are so good, so kind, and so loving. Sweet love, I 
wonder you care a bit for me, I have been so unkind to you. ~ But, 
love, if I were indifferent it was because I was not well. But it is 
all over now. Emile I love you more and more each day. Emile, 
I love you now as I never did before—you are my all—my only 
love. I do love you, sweet dear. I love you as much, far more than 
I ever did. I would do anything to become your wife, never more 
to leave you, to be your companion. Would we not love each other. 
Ah yes, we would, more than words can express, would we not, sweet 
one. You have misunderstood me regarding your income. What I 
meant when (I) said about the £50, I did think it was much tov little 
for you to receive for your services. You told me you had £100, and 
I was satisfied with the sum—and I tell you again it is quite enough. 
Yes, it is enough. I am satisfied with the sum—it is enough for all 
our wants. Emile, I knew you were poor, you told me yourself you 
were not rich. I am your wife. I shall love you as long as I live. 
Yes, for ever. I do love you truly, fondly. I would not change you 
for any one I ever saw. No, Emile, I would not exchange. You are 
all I can ever wish. You love me—and that is worth gold. We shall 
love and be happy. Yes; we, I trust, have many years of happiness 
before us—years that we shall enjoy life, and meet with no dis- 
appointments, nor annoyances. I was sorry I said anything about 

348 


Appendix 1. 


Mary—it was not kind of me. She, your kind and true friend, 
it was very bad of me—but I was vexed she said she would not 
write me. I thought she had taken some dislike to me, and would 
not write me. She had written me all along knowing M/ did not 
know—so I thought it peculiar she should drop writing without 
such other excuse. Pray, love, do not say a word to her about 
my writing in an unkind way. No, sweet love, say nothing to 
her about it. She is your friend, and that is enough—she shall 
be mine some day soon—she wont object then, shall she. Sweet 
dear, I could not help being introduced to Sir H. Chamberland. I 
met him up at the Wilsons. I did not know he was there—but. I 
dont like him in the least. I hope never to see him again—dont 
be angry, love. I could not help ‘it—pray pardon me, dear love. 
Good-bye for the present, love and kisses. Ever yours, for ever your 
own wife, your Mimi L’ ANGELIER, 


———— 


No. 67. 


Envelope addressed—* Mr. L’Angelier, Mrs. Jenkins, 11 Franklin 
Place, Great, Western Road, Glasgow ” 


[Posted Osborne Buildings Receiving Office, Glasgow, after 6.20 
p.-m., Dec. 5, 1856; reached General Office 10 p.m. same night; 
deliverable next morning, first delivery. ] 


[Lzrrer. ] 


I wish I had been with you to nurse you, give you all you 
wanted, dearest love, my own sweet pet, my own love, my dearest 
husband. You are in a fix with D. E. What can you do—will you 
ask him to come—is there no more spare room in your lodging for 
him. When he proposes you cannot well refuse. And, dear love, 
do you go abroad with him next summer. Wil. I not be your 
wife by that time. We could not part so soon, dearest pet. I will 
be very unfond of being left alone. Of course, if it is business, 
then I would not say a word. I should not like to be left 
alone in Bed—it would be so cold, so dull. You will see Mary 
to-morrow, and you will be looking sad and angry. She will know 
at once that Mini is annoying. Tell me if this is not the case? 
I know it will. I shall avoid going out with Jack as much as 
I can—(he is in Edr.)—will that, love, please you. A kiss, a fond 
embrace—by best beloved, my love my own sweet ever dear Emile. 
I have forgot this side, Love—Good-night. Adieu. 

I am not going out on Wednesday night. I have an invitation 
for Edr. in Feby. I have written to say I will give no answer 
about it till the time comes—and we shall see. But I had an 


349 


Madeleine Smith. 


invitation yesterday which will make you laugh. Where do you 
think it was too—New York. I had told some friends in London 
I would like much to go, and they are going in April, so they said 
if I was still in the same mind, would I go. It was all fun on my 
part. When I heard of it, love, I was sure you would have a good 
laugh: I have told you, I think, that I have nothing to do with 
the house-keeping now. I gave it up when we left Row, and M/ 
says I must take it again in summer. So I wont require to go out 
and make markets. I like to do it very much in the Country, but 
not in Town. M/ is tired of it, but I wont take it off her hands. 
Sweetest, dearest love, if it is more convenient for you to drop in 
my note at 6 o’c do it—it will suit me just as well. If not six, 8 
o’c. Will you, darling, write me for Thursday first. If 6 o’c, do 
it—I shall look—if not at 6—why I shall look at 8 o’c. I hope 
no one sees you—and, darling, make no noise of the window. You 
mistake me. The snobs I spoke off do not know anything of me. 
They see a light, and they fancy it may be the servants room. and 
they may have some fun—only you know that I sleep down stairs— 
I never told any one, so dont knock again my beloved, but dearest 
love, good night. Fond, dear embraces, much sweet, warm love. 
I hope your next will be nice as the one of Tuesday; it was a dear, 
sweet letter. Adieu, my love, my only love, my fond one, my 
husband. Your devoted wife, your own dear fond and loving 
Mint L’ ANGELIER. 


Thursday, 11th Dec., 6 o’c or 8 o’c—Tell me what that P. before 
Emile stands for. Adieu, love, a kiss, good-night. God bless and 
prosper you with all you desire. Adieu. M. L’A. 

Remember dont knock at the window. 


Sunday evening, 11 0’C. 

My very dearest Emile,—Your note of Friday pained me much. 
I was sorry if you were put to any inconvenience by returning at 
10 0’C to see if your letter remained there. My husband, do you 
for an instant suppose that your wife, your Mini, would forget 
that you mentioned in your previous letter that you would drop 
a note Friday night. Could I forget it—no, never! If I did 
not mention in (as I could not have done) my note, why that was 
a forget. For the future I shall take more notice of the time. 
The tone of your letter was so different from the last; it has made 
me feel, I assure you, most unhappy. Emile, my own ‘dearest love, 
I have done all I vould to please you, yet you are not pleased 
with me. Would I were dead, and then I would annoy my husband 
no more. I wept for hours after I received your letter, and this 
day I have been sad, yes very sad. My Emile, I love you, and you 
only. I have tried to assure you no other has a place in my 
heart. It was Minnoch that (I) was at the concert with. You see 1 
would not hide that from you.~ Emile he is P’s friend, and I know 


350 


Appendix I. 


he will have him at the house. But need you mind that when I 
have told you I have no regard for him. It is only you, my Emile, 
that I love—you should not mind public report. You know I am 
your wife, and that we shall shortly be united—so, Emile, it matters 
not. I promised you I should be seen as little in public with him 
as I could. I have avoided him at all times. But I could not on 
Wednesday night, so, sweet love, be reasonable. I love you, is 
not that enough. I hope we may not have occasion to he vexed 
with each other again. A kiss, love, and now I will begin and be 
more affecte. My own sweet darling, I was so glad I had written 
you for Saturday. You would get my note while you were in bed. 
1 hope you are better, dear love—tell me, sweet one. It is not 
want of time with me regarding your letters. But, pet, believe 1 
dont get out—that is the worst thing to post them. 


No. 69. 
Envelope addressed—‘‘ Mr. L’Angelier, 10 Bothwell Street, Glasgow,” 


[Posted Glasgow, 8th Dec., 1856; deliverable between half-past 
one and three same day. ] 


[LerreR. ] 


Thursday evening 4 past 11 o’c. 

My dearest love, my own fond husband, my sweet Emile,—l 
cannot resist the temptation of writing you a line this evening. 
Dear love, by this time you have my parcel. I hope ere long you 
may have the original, which I know you will like better than glass 
likeness—wont you, sweet love! I hope you got it safe—C. H 
left it at the door for you. Sweet Emile, I intend going (if the 
day is fine) to Row on Saturday with Papa, it may be the last 
time I may be ever there—but I dont care, so as I am with you, 
love. You would be annoyed at M/ going to the concert with me 
—I was, for I knew it would vex you, but all this annoyance will 
soon end, so, darling, dont vex yourself about them. I am glad 
you promised me not to say anything to him—and you will ask 
no one.to speak to him for you, you know, dear, it would all come 
back on your wife, so I know, sweet love, you wont annoy him. 
I did read ‘‘ Dred,” but was disgusted with it—it was one wet 
Sunday at Row, and I had nothing to do, so I read the whole of 
it. Shall have your note to-morrow. Emile, I dont see when we 
are to have a chance. I dont know, but I rather think P/ and 
M/ will go into Edr. with James in January, but. dont hear of 
their being from home in Feby. I rather fear we shall have 
difficulties to contend with—but we must do our best. How I am 


35! 


Madeleine Smith. 


to get out of the house in the morning with my things—which 
will be two large boxes, &c. I dont know. I rather think they 
must go the night before. And for that I would try and get the 
back decor key. The Banns gave me great fright. I wish there 
was any way to get quit of them. What stupid things they are. 
I don’t see the use of them—do you, sweet darling? I called for 
the Tweedies to-day, but I knew they always go out at 2 o’c, so 
we called at 5 o’c, and, as I expect, ‘they were not at home, 
‘for which I was very glad—they asked us 4 times last winter— 
we never went, and never did we ask them. We meet (sic) several 
gentlemen in town to-day who asked to have the pleasure of dancing 
with us at ‘‘ Thomson’s Ball’ to-night. But I said we did did 
(sic) not intend to go to any Glasgow Balls this winter. I shall 
just laugh at Aunts the next time they speak of that report. Is 
it the M‘Dougals in Elembank (sic) Crescent that you mean are 
such gossips—one of them always laughs when she meets me—it is a 
pretty one, with light hair. Jack admires her so, thinks there is 
no girl in Town like her—you use (sic) to think so too. Dear love, 
a fond embrace a kiss you sweet dear little Pet. Oh, Emile, 
I dote on you, I love and adore you with my soul. A kiss. I see 
de M. passing our house. How is Madame. Have you been to see 
them yet. I would not like to live with my relations as they 
do—I would rather have a small place and be with my husband 
only—I dont like friends in the house. Oh, it will be so charming 
to stay with only you—only you, my love, my husband, my own 
dear Emile. We shall be happy—we shall have such nice, quite 
(stc) evenings all to ourself. We shall often talk over all our past 
performances—it really has been quite a small romance. Emile, the 
day you gave me that note telling me you loved me, I had not 
the least idea what its contents were. You must have thought me 
most cool. I got a start when I read it—it was well I did not 
read it beside you—or at the moment I might have said something 
that would have vexed you, love. I did not expect a declaration 
of your love so soon. In fact, I had been so used to flirtations 
that I thought it was all flirtation on your part. Though I did 
begin with you flirting, yet, love, it was not long before I began to 
think of you more than I did of others—then to see you pass in 
the morning was my last thought at night and my first in the 
morning. I admire your appearance (you know you are rather 
handsome) from the first. When I went to Row after the walks 
B/ and you and I had, I was unhappy for days thinking of you. 
I fancied you at all hours—but I never for a moment thought you 
loved me. How things do come about. Did you or I fancy the 
first morning we met in Sauchiehall Street that we should yet 
be husband and wife. I am sure I never did! What were my 
feelings that morning—I thought you would think me bold and 
impudent coming out. to meet you a stranger. I wept for an hour 


352 


Appendix I. 


after I got home for having done such a thing. I thank God now 
I did it, or we would not have been as we are my love my husband my 
own beloved Emile. I am very well. My dear, if I was to take as 
you say a glass of Port wine I would not be unable to stand—two 
spoonfuls of Port is enough for me—but dont fear—I am very 
strong—can stand a very great deal. But you will wish me to end 
this now, and so I shall, sweet love, good-night, sweet one. Would 
I were by your side, my head on your breast. Perhaps you will 
like to be more uncommon still than other young married people, 
and never love at all. I see you dear laugh and say that would 
not suit very well—no, we shall just be common for once. What 
kind of little girl have you—J would object decidedly to any little 
girls coming home to me, as I have a very great dislike to other 
peoples children. In fact, I dont like them at all—it is Mrs. 
Clark’s girl at the Gardens—is she very fond of her Papa L’ Angelier. 
Only fancy your being called Papa. You would think you were 
getting old then. I think it would be great fun to see you 
Papa to a nice little child. I know, dear love, you would like 
to be papa to Mini’s Baby—would you not, sweet one. Yes I 
am sure, but good-night—a fond embrace, much kind, dear love, 
a kiss, a sweet dear kiss. I am your own, your fond wife, your 
ever dear Mrnr L’ ANGELIER. 


My very kindest & warmest love to Mary on Monday when you 
see her. I like her very much, and will like her better. 

Please to tell me love what the P. before Emile stands—I must 
know all your names. Adieu a kiss, sweet embraces—a kiss. 


No 71. 


Envelope addressed—‘‘ Mr. L’ Angelier, 10 Bothwell Street, 
Glasgow.” 


[Lerrer. ] 


Sunday morning, 1 oc. 

Beloved and best of husbands,—my love, a fond embrace for thy 
letter of this evening. Oh how glad I am to get such letters 
from you, the man I love and adore. My love my own darling 
Emile my husband ever dear I did not go to Row. I had a bad 
headache when I woke at 6 oc in the morning, and more I was ill, 
so I thought it best not to go in case of cold. I went out a little 
with Mama in the forenoon, but I was in all the afternoon, and as 
Jack did not leave till 5 oc, he stayed at home with me, and mama 
and B/ went out. Beloved, I was not out yesterday (friday) so 


Z 353 


Madeleine Smith. 


could not post your note, which I enclose and to-day I could not 
post it with M/, darling—I was sorry you did not get it as it looked 
careless of me. J] am sorry you did not go with de M. to H.—it 
would have done you good, a day in the fresh, country air. Dearest 
of my soul how can I return. you such kindness. I shall try and do 
it by continuing to love and adore you my love my husband a kiss 
a fond dear embrace. I am so glad love you are better. My arm 
is almost well. Jack has just come home from Edr. I sat up for 
him with P/—he is a dear, good boy. James dined with him 
to-night—he is to be home on Friday. Janet is a good girl, but 
she (is) not very affct. I think you would like her. I know you 
would like Jack. I have two of your letters to answer. I must 
begin and do it sweet dear darling. The first time I can sweet love 
we shall meet—dont fear M/h watching, he wont know. I wish we 
could meet sooner. C. H. has promised that she shall be happy 
to put all things out of the house. I shall see them off before I go. 
P/ and M/ would not let them go if I left them. It will be very 
easy—just put them out at the back gate—people may fancy some of 
the servants are leaving. But I shall manage all that. About 
those horrid Banns—love, I wish. we could do without them, for if 
they go on friday, why my old father will be there at church on 
Sunday to stop them. And then, sweet darling, how could you trust 
two witnesses. Emile, my sweet love, I have often heard of 
clergymen in Glasgow. marrying people with out banns, &c. Just 
go to their house, and ask them to marry us. They would never 
refuse. If not that sweet love why not the J.P.? And you say that 
a marriage by a J. of Peace is binding, why not do it? So as we 
are married we need not mind how dear love of my soul. I knew, 
sweet love, you would dislike my Jacket. I tell M / and P/ I look 
a fright in it, but they like them. If I had known it was your pipe 
in my window, darling love Emile I would have taken it in—but 
I fancied it was some man’s. You sweet dear darling, a kiss a fond 
dear embrace—a kiss, my love, my life, my beloved husband. [I 
hope, darling, your excuse to Lane and D. EK. in the Spring will be 
that you have your wife at home, and cannot leave her. I will be 
so happy if that is the case. I should so much like tc be your wife. 
My love, I long for it. TI sigh and wish I were near you, dear 
love. I do most sincerely love you with my heart and soul. I 
adore you, you dear little love of a husband. I saw Dr. Beattie 
this week, and we had a quarrel because I gave him my cheek to 
kiss. I told him if he did not kiss my cheek he must want—so the 
old fellow did as he was desired. I have often thought of he being 
a good hand to smooth down things. Emile, my husband, my love, 
you dear, sweet love, I would like to have a child, because I know 
you are fond of children—and I would I am sure love the child, 
you dear love, were the father off. Yes, Emile, I would be very 
sorry if we had no family—only I would be very jealous of a baby, 
354 


Appendix I. 


as I would then not get so much of your love. I would envy every 
loving word or look you bestowed on the child. Emile, I love you 
much, as much as I can. I dote on you with heart and soul. You 
will be sure to spoil me. You will pet me far too much. I have 
not be accustomed to much petting, so will be spoiled by you, I 
am sure, dear love, my truly dear love, my Emile. Last night I was 
dreaming we were walking together, and that we were so happy, 
heppy (sic), and so we shall be, love. Will we not be kind to each 
other. I wish I knew when we would be walking about with each 
other. Oh, what charming walks we shall have, and our evenings 
we shall spend happily, and oh! our nights we shall spend in 
pleasure, loving each other, dearest love. Give my best, my kind 
love to Mary on Monday. I have never seen her yet—mnot even on 
S. St. Every one is asking why B/ and I are not walking in S. St. 
in the afternoon. Mama was quite annoyed we did not go out 
several times this week in the afternoon. You dont mind when 
Mama is with us. When we go with her, she always comes home 
by S. St. Dearest love, I am doing all I can to be good. Consider- 
ing the way we walked every other winter—I am behaving very well 
this. But, sweet Emile, you dont think so. I fancy I see by 
your look. A kiss, my love. I wish I could see you smile. I 
would give anything to have an interview with you, dearest love, 
my pet husband. But I must stop for to-night. Again love, a 
kiss for your darling letters dear kind Emile. A fond dear, dear 
embrace, much love and kisses—my best wishes. Heaven be kind 
to you, my husband. I am thy fond, thy loving wife—thy own 
ever dear devoted Mint L’ ANGELIER. 


P.S.—Thursday Evening, 6 or 8 o’c. A letter, my love, my 
pet, my ever fond one. And, Emile, love, in your next letter please 
fix the next: night you will give me a letter—you may be engaged 
the night I fix, and I would rather you would fix the night always. 
If I cannot take in your note, C. H. will do it for me. 

Adieu my love my pet my husband. Good night dearest love, 


a kiss. 


No. 73. 


Envelope addressed—‘ Mr. L’Angelier, 10 Bothwell Street, 
Glasgow.” 


[Posted Sauchiehall Street Receiving Office, month not legible, 
day 17, 1856; deliverable between half-past one and three p.m.] 


[Lerrer. ] 
Thursday night, 12 o’c. 
My own beloved my darling,—I am longing for Thursday to 
bring me your dear, sweet letter. How I love to hear from you, 
355 


Madeleine Smith. 


my own best beloved. Are you well, sweet Emile? Is your cold 
gone. Are your spirits good. Tell me oh my beloved husband. 
Mini loves you, Emile, with a deep, fond love—a love sincere and 
true. Sweet love of my soul, my only love. I was wrong, Emile, 
about a clergyman being able to marry without Banns it seems he 
cannot. I asked our own clergyman to-day, Mr. Middleton. I 
asked it as a passing remark. I am well—all but a slight cough, 
which will not leave me all winter, but, sweet pet, you must take 
so much care of yourself, for your little wife’s (sic) Mini’s sake. 
Wont you be kind to yourself, my own beloved. I do love you more 
fondly each day—you sweet, dear love of a husband, my own best 
beloved, my darling. I am going to the concert to-morrow; it 
is the last one. I dont know if Minnoch is going. I have not 
heard.. James and Janet have sent out nearly 50 invitations to-day 
for the 29th. James is to be home on friday. Last evening we 
had a good many young friends. I would give anything to have 
an hours chat with you. Beloved Emile, 1 dont see how we can. 
M/ is not going from home, and when P/ is away Janet does not 
sleep with M/. She wont leave me, as I have a fire on (sic) my 
room and M/ has none. Do you think, beloved, you could not 
see me some night for a few moments at the door under the front. 
door but perhaps it would not be safe. Some one might pass as 
you were coming in. We had better not—but I would so like a 
kiss, dear, and I think I could also say you would (like) one from 
your Mini. Am I right. Yes, love, I know you would like to 
press me to your heart and tell me you still love your Mini. But 
for all this separation we shall some day make up. Yes, we 
shall be happy then. Miss Wilson is going to take Sir H. C. 
after all. She is to be married 2nd week in Feby., in your 
Church, St. Judes. They have come to stay in town. Sir Henry 
is with them. I am to be in town to-morrow. Is not this nasty 
weather. Did de M. go to Helensburgh on Saturday his wife 
was not with him. Can they part so soon. I hope we wont be 
_ without each other for a night for a long, long time. I heard she 
was at the concert in the M‘Lelland Rooms, and looked very well. 
By the bye, darling, do you still admire Laura Kerr? I hear her 
Mama has some one in view for her at present. The year is 
drawing to a close. I hope, my love, ere this time next year we 
shall have been married sometime. What little ‘‘ White Fib” 
did you tell D.E. Have you written Willmers yet. I hope you 
have. I quite like him from his style of letter and his affection 
for my own beloved little husband—and his sister is a nice girl I am 
sure. I often wonder, knowing all the nice girls you know, my 
love—you should have fixed upon me as you did. I often wonder 
what like your other young Lady, the one that disappointed you, 
was like. Was she pretty. Am I anything like her. Oh! 


356 


Appendix I. 


Emile, my best beloved, my dear, dear Emile, Oh would I were 
your wife. We would be so happy. I shall get you to tell me 
all the girls you have loved—and then I shall begin, when you tell 
me of pretty ones, to be very jealous—will I, love. You may 
flirt as much as you like after our marriage, for I know you love 
me, so I have all confidence. But, love, I am going to stop and 
say good-night.' God prosper you—give you health and all you 
wish for, my love. I am thy own wife, a fond, dear embrace, 
kisses, and much, much sweet love—a fond embrace. Oh sweet 
Emile, good-night. Dream of your Mini, but dont be naughty, 
you sweet love. Adieu! Your fond loving wife—your own 
dear fond Mint L’ ANGELIER. 

If you can, on Thursday between 6 and 7—as P/ is not at home, 
and Jack will go out about 8, and might just pass at the time, 
but dont darling inconvenience yourself—sweet love of my soul. 

Adieu a kiss love. A kiss good-night. Would I had your dear 
lips here to kiss. 


— 


No. 75. 
Envelope addressed—‘‘ Mr. L’Angelier, 10 Bothwell Street, Glasgow.’’ 


[Posted Glasgow, Dec. 19, 1856; deliverable between half-past 
one and three same day. ] 


[Letree. ] 


Thursday night, 11 0’c. 

My beloved, my darling,—Do you for a moment think I could 
feel happy this evening, knowing you were in low spirits—and 
that I am the cause. O why was I ever born to annoy you, 
best and dearest of men. Do you not wish oh, yes full well I 
know you often wish you had never known me. I thought I 
was doing all I could to please you. But no. When shall I 
ever be what you wish me to be. N ever! Never! Emile, 
will you never trust me—she who is to be your wife. You will 
not believe me. You, say you heard ‘ I took M/ to the Concert 
against his inclination; I forced him to go.’ I told you the 
right way when I wrote. But from your statement in your letter 
of to-night you did not believe my word. Emile, I would not have 
done this to you. Every word you write or tell me [ would 
believe. I would not believe every idle report. No, I would 
not. I would, my beloved Emile, believe my husband’s word _ 
before any other. But you always listen to reports about me if 
they are bad. But you will think I am cross. I am not—but I 
feel hurted. Yes, ah, yes! you, my only love, the only being 


357 


Madeleine Smith. 


I love with my soul, should doubt my word and believe a stranger’s. 
I know I talked to him. I could not (sit) still without talking a whole 
evening, but I did not flirt. I gave up flirting some time ago. 
There is a difference between flirting and talking. He was not 
with me last night; he had a second-rate looking girl with him 
of the name of Christie. John M‘Kenzie was engaged to her for 
two years. My beloved, my dear, dear husband, I am truly sorry you 
are ill. God grant you may soon be well. Emile, my beloved, 
perhaps I am wrong to write you as I. have done. Sweet love, 
a kiss. Oh! would to God we could meet. I would not mind 
for M/, if P/ and M/ are from home. The first time they 
are you shall be here. Yes, my love, I must see you, I must be 
pressed to your heart. Oh! for one sweet kiss from you, my 
husband. I would feel happy—yes, love, I would be happy if we 
could have a meeting like our last. We were happy then, were 
we not, sweet one? A kiss, a fond embrace, my beloved, my 
darling, my love. To be your wife, to be near you—happiness it 
will be. Oh, darling! do not think of dark clouds; they may 
pass away, and all will be sunshine. Oh—Emile you do not look 
on the bright side of the picture. I do—I cannot look on the 
dark. Love, do not give way to such sad, dark thoughts. All 
will end well. My love will repay you, Emile. If ever woman 
loved man I do love you. Yes, many a sigh I heave, many a tear 
I shed, that we are so placed. I love you with my heart and soul. 
Never do I cast a thought on any other man living. My thoughts 
are all of my beloved, my darling husband. My sweet, dear, little 
pet Emile—darling, I love you. A kiss, sweet one. For your 
sake I shall be very kind to Janet. Her party is spoiled, as all 
the people James has asked are grown-up ladies and gentlemen. 
He has asked the Tweedies. He was asked who he would like, 
and he sent through a list. Jack has a lot of companions. I 
hate our boy, William. He stands out on the St. every night, 
and we are very angry with him. I give him a blow up every 
day. I just gave your note along with other 4 and said nothing. 
We have a nasty cook, too. I am rather more fond of C. H. now; 
she is very civil. I would trust her. But I shall always take in 
my own notes, love; that will please you. I shall be most anxious 
to hear again from you, to know how you are—so will Monday not 
be too soon, either 6 or 8 0’c. Monday night. I thank my God we 
can get letters. Emile, Emile, my beloved, my darling, I would 
love your child—could I help it? No, sweet love, I would adore 
it. I would be to it a fond mother. I would forget the suffering, 
knowing it was a pledge of our love. Thank you for saying you 
would love me more if I had a child, and that I need not be jealous. 
I would rather a son, as he might have a greater chance of being 
like his father. And when you were away from me I should 
have him to look at. When will that happy day be? Oh! yes, 


358 


Ny ee a. ee 


Appendix I. 


my beloved, we must make a bold effort. I shall do it with all my 
heart, if you will. I should so like to be be (sic) your wife ere 
they leave town end of March. Oh! these horrid Banns. I will go 
to Edinburgh for 21 days if that will do. I am so afraid of 
Glasgow people telling P/, and then there would be such a row. 
You see, darling, we would have a greater chance of making up 
if we were off than if he found it out before we were married. 
Have you not 2 friends that would do as witness. Sweet love, 
we have much to contend with. Emile, darling, / think I can 
promise that I shall not be in S/ts. on Saturday. I shall go out 
in the forenoon, come in about } past 1 o’c., and not go out again; 
it will please you if I do so, so I shall do it, sweet love. A kiss, 
a fond embrace. I did not see you on Monday. B/ said nothing. 
She never by any chance mentions your name to me. I heard 
her ask aunt if you were in Glasgow, as she had not seen you. 
She said she did not think Madeleine had ever seeen you. Mama 
has been very ill all day and in bed. She is very ill to-night. P/ 
has come home. He could not stay away, she was so ill. Tell 
me what Mary says of my likeness. It is horrid ugly. Miss 
Willmers asks you in her last letter for a description of your wife. 
I would give a great deal to see your account of little Mini; it 
will be like this—a short, fat, little round-faced thing. Give me 
a copy of your own account. Belove I must stop. Forgive me if I 
have said anything unkind. Burn my letter. Ah! sweet one, I 
love you—yes, fondly. Forgive for all I have done to vex you, 
sweet love. My only, only love, my pet, best of men. Adored, 
I adore you with my heart and soul, for one glance of your eye, 
one kiss, one sweet embrace. I would be happy if I could see you 


for one hour. We shall meet. Cheer up, beloved, adored, my 
love, my husband. I am thy fond, loving wife, thy own dear, 
faithful true and loving little wife, thy Mint L’ ANGELIER. 


I do so like to write Mini L’Angelier. {t is such a dear, pretty 
name. I love it so. A kiss. Another 
Monday evening, 
6, 8, or 10 o’c. 


No. 77. 
Envelope addressed—‘‘ Mr. L’Angelier, Bothwell Street, Glasgow.” 


[Lerrter. ] 


Thursday night, 11 o’c. 
My very dear Emile,—I hope you are well this night. I never 


felt so tired as I am of Christmas Day. We have had a large dinner 
359 


Madeleine Smith. 


party, all old people. I have wished I am sure a thousand times 


I had been by your side in your own little room. Christmas eve we 


has (sic) a few friends. M/ was with—he is to be with us on 
Monday evening, and also the last night of the year. I hope, my 
own sweet pet, you feel better—tell me, love. I shall have a dear 
note from you to-morrow night. Sweet, dear little Emile, I have a 
very severe headache this night. I am not able to write much. 
Poor Janet was very ill this morning. She had danced so much 
(she is a very good dancer) last evening from 7 o’c. till 1 o’c. that 
when she got up this morning she fainted. I did get a fright with 
her. I thought the child was dead. She is not at all well to- 
night. She is out to-morrow night again. James is very much 
subdued, but improved in appeatance. My own dear Emile, were 
you at chapel to-day. I intended to have been at Roman C. Church 
to-day, but I was prevented from going. I hope, my own sweet, 
dear love, you are in better spirits. Cheer up, sweet one. I shall 
stop this note, as my head aches, and you will say I am cool, so 
I shall conclude, as I cannot write any more. Adieu, my own 
dear love, my beloved Emile. Farewell, good-night. Sweet pet, 
a fond, tender embrace. A kiss, my beloved Emile. Much love. 
Warm, kind kisses. My love to Mary. Again good-night. God 
bless you, sweet love. Adieu. Ever beliéve me your very true and 
very devoted, affecte., and true Mint. 


A kiss, beloved. Another. 

I don’t think you shall have a letter till Monday morning, but I 
shall try, love, and post one on Saturday before 12. Adieu, my 
sweet dear kind Emile my own sweet dear beloved. Mint. 


No. 79. 
Envelope addressed—“ Mr. L’Angelier, 10 Bothwell Street, Glasgow.” 


(Lerten. ] 
Monday. 

My beloved, my darling husband,—Why did I ever do anything 
to displease you, dearest and best of men? My beloved Emile, my 
own sweet darling, forgive me, and I shall not again offend you. 
Dearest love, you are kind to me—far kinder than I deserve. My 
last letters to you must have. seemed unkind—pray, my love, forgive 
me. Sweet, kind Emile, what would I not give this night to come 
and speak with you. We should part loving, adoring each other 
as much as possible. Belove Emile, we must meet. If you love 
me, you will come to me when P / and M/ are away in Edr., which 
I think will be the 7 or 10 of January. Love, we must meet. 
Do not disappoint me, sweet love. I wish I were your wife. Oh! 

360 


Appendix I. 


to be your very own wife, then we would have no more annoyance. 
We would be so happy, dearest love. We must be united some- 
time. I know you will never be well till I am your own dear wife, 
when I shall be able to pet and take care of you. Sweet. love, why 
will Fortune not smile on us, and make us happy? We desire it, I 
am sure: My love, my own beloved Emile, I shall take your hint 
and give it to B/ about the T—s. I don’t like the family at all; 
and I shall never be intimate with them. They are coming to our 
house on an invitation sent to them in Janet and James’ name, and 
they sent back their answer addressed to James. P/ hates their 
father, and would not have him come t the house. I don’t know him. 
I shall do all I can to learn painting, and that soon. My beloved 
Emile, I did not go out on Saturday after 1 o’c. B/ and Jack 
took a walk in 8. St. at 3 o’c. by themselves. Are you. pleased, 
beloved one of my soul? My letter of friday must have gone 
amissing; it has no address, so won’t come back here again. M/ 
is rather better—it was influenza she had. James and Janet go 
out every night this week after Tuesday—to the Rowans on Wednes- 
day. I hate Christmas dinners, &ca they are such a bore. My 
own beloved, you must try and get up your spirits, and be well, 
dear, dear love. I do assure you that with my soul I love and 
adore you. Emile, my beloved, it is thoughtlessness that makes me 
so bad. I do not think. I will I had you by my side just to 
tell me when I was going to do anything that. was wrong. My 
own dear, dear husband, how very nasty of those L— to go and 
speak about James giving a party! I am sure none of us would 
mention it to any one. Our rooms are very small; there are 50 
coming. That impudent looking fellow Banks is to play for us. 
You remember he was in the Exhibition. I do not very well 
know what kind of lecture Mrs. G. wanted us to go to. It was 
in the M‘Lelland Rooms. Will you give me a letter on Friday, 
at 6 o’c? I say 6, because I have promised, if I can to go with 
Jack to the Pantomime. P/ is at’ Row on that night, and B. 
and I and J. intend going. If not at 6, why then, love, if you 
like, 10. I was so sorry this night was so wet for you, my dear, dear, 
beloved Emile. I wish every day I were better, love, for your sake, 
you should have got such a good wife. But, Emile, I am sure after 
I am beside you that you will never have any regrets. My own beloved 
husband, my sweet, dear Bee my darling, I love you with my soul 
and heart. Kiss me, my fond one, a fond, dear, dear embrace, sweet, 
ever sweet Emile. If P/ and M/ go, will you not, sweet love, come 
to your own Mini? Do you think I would ask you if I saw danger 
in the house? No, love, I would not. I shall let you in; no one 
shall see you. We can make it late—12 if you please. You have no 
long walk. No, my own beloved, my sweet, dear Emile. Emile, I 
see your sweet smile. I hear you say you will come and see your Mini, 
clasp her to your bosom, and kiss her, call her your own pet, your 
361 


Madeleine Smith. 


wife. Emile will not refuse me. I know you will not, my pet, my 
beloved. Cheer up, all will end well. Do not be sad or grieve— 
it does not suit your sweet smiling face, my own beloved, handsome 
husband, my own darling, my true Emile. How well your name 
looks in print. I must stop asking your forgiveness for my unkind- 
ness. Forgive me, your wife, your own Mini, asking you forgiveness. 
Smile upon me. Kiss me, my beloved. Dislike me not. I love 
you, and I have no reason of to regret our correspondence, and 
never once, Emile, have you done anything to annoy me. No, 
beloved, you have ever been affectionate, kind, and loving, and I 
only wish you could same (sic) the same of me. But, alas! A kiss, 
my own beloved. Good-night to you, my beloved. I shall be good. 
I must go to St. St. I need not wish you a merry xmas, but I 
shall wish that we may spend the next together, and that we shall 
then be happy. Adieu, my dear husband. Adieu, my dear Emile. 
Forgive me. I shall begin the year well. God bless you, pet of 
my soul. A kiss, good-bye, a fond embrace. Believe me, thine ever 
true, devoted, and aficte. wife, Mint L’ ANGELIER. 


No. 81. 


Envelope addressed—‘‘ Mr. L’Angelier, at 10 Bothwell Street, 
Glasgow.” 


[Posted at Glasgow, 28th Dec., 1856; deliverable next morning, 
first delivery. ] 


[Lerrer. ] 
M. L. 


Saturday night. 

My own ever beloved Emile,—You dear letter of Thursday I 
have read over and over again. It is loving, kind, and affte., more 
than I expected, love. Ah! dear love, why I am I not always what 
you would like me to be. But I cannot help my carelessness. It 
is not want of love, sweet, dear one of my soul. I am so glad you 
do feel better; take care, love, of yourself. Get well, my dear 
pet. Thank you, sweet one, for your assurance of love. I love 
you. But, oh! sweet Emile, I feel sad to-night, and why I cannot 
tell. If I were with you I would be all right. But I feel ready to 
weep and sigh. A kiss, fond love, a tender, long embrace. Sweet 
pet, I know your love for me is great when I am good, but you 
are vool when I am bad, and then I try to drown my sad thoughts 
in be careless. When I get a cool letter from you, my beloved, I 
feel as if I did not care what I did or where I went. I know the 
walks you propose; they are good ones. . It is a pity they have not 
written for you to go home; it might do you good—change of air 

362 


Appendix I. 


and company. Mama is better. I did not much like the Pantomime. 
It was stupid, but I suppose it is as good as a Pantomime can be. 
Jack and B/ and I and a friend of Jack’s—Patison. Why, you 
little pet, you were in Bath St. when I saw you Tuesday. I passed 
you quite close. It was, it must have been Emile L’Angelier. I did 
not make a mistake. I have not yet got consent about the painting, 
but I don’t fear. I think I shall have to go to Edr. in beginning 
of Feby., they are so anxious to have us. I have again refused 
to stay at the Castle. Even B/ says she would not like to go. I dont 
understand why you did not get a note from me on Thursday; it 
was posted at 11 o’c.—time enough for you to get it at 30’c. My own 
sweet love, I am so glad you are not angry. Bless you for loving me 
as you do. Give my love to Mary. I thought she did not know me. 
I am so glad she is your dear friend. I wish I had one like her— 
it would do me a vast deal of good. Now, I must tell you some- 
thing you may hear. I was at the Theatre, and people, my love, 
may tell you that M/ was there too. Well, love, he was there, 
but he did not know of my going. He was in the Club Box, 
and I did not even bow to him. To-day, when B/, Mama, and I 
were walking, M/ joined us, took a walk with, and came home; 
he was most civil and kind. He sent Janet such a lovely flower 
to-night to wear on Monday evening. Now I have told you this, 
sweet pet, I know you will be angry, but I would rather bear your 
anger than that you would perhaps blame me for not telling you, 
as some one will be sure to inform you of me. I have been 
candid with you, as I think it is best—is it not, my sweet one? 
A kiss, my fond love. I am your own ever dear Mimi. I love you, 
sweet Emile, very, very much. I wish so much I were by your 
side. Yes, my sweet love, I often dream of you. I sometimes 
fancy Janet is Emile. I put my arms round you, and once or twice 
I have kissed you and gone so close to you to keep me warm. I 
got no answer to my tender embrace—I awoke, and it was all a 
dream. I am so disappointed when I do this. I often wish you 
were beside me—and I think I would even ask you to love me. 
Sometimes I feel as if I could just fly to you and be your wife. 
But, alas! alas! when may that ever be? God only knows if there 
is happiness ic store for me. Emile, my darling, I often think 
if I were to displease you and you were to go away, what would 
I do? I would get some one to take me to be their wife, but I 
would never love another one. I have no love for any other but you, 
my sweet Emile. I often fear you will yet get so cool to me that you 
wont have me for your wife. For, however much I adore you, if 
you were cool I would not be your wife. Emile, I fondly love you. 
If you have no engagement on Wednesday, would you drop a note, 
6, 8, or 10? Remember, love, if you are engaged, dont mind it; 
I shall know you could not do it. Tell me, sweet one, do I ask 
too many letters fron you?—it is not quite fair of me to ask you 


363 


Madeleine Smith. 


so often, but I do enjoy your notes, they are such happiness to me. 
I hope you may be happy. What are you to do on New-Year’s 
Day? ‘It is always a horrid day to me. I never go out, and we 
have such a host of people to call for us—all coming in, making 
such a fuss wishing you happy returns, &c. It is a great bore. I 
have not read your book regarding Sir J. Franklin. We have 
not got ‘t, but I know some one who has—but I dont think you 
like me to ask the lend of it from M/. My very dear, sweet 
Emile, my own beloved husband, I must say adieu. A sweet, dear, 
fond, loving, and truly affte. embrace. Much, much love. God 
bless you, make you weil for your wife’s sake; get strong, do as 
your Dr. tells you. A kiss. Adieu, sweet love. Adieu, my only 
sweet, dear, fond love. Dont think I am cool, sweet pet. I love 
and adore you, yes, with my heart and soul. Adieu, my life, my 
love, my own beloved Emile, my sweet, darling husband. Adieu. 
Fond kisses, much love, from Mini, your ever true, devoted, and 
much attached loving wife, Mini L’ ANGELIER. 


How bad R. Baird is behaving. They sometimes throw out a 
hint at your being one of his friends. He introduced me to you. 
I shall always feel a warm heart towards him. Good-night, Beloved. 


No. 83. 


[Lerrer, ] 


Monday evening. 

My Dear Mary,—How very kind of you to remember me and write 
me such a nice kind little note. I feel this kindness on your part 
exceedingly, and thank you most sincerely for it. I often think of 
you, and wish from my heart that I might see you, but, alas! I 
cannot at present. A better time is coming. I do so wish you would 
persuade my dear Emile that there is a bright future in store for us; 
he always looks on the dark side of the landscape. He sees no happi- 
ness for us, but I try to see no unhappiness. I see all sunshine. No 
one in this world but has sorrow, and he, like the others, must 
submit. I have seen you but once, dear Mary, passing our house. I 
dislike the town very much; not a day passes but I wish I were again 
in the country. Poor, dear Emile has got a bad hand. I am so sorry 
for him as he has no sister or any one to assist him, and I know what 
it is to have a sore hand. I had my left hand in a sling six months 
I got my finger broken. I hope this won’t be of so long duration. 
Do, dear Mary, and try and make him more cheerful. I know you 
are his only friend, and I know that when I am his wife you will be 
my friend. With much love and kind wishes, I am, yours sincerely, 


Mint. 
364 


Appendix I. 


No. 865. 


Envelope addressed—‘‘ Mr. L’Angelier, at Mrs. Jenkins, 11 
Franklin Place, Great Western Road, Glasgow.” 


[Lerrer. ] 


Friday evening, Jany. 9. 

It is just 11 o’c., and no letter from you, my own ever dear 
beloved husband. Why this, my sweet one? I think I heard 
your stick this evening (pray, do not make any sounds whatever at 
my window). I fear your finger is bad. If it were possible, 
sweet one, could you not leave my notes at six, as at 10 o’c. the 
moon is up and it is light? I hope, my own ever dear beloved one, 
you feel better and that you are in better spirits. Sweet, dear 
Eimile, I do truly and fondly love you with my heart and soul. 
But you, I know, think me cool and indifferent. Ah! sweet one, 
little do you know the love I have for you. I was so glad to see 
you the other night. When we shall meet again I can cannot 
tell. I hope you have gone and seen Mary, and also that you 
have made up your mind to go to Edinburgh and see your kind, 
dear friends the Lanes. Are they to be long in Scotland. By the 
bye, did I put a letter into yours in mistake addressed to Clara 
Courtland. If I did not, I have put it into some other one’s. I 
found the envelope addressed, but no note could I get; so if you, 
my own sweet darling pet, have got hold of it, just put it into 
the fire, as I have written another one. We are going to a large 
ball at the Wilson’s on the 3rd of February. Is not this horrid 
bad weather. I have been very little out all week—it is so cold. 
How do you keep warm in bed for I have a fire, and Janet and 
I am not a bit warm. I often wish I had you with me. Would 
you not, sweet love, put your arms around your Mini, fondly 
embrace her, and make her warm? Ah! yes, sweet one, I know 
you would. We would: then be so warm, so comfortable—but 
when, when shall that dear time come? God only knows. It 
may be in a short time, and alas! alas! it may be a long, long 
time. I often wish I could get a peep into futurity. If I could 
see what would be in two or three years hence. But perhaps it 
would be bad for us if we knew what would happen. I am writing 
in the Ding Room, and I think you are again at my window, but 
I shall not go down stairs, as P/ would wonder why, and only 
he and I are up waiting for Jack. I wish I could see you; but no, 
I must not even look out. at the window, as some one might see 
me. So, beloved, think it not unkind. If I never by any chance 
look at you, just leave my note and go away. It is much the 
best way. Remember, Janet is in my room. Do you, my sweet, 
beloved Emile, still like your lodgings? Are they comfortable, 


365 


Madeleine Smith. 


and are the people kind to you? Have you gone to any Dr. yet? 
or are you still being Dr. yourself, my own best beloved? I shall 
write you to-morrow night, so you shall have a letter Monday 
morning. Will that please my own sweet belovéd husband? 
Love and fond kisses, sweet tender embraces, and much, much 
love. Oh! sweet one of my soul, my own pet, my adored one, 
darling of my heart. God bless you pet. Good wishes from thy 
own dear true and ever fond, beloved, and most truly attached 
and devoted wife, Thy own dear Mint L’ ANGELIER. 


Adieu. A kiss, my pet, my sweet one. Good-night. 


My own sweet one,—Why did you not write me to-night, my 
pet, my love, my own sweet Emile? But your hand is bad, I 
know it is, my sweet one. I did not like to ask you to write me 
Sunday for fear you are engaged. But if you are, why then, my 
own beloved, I shall look for a letter on Monday, 6 o’c. Perhaps 
it would be better, sweet love, to fix Monday at once, in case you 
are engaged. Do you hear off Louise now, or is she still in the 
country? My sweet, beloved pet, I am so sorry to think your 
hand may be very bad, and you have no one to dress you or do 
anything for you. If I were beside you I would do every thing 
for you—dress you, wash your face, but I fear, sweet love, I could 
not shave you. I tried to do it for Jack in summer and cut him; 
but do you shave or not? We might be so happy living together, 
loving each other and being kind and attentive. I hope you may 
get this to-morrow; it shall be posted long before 12, so it wont 
be my fault. I don’t understand the post. But I must say 
good-night. With love and many, many kisses, much love, fond, 
dear, dear embraces, from thy own sweet Mini, thy fond dear 
wifie thy Mint. 


87. 


Envelope addressed—‘‘ Mr. L’Angelier, 10 Bothwell Street, 
Glasgow.”’ 


[Posted at Glasgow, 11th Jan., 1857; deliverable next morning 
first delivery. ] 


(Lerrer.] 


Saturday night, 12 o’c. 
My own dear beloved Emile,—I cannot tell you how sorry I 
was last night at not hearing from you—it must have been your 
hand. I am truly sorry for the cause, my sweet pet. I hope it 
will soon be well. Are you well otherways—cold gone? And are 
366 


Appendix I. 


you, my pet, happy? You know, sweet one, I love you very, very 
much. I am very fond of you, my dear little pet. My own 
sweet, dear Emile, be happy for Emile’s sake. I hope you got 
my note to-day, it was posted at 10 o’c. You would get a walk 
this afternoon, it was so fine. Beloved pet, I wish I could take 
a walk with you. We would have such a nice, pleasant chat, one 
with another, my sweet, dear little Emile. What are you doing 
with your friend D. E.? Is she coming to Scotland? Do you 
go and call for Mary, and tell me how she is on Monday night 
when you write me. Give my warmest love, and tell her my 
greatest pleasure would be to come with you, my love, and visit 
her. Janet is not well. She has been out so much at dancing 
parties that she has made herself quite ill. But P/ says she is 
not to get out again. The night before last Thursday she did 
not come in till 2 o’c. in the morning. James is settled again at 
School. I see your friend Miss Macdougal has lost her papa. Do 
you hear from Louise? My sweet, dear pet, I would so like to 
spend 3 or 4 hours with you, just to talk over some things, but I 
do not know when we can—perhaps in the course of ten days I 


May see you for a minute same as last. 1f you would risk it, 
my sweet, beloved pet, we would have time to kiss each other 
and a dear, fond embrace. And though, sweet love, it is only 


for a minute, do you not think it is better than not meeting at all? 
We go to Julliens on Thursday—B/; Jack, and I. Harry Grierson 
and a fellow Patison are going with us. Do not fear, Mr. M. is 
going with his sister, so he wont be with us. The Ball at the 
Wilson’s is to be the evening of the marriage. I am very good 
at present, sweet love, for my own dear Emile’s sake. I do love 
you very, very much. A fond, tender embrace. We are to have 
a gentlemen’s dinner party on Tuesday. I dont think there is 
any chance of our living at Row again, but P/ cannot get a nice 
place. He wants a much larger place than we have. I am sure 
I think it is quite large enough, and quite expensive enough, but 
he knows best. My sweet love, you will get this on Monday 
morning. I hope it will find my own dear, kind, sweet love of a 
husband, happy and in good health. Oh! sweet darling, be happy 
for your own little Mini’s sake. A kiss, sweet one, my best 
beloved, my adored Emile. A kiss to you who fills the place 
in my heart, you whose image is ever before my eyes, you whose 
name is on my lips. Adieu, my love, my all, my life, my darling 
Emile. A kiss, a warm, tender embrace. Adieu. Adieu. Good- 
night. Bless you, my sweet love. I am thy own ever dear, fond, 
devoted and ever loving wife, thy own Mint L’ AncEtier. 


Monday night, sweet love, 6, if you can. A kiss, two kisses, if 
yours is a kind, dear letter. A kiss. Good-night. Your 
Mrnt. 


367 


Madeleine Smith. 


No. 89. 


Envelope addressed—‘‘ Mr. L’Angelier, 10 Bothweli St., 
Glasgow.”’ 


[Posted Glasgow, Jan. 14, 1857; deliverable between three and 
five same day.] 


[Lerrer. | 
Monday night. 

My own beloved darling husband,—I have written Mary a note, 
and you shall have one too. I am sé sorry about your hand. I 
do hope it wont be long, but I am so sorry for you, my own sweet 
dear love. What are you to do with yourself—how can you get 
on. I do so wish I were with you now. Would I not, dearest love, 
be a help to you. I wish from my heart I were now your wife. I 
would happy, love, so would you, my own dear little pet of a hus- 
band. Many thanks for your kind, dear long letter to-night. 
You are a dear, kind sweet love. I ought to be kind to you, for 
you are kinder to me than I deserve—you darling. I am glad you 
are sound, that is a great matter. I had a fear you were not—and 
I often thought you would die, but now I am easy on that point. 
I am very well (but idl to-night). My sweet love, I shall contrive 
to see you some night soon for a short time. I do not know when 
they may go from home. I wish I could tell you, sweet love—I 
would so with pleasure, but I dont see any chance, as °M/ is not 
well this winter. It would be difficult to get away from my 
cousins house in Edr., but I do so wish we could be married. Ah, 
where shall we go that happy night—it wont matter where. I 
am sure we wont think of the place—so it may be any place for 
me. I do not in the least mind so as I am with my own. beloved 
husband, my darling love. Emile, you sweet dear darling, I love 
you with all my heart and soul. In my letter to Clara I said about 
seeing her in summer all for politeness sake. I know there is no 
chance as she goes' to India in June to get married. She is an 
officer’s daughter. Her father was in the same regiment with two 
of papa’s brothers. The Patison, Jack’s friend, is not from Ayr, 
he was born in America. You must know his father, as he does 
business with America. Godfrey Patison—he is just 19, but B/ 
has a great fancy for him, so he is much with us—he is a nice 
boy. Grierson is a most innocent fellow. I will stop for to-night, 
darling of my soul, my love, my beloved, my darling Emile. 
Adieu, good-night, tender embraces, love, kisses, from thy devoted, 
thy loving wife, thy own Mint L’ ANGELIER. 


Tuesday. 


d to write, so 
T hope, dear, your finger is better, take care. 


My dear Emile, it is very late, and I am too tire 
you will excuse me. 


368 


Appendix I. 


of it. I think you should leave the office for some time, and go and 
get change of air, it would be good for you. Mr. Kirk” has been 
here to-day, and we have fixed to go to Edr. the end of Feby— 
he wishes us to go to several Balls. I think we shall go to one 
Ball in Glasgow. I dont hear of M/ or P/ going from home, 
so, my dear pet, I see no chance for us. I fear we shall have to 
wait a bit. I dont see how I could venture to do it while in 
Edr., but if I see or hear anything you shall hear of it. Mr. M/ 
dined with us to-night—do you know I think if you knew him you 
would like him, he is most kind. I like him very much better 
than I used to do. I hope, dear love, you will be soon better. I 
wont ask any letter from you till next Monday evening. 

I am engaged every night this week. Adieu, my sweet, dear 
Emile. A fond kiss, dear, kind love. I am, yours affy 

Mint. 

I have sent a note to Mary; dont give it if you dont like it. 

Good-night, dear Emile. 


No. 91. 


Envelope addressed—‘‘ Mr. L’Angelier, 10 Bothwell Street, 
Glasgow.”’ 


[Posted in Glasgow, Jan. 16, 1857, during the night; deliverable 
next morning, first delivery. ] 


[Lerrer. ] 


Friday, 3 o’c afternoon. 

My very dear Emile,—I ought ere this to have written you. I 
hope your hand is better—do take of it, my own sweet pet—try 
and soon get well. I hope you have no cold. Well, my dear 
Emile, you did look cross at your Mini the other day. Why, my 
pet, you cannot expect I am never to go on St. St. Sometimes I 
must. It is not quite fair of you. I have kept off that St. so 
well this winter, and yet when you meet me, and the first time you 
have bowed to me this season, that you should have looked so 
cross. When I saw you, my little pet, coming, I felt frightened 
even to bow to you. But I hope the next time I have the pleasure 
of meeting you, love, you will have a smile, one of your own dear, 
sweet smiles—the smile I love to see on your face. I am very well. 
We were at the concert last evening, and enjoyed it very, very 
much. I am quite fond of concerts now, and another thing, they 
pass an evening over. We were to have been at the College yester- 
day, but P/ was afraid of the large number of people, so would not 


IA 369 


Madeleine Smith. 


let us go. Sir E. L. Bulwer is a great favorite of mine. I hope, 
dear love, you are taking good care of your hand—do, my sweet, dear 
love of a husband, my own dear little pet Emile. I shall have 
a note from you on Monday night. If you go to Edr. leave it 
on Sunday night at 6. Any hour on Monday. Jack has gone to 
Edr. to-day till Monday—this is a fine day, but we are not out. 
I have a slight cold with last night. I had on a thin white dress— 
and it was rather cold. I hope dear Mary is well. Have you ever 
written to Miss William? No, I can hear you say. Well, you 
naughty boy, when she was so kind to write to you, why not do it, 
sweet love? A kiss, my own beloved Emile. I love you, dear Sweet 
one of my soul. I would give you a note Monday morning, but it 
is only when C. H_ goes to church I get it posted it (sic), and she 
only goes every second Sunday. I hope you will enjoy your trip to 
Edr. You will when you are among all your dear friends. Do, my 
dear Emile, go to the officers’ ‘Ball—it will do you go a little excite- 
ment. You need not dance much, but go, sweet one. I do not 
understand your bargain about writing letters, as you have missed 
out two words, so I can not make it out. Adieu, my own sweet, 
dear love. A fond dear embrace, a sweet tender kiss, much, much 
love—take care of yourself for Mini’s sake, love: my own little 
pet, my dear sweet one. Adieu, a fond kiss. I am, ever and 
ever your own devoted and loving Mint L’ ANGELIER. 


No. 93. 


Envelope addressed—‘‘ Mr. L’Angelier, Mrs. Jenkins, 11 Franklin 
Place, Great Western Road, Glasgow.”’ 


[Posted at Glasgow, 19th January, 1857; deliverable next morn- 
ing, first delivery. ] 


{Lerrer. | 


Monday, 5 0o’C. 

My Sweet Beloved, I could not get this posted for you to-day— 
love, I hope you are well. I did not sleep all night thinking of 
my own Pet. T went to Govan with M/, and when I got home I 
was looking so ill M/ made me go and take a walk to get some 
colour—so B/, Patison, and I took a long walk on the Dumbarton 
Road. When I told you, love, to write to me for to-night, I 
forgot I am to be out. We go to Taylor’s, Park Terrace. He is 
the Banker—you will know him. And as we go out at 9 o’C, your 
letter will not be there, but I shall tell C. H. to take it in. Dearest 
Emile, all this day I have wished for you one moment to kiss you— 
to lay my head upon your breast would make me happy. I think 


370 


Appendix I. 


I shall see you on Thursday night. I think P/ is not at home. But 

you shall hear. Adieu, my beloved one. My husband. My own 

little pet. Adieu. God bless you. I am your wife, Your own 
Mint L’ ANGELIER. 


I did love you so much last night when you were at the window. 
Do you know a low fellow of the name of Grey? 

P.S.—I don’t think I should send you this scroll, but I could 
not help just when you left me, I was so weak-hearted as to take 
a long cry, because I could not get out with you, but excuse a 
woman’s weakness. I love you, & would wish to be with you. 
Adieu, my love.-. . 


No. 95. 


Envelope addressed—‘‘ Mr. L’Angelier, 10 Bothwell Street, 
Glasgow.”’ 


{Posted at Glasgow, 2lst Jan., 1857; deliverable next morning, 

first delivery.] 
[Lerrer.] 
5 oC 
Wednesday morning. 

My dearest Emile,—I have just 5 minutes to spare. My dear, 
I hope you are well. Why no better pet on Monday night— 
it was such a disappointment to your Mini. I cannot see you 
Thursday, as I had hoped. Jack is out at a party, and the Boy 
will sit up for him, so I cannot see you. A better chance may 
soon occur, my dear pet. I shall write you a letter soon—I have 
not time at present. I wont write to-night. I am so tired. I 
have not got home till after 2 o’c for the last two nights. If you 
can, I shall look for a note on Friday 8 or 10 not 6. Much, much 


love, fond kisses, a tender embrace. I am for ever, yours devotedly, 
Mnn. 


—_—— 


No. 97. 


Envelope addressed—‘‘ For Mr. L’Angelier, at Mrs. Jenkins, 11 
Franklin Place, Great Western Road, Glasgow.” 


[Posted at Glasgow, 23rd January, 1857; deliverable next morn- 
ing, first delivery.] F 
[Lerrers. ] 
Thursday, 12 o’c. 
My dear Emile,—I was so very sorry that I could not see you 
to-night. I had. expected an hour’s chat with you—but we must 
371 


Madeleine Smith. 


just hope for the better the next time. I hope you are well. Is 
your hand quite better, my dear pet—are your spirits better, sweet 
love. I hope you enjoyed the Ball. We had such a charming party 
at the Taylor’s—but the most horrid low vulgar set of people we 
had at the T—’s, people I never heard of. I was quite sick of 
them, but though they send us 50 invitations I shall never go to one 
of their parties again. Neither shall B/. We had a most pressing 
invitation to go to the Ball to-night, but we declined. I dont see 
the least chance for us, my dear love. M/ is not well enough to 
go from home, and my dear, little sweet pet, I dont see we could 
manage in Edr., because I could not leave a friends House without 
their knowing of it—so, sweet pet, it must at present be put off 
till a better time. I see no chance before Maroh. But rest 
assured, my dear love Emile, if I see any chance I shall let you 
know of it. Yes, my dear love, I shall. P/ wishes us to put off 
our visit to Edr. till after the Opera has been here. He has taken 
places I think. My dear love, I shall have your note to-morrow. 
How happy it will make me feel, you sweet, dear little pet. You 
shall’ have a note Monday morning from me. I hope Mary is well. 
We were at Partick to-day in the rain in a cab. I hope my own 
sweet love, it wont be long before we meet. A kiss, my pet. A 
dear, tender, sweet, loving embrace. Adieu, my much beloved 
pet, my dear, dear Emile—take care of yourself. God bless you, 
make you happy. Adieu. Good-night. I wish I were with you, 
I would be happier than I am. Again farewell, with much, much 
love, and warm loving kisses. I am, with much love, for ever 
your own dear, sweet little pet wife. Your own fond 
Mint L’ ANGELIER. 


Again a kiss, my pet—my own sweet one, my beloved little pet 
husband. 


ooo 


Sunday night, 4 past 11 o’c. 

Emile, my own beloved, you have just left me. Oh, sweet 
darling, at this moment my heart and soul burns with love for 
thee, my husband, my own sweet one. Emile, what would I not 
give at this moment to be your fond wife. My night dress was 
on when you saw me. Would to God you had been in the same 
attire. We would be happy. Emile, I adore you. I love you 
with my heart and soul. I do vex and annoy yon, but, oh, sweet 
love, I do fondly, truly love you with my soul to be your wife your 
own sweet wife. I never felt so restless and so unhappy as I have 
done for some time past. I would do anything to keep sad thoughts 
from my mind. But in whatever place some things make me feel 
sad. A dark spot is in the future. What can it be. Oh God 
keep it from us. Oh may we be happy—dear darling, pray for our 
happiness. I weep, now, Emile, to think of our fate. If we could 

372 


Appendix I. 


only get married, and all would be well. But alas, alas, I see no 
chance, no chance of happiness for me. I must speak with you. 
Yes, I must again be pressed to your loving bosom—be kissed by 
you, my only love, my dearest, darling husband. Why were we 
fated to be so unhappy. Why were we made to be kept separate. 
My heart is too full to write more. Oh, pardon, forgive me. If 
you are able, I need not say it will give me pleasure to hear from 
you to-morrow night. If at 10 o’c, dont wait to see me—as Janet 
may not be asleep, and I will have to wait till she sleeps to take’ 


it in. Make no noise. Adieu, farewell, my own beloved, my 

darling, my own Emile. Good-night best beloved. Adieu I am your 

ever true and devoted Mint L’ ANGELIER. 
No. 99. 


Two envelopes, each addressed to ‘‘ Mr. L’Angelier, Mrs. Jenkins, 
at 11 Franklin Place, Great Western Road, Glasgow.” 


No. 101. 


Envelope addressed—‘‘ Glasgow, Mr. E. L’Angelier, Mrs. Jenkins, 
11 Franklin Place, Great Western Road.” 


[Posted at Glasgow, February, 1857, day illegible; deliverable 
next morning, first delivery.] 


[Lerrers. | 


I felt truly astonished to have my last letter returned to me. 
But it will be the last you shall have an opportunity of returning 
to me. When you are not pleased with the letters I send you, 
then our correspondence shall be at an end, and as there is coolness 
on both sides our engagement had better be broken. This may 
astonish you, but you have more than once returned me my letters, 
and my mind was made up that I should not stand the same thing 
again. And you also annoyed me much on Saturday by your 
conduct-in coming so near me. Altogether I think owing to cool- 
ness and indifference (nothing else) that we had better for the 
future consider ourselves as strangers. I trust to your honour 
as a Gentleman that you will not reveal any thing that may have 
passed between us. I shall feel obliged by your bring me my 
letters and Likeness on Thursday eveng. at 7—be at the Area Gate, 
and C. H. will (take) the parcel from you. On Friday night I shall 
send you all your letters, Likeness, &ca. I trust “you may yet be 
happy, and get one more worthy of you than I. On Thursday at 


7 oC. I am, &c. M. 
373 


Madeleine Smith. 


You may be astonished at this sudden change—but for some time 
back you must have noticed a coolness in my notes. My love for 
you has ceased, and that is why I was cool. I did once love you 
truly, fondly, but for some time back I have lost much of that 
love. There is no other reason for my conduct, and I think it 
but fair to let you know this. I might have gone on and become 
your wife, but I could not have loved you as I.ought. My conduct 
you will condemn, but I did at one time love you with heart 
and soul. It has cost me much to tell you this—sleepless nights, 
but it is necessary you should know. If you remain in Glasgow or 
go away, I hope you may succeed in all your endeavours. I know 
you will never injure the character of one you so fondly loved. 
No, Emile, I know you have honour and are a Gentleman. What 
has passed you will not mention. I know when I ask you that 
you will comply. Adieu. 


No. 103. 


Envelope addressed—‘‘ Mr. L’Angelier, Mrs. Jenkins, at 11 
Franklin Place, Great Western Road, Glasgow.” 


[Posted at Osborne Buildings Receiving Office, 9th February, 
1857; deliverable next morning, first delivery.] 


{Lerrer. | 


I attribute it to your having cold that I had no answer to my 
last note. On Thursday evening you were, I suppose, afraid of 
the night air. I fear your cold is not better. I again appoint 
Thursday night first same place, Street Gate, 7 o’c. M. 


If you can not send me or bring me the parcel on Thursday, 
please write a note saying when you shall bring it, and address it 
to C. H. Send it by post. 


(In the original the words “not sen me or” are deleted.) 


No. 105. 
Envelope addressed—‘‘ Immediately. Mr. L’Angelier, Mrs 
Jenkins, 11 Franklin Place, Great.Western Road, Glasgow.”’ 


[Posted at Glasgow on the 10th of a month in the year 1857; 
deliverable between 1.30 and 3 of day on which it was posted.] 


{Lerrer. | 


Monday Night.—Emile, I have just had your note. Emile, for 
the love you once had for me do nothing till I see you—for God’s 


374 


Appendix I. 


sake do not bring your once loved Mini to an open shame. Emile, 
I have deceived you. I have deceived my Mother. God knows 
she did not boast of any thing I had said of you—for she, poor 
woman, thought I had broken off with you last Winter. I deceived 
you by telling you she still knew of our engagement. She did not. 
This I now confess—and as for wishing for any engagement with 
another, I do not fancy she ever thought of it. Emile, write to no 
one, to Papa or any other. Oh, do not till I see you on Wednesday 
night—be at the Hamiltons at 12, and I shall open my Shutter, and 
then you come to the Area Gate, I shall see you. It would break my 
Mother’s heart. Oh, Emile be not harsh to me. I am the most guilty, 
miserable wretch on the face of the earth. Emile, do not drive me to 
death. When I ceased to love you, believe me, it was not to love 
another. I am free from all engagements at present. Emile, for God’s 
sake do not send my letters to Papa. It will be an open rupture. I 
will leave the house. I will die. Emile, do nothing till I see you. 
One word to-morrow night at my window to tell me or I shall go mad. 
Emile, you did love me. I did fondly, truly love you too. Oh, dear 
Emile, be not so harsh to me. Will you not—but I cannot ask for- 
giveness, I am too guilty for that. I have deceived—it was love for 
you at the time made me say Mama knew of our engagement. 
To-morrow one word—and on Wednesday we meet. I would not again 
ask you to love me, for I know you could not. But oh, Emile, do not 
make me go mad. I will tell you that only myself and C. H. knew 
of my Engagement to you. Mama did not know since last Winter. 
Pray for me for a guilty wretch, but do nothing. Oh, Emile, do 
nothing. 10 o’c To-morrow night one line, for the love of God. 


Tuesday morning.—I am ill. God knows what I have suffered. 
My punishment is more than I can bear. Do nothing till I see you, 
for the love of heaven do nothing. I am mad, I am ill. 

[Written in pencil, ‘‘ Sunday night.””} 


(i.e., the letter is not written in pencil—only the words “ Sunday 
night.’’) 


No. 107. 


Envelope addressed—‘‘ Mr. L’Angelier, Mrs. Jenkins, at 11 Franklin 
Place, Great Western Road, Glasgow.” 


Not posted. 
[Lerrer. } 


Tuesday evening,—12 o’C.—Emile, I have this night received your 
note. Oh, it is kind of you to write to me. Emile, no one can 


375 


Madeleine Smith. 


know the intense agony of mind I have suffered last night and 
to day. Emile, my father’s wrath would kill me; you little know 
his temper. Emile, for the love you once had for me do not denounce 
me tomy P/. Emile, if he should read my letters to you—he will put 
me from him, he will hate me as a guilty wretch. I loved you, and 
wrote to you in my first ardent love—it was with my deepest love 
I loved you. It was for your love I adored you. I put on paper what 
I should not. I was free, because I loved you with my heart. If 
he or any other one saw those fond letters to you, what would not 
be said of me. On my bended knees I write you, and ask you as you 
hope for mercy at the Judgment (Day) do not inform on me—do not 
make me a public shame. Emile, my life has been one of bitter dis- 
appointment. You and you only can make the rest of my life 
peaceful. My own conscience will be a punishment that I shall carry 
to my grave. I have deceived the best of men. “You may forgive me, 
but God never will—for God’s love forgive me—and betray me not—for 
the love you once had to me do not bring down my father’s wrath on 
me. It will kill my mother (who is not well). It will for ever 
cause me bitter unhappiness. I am humble before you and crave your 
mercy. You can give me forgiveness—and you, oh, you only can make 
me happy for the rest of my life. I would not ask you to love me— 
or ever make me your wife. I am too guilty for that. I have 
deceived and told you too many falsehoods for you ever to respect 
me. But oh, will you not keep my secret from the world? Oh, 
will you not, for Christ’s sake, denounce me? I shall be undone. 
I shall be ruined. Who would trust me. Shame would be my 
lot—despise me, hate me—but make me not the public scandal— 
forget me for ever—blot out all remembrance of me. I have 

you ill. I did love you, and it was my soul’s ambition to be your 
wife. I asked you to tell me my faults. You did so, and it made 
me cool towards you gradually. When you have found fault with me, 
I have cooled—it was not love for another, for there is no one I 
love. My love has all been given to you. My heart is empty, 
cold—I am unloved. I am despised. I told you I had ceased to 
love you—it was true. I did not love you as I did—but oh, till 
within the time of our coming to Town I loved you fondly. I longed 
to be your wife. I had fixed Feby. I longed for it. The time I 
could not leave my father’s house I grew discontented, then I ceased 
to love you—Oh, Emile, this is indeed the true statement. Now you 
can know my state of mind. Emile, I have suffered much for you. 
I lost much of my father’s confidence since that Sept. And my mother 
has never been the same to me. No, she has never given me the same 
kind look. For the sake of my mother—her who gave me life, spare 
me from shame. Oh, Emile, will you in God’s name hear my prayer. 
I ask God to forgive me. I have prayed that he might put it in your 
heart yet to spare me from shame. Never, never while I live can I be 

376 


een. ee ey ee 


ee a ee 


: 
. 
: 
: 


Appendix I. 


happy. No, no, I shall always have the thought I deceived you. I 
am guilty. It will be a punishment I shall bear till the day of my 
death. I am humbled thus to crave your pardon. But I care not. 
While ‘I have breath I shall ever think of you as my best friend, if 
you will only keep this between ourselves. I blush to ask you. Yet, 
Emile, will you not grant me this, my last favor. If you will never 
reveal what has passed. Oh, for God’s sake, for the love of heaven, 
hear me. I grow mad. I have been ill, very ill, all day. I have had 
what has given me a false spirit. I had to resort to what I should 
not have taken, but my brain is on fire. I feel as if death would 
indeed be sweet. Denounce me not. Emile, Emile, think of our once 
happy days. Pardon me if you can, pray for me as the most 
wretched, guilty, miserable creature on the earth. I could stand 
anything but my father’s hot displeasure. Emile, you will not cause 
me death. If he is to get your letters, I can not see him any 
more. And my poor mother. I will never more kiss her—it would 
be a shame to them all. Emile, will you not spare me this—hate 
me, despise me—but do not expose me. I cannot write more. I am 
too ill to-night. M. 
P.S.—I cannot get to the back stair. I never could see the 
to it. I will take you within in the door. The area 
gate will be open. I shall see you from my window, 12 o’C. I will 
wait till 1 0’C. 


No. 109. 


Envelope addressed—‘‘ Mr. E. L’ Angelier, Mrs. Jenkins, 11 Franklin 
Place, Great Western Road, Glasgow.”’ 


[Posted between 8.45 a.m. and 12.20 p.m., at Osborne Buildings 
Receiving Office, Glasgow, 14th February, 1857; deliverable between 
half-past 1 and 3 p.m. same day.] 


[Lzrter. | 


Saturday.—My dear Emile,—I have got my finger cut, and can 
not write, so, dear, I wish you would excuse me. I was glad to 
see you looking so well yesterday. I hope to see you very soon 

Write me for next Thursday, and then I 
shall tell you when I can see you. I want the first time we meet, 
that you will bring me all my cool letters back—the last four I 
have written—and I will give you others in their place. 

Bring them all to me. Excuse me more; just now it hurts me to 
write, so with kindest and dearest love, ever believe (me), yours 
with love & affection, ~ M. 

377 


Madeleine Smith. 


No. 111. 


Envelope addressed—‘‘ Glasgow, Mr. E. L’Angelier, 11 Franklin 
Place, Mrs. Jenkins, Great Western Road.” 


[Posted at Glasgow. ] 


{ Lerrer. | 
Wednesday 
(Date forgotten). 

Dearest, Sweet Emile,—I am so sorry to hear you are ill. I hope 
to God you will soon be better—take care of yourself—do not go to 
the office this week—just stay at home till Monday. Sweet love it 
will please me to hear you are well. I have not felt very well these 
last two days—sick & headache. Every one is complaining: it must 
be something in the air. I cannot see you Friday, as M/ is not away— 
but I think Sunday P/ will be away, & I might see you, I think, but 
I shall let you know. I shall not be at home on Saturday, but I shall 
try, sweet love, and give you, even if it should be a word. I cannot 
pass your windows, or I would, as you ask me to do it—do not come 
and walk about and become ill again. You did look bad Sunday night 
and Monday morning. I think you got sick with walking home so 
late—and the long want of food, so the next time we meet I shall 
make you eat a loaf of bread before you go out. I am longing to 
meet again, sweet love. We shall be so happy. I have a bad pen— 
excuse this scroll, and B/ is near me. I cannot write at night now. 
My head aches so, and I am looking so bad that I cannot sit up as I 
used to do—but I am taking some stuff to bring back the colour. I 
shall see you soon again. Put up with short notes for a little time. 
When I feel stronger you shall have long ones. Adieu my love my 
pet my sweet Emile. A fond dear tender love and sweet embrace. 
Ever with love, Yours, Mint. 


No. 113. 


Envelope addressed—‘‘ Mr. E. L’ Angelier, Mrs. Jenkins, 11 Franklin 
Place, Great Western Road, Glasgow.” 


[Posted at Glasgow, 27th February, 1857; deliverable next morn- 

ing, first delivery. ] 
{Lerter. ] 
Friday. 

My Dear, Sweet Emile,—I cannot see you this week, and I can 
fix no time to meet you. I do hope you are better—keep well, and 
take care of yourself. I saw you at your window. I am better, but 
have got a bad cold. I shall write you, sweet one, in the beginning 
of the week. I hope we may meet soon. We go, I think, to Stirling- 
shire about the 10 of March for a fortnight. Excuse this short note, 

378 


% 


ee ee ee ee eee 


Appendix I. 


Sweet love. With much fond tender love and kisses. And ever believe 
me to be Yours, with love, ~ Mint. 


No. 115. 


Envelope addressed—‘‘ Mr. E. L’Angelier, Mrs. Jenkins, Franklin 
Place, Great Western Road, Glasgow.” 


[Posted, Osborne Buildings Receiving Office, Glasgow, 3rd March, 
1857; posted between 8.45 a.m. and 12.20 p.m.; deliverable between 
half-past 1 and 3 p.m. same day.] 


[Lerrer. ] 


My dearest Emile,—I hope by this time you are quite well, and 
able to be out. I saw you at your window, but I could not tell how 
you looked—well, I hope. I am very well. I was in Edr. on 
Saturday to be at a Luncheon party at the Castle. It was a most 
charming day, and we enjoyed our trip very much. On Friday, we go 
to Stirling for a fortnight. I am so sorry, my dearest pet, T cannot 
see you ere we go—but I cannot. Will you, sweet one, write me for 
Thursday, 8 o’C., and I shall get it before 1 go—which will be a 
comfort to me—as I shall not hear from you till I come home again. 
I will write you, but, sweet pet, it may only be once a week—as I 
have so many friends in that quarter. B/ is not going till next week. 
M/, P/, J/, and I on Friday. B/ goes to the Ball next week. I am 
going to a Ball in Edr. the end of this week, so cannot go to both— 
and I would rather go to the one in Edr. I have not seen you all this 
week—have you been passing. What nasty weather we have had. 
I shall see you very soon, when I get home again—and we shall be 
very happy, wont we, sweet one—as much so as the last time—will we, 
my pet. I hope you feel well. I have no news to give you. I am 
very well—and I think the next time we meet you will think I look 
better than 1 did the last time. You wont have a letter from me 
this Saturday, as I shall be off—but I shall write beginning of the 
week. Write me for Thursday, sweet love, and with kind love, ever 
believe me to be yours, with love and affection, Mint. 


No. 117. 


Envelope addressed—‘‘ Mr. E. L’Angelier, Mrs. Jenkins, 11 Franklin 
Place, Great Western Road, Glasgow. 4 
[Posted at Glasgow, 4th March, 1857; deliverable between half- 
past 1 and 3 same day.] 
[Lerrer. | 
Dearest Emile,—I have just time to give you a line. I could not 


come to the window as B/, and M/ were there, but I saw you. If 
379 


Madeleine Smith. 


you would take my advice, you would go to the south of England 
for ten days; it would do you much good. In fact, sweet pet, it 
would make you feel quite well. Do try and do this. You will please 
me by getting strong and well again. I hope you wont go to B. of 
Allan, as P/ and M/ would say it was I brought you there, and it 
would make me to feel very unhappy. Stirling you neéed not go to as it 
is a nasty dirty little Town. Go to the Isle of Wight. I am exceed- 
ingly sorry, love, I cannot see you ere I go—it is impossible, but 
the first thing I do on my return will be to see you, sweet love. I 
must stop as it is post time. So adieu, with love, and kisses, and 
much love. 
I am, with love and affection, ever yours, Mint. 


[The Lorp Apvocats then tendered the production No. 119 
of Inventory to be read, which bears to be the copy of a letter 
from the deceased to the panel. It was objected to by the 
Dean of Faculty as being only a copy taken by the press. 
The decision on this point was reserved until No. 1121 should 
be read. | 


No. 121. 


Envelope addressed—‘‘ For my dear and ever beloved sweet little 
Emile.”’ 


Not posted. 
[Lerrsr. ] 


My sweet, dear pet,—I am so sorry you should be so vexed— 
believe nothing, sweet one, till I tell you myself—it is a report I 
am sorry about—but it has been six months spoken of. There is one 
of the same kind about B. Believe nothing till I tell you, sweet 
one of my heart. I love you, and you only. Mrs. A. only supposed, 
M/ never told her—but we have found out that Mrs..A. is very 
good making up stories. Mrs. A. asked me if it was M/ gave me 
the trinket you saw—and I told her no. My sweet love, I love you, 
and only wish you were better—we shall speak of our union when we 
meet. We shall be home about the 17—so I may see you about that 
time. I wish, love, you could manage to remain in town till we come 
home, as I know it will be a grand row with me if you are seen 
there. Could you, sweet love, not wait for my sake till we come 
home. You might go the 20th or so. I would be so pleased with 
you if you can do this to please me, my own dear beloved. TI shall 
be very glad to meet you again, and have as happy a meeting as the 
last. I have quarrelled with C. H. just now—so cannot see you 

380 


Appendix I. 


to-night. I shall write you next week. Neither M/ nor his sisters 
go with us—only M/, B/, J/, and I go to-morrow, P/ on Saturday 
night. I haye only been in M/’s house once, and that was this week 
—and I was sent a message because M/ could not go herself. I will 
tell and answer you all questions when we meet. Adieu, dearest love 
of my soul—with fond and tender embraces, ever believe me, with 
love and kisses, to be your own fond, dear, and loving * Mint. 


If you do not go to B. of A. till we come home—come up Main 
St. to-morrow morning, and if you go come your own way. 


[The Lorp ApvocatE again tendered the production No. 
119. The Dean or Facutty repeated his objection. The 
Lorp ApvocaTE replied that it was proved by its connection 
with Nos. 117 and 121, and therefore ought to be received. 

The following opinions were delivered :— 

Lord Ivory said—The Court had here a very important 
question presented to them—a question, the decision of which, 
in so far as he was: concerned, he would willingly have 
avoided. Still as it had been presented to them, although 
he could not say that he felt no doubt, he would give the best 
opinion in his power in the circumstances of the case. He 
had come to the conclusion that the document was admissible, 
but, in coming to that conclusion, he could not look upon 
that letter apart from some which went before and from some 
which followed after it. [His 'ordship then went over in 
detail the various passages in the other letters which bore 
upon the statements in the letter under discussion.] This 
letter, he assumed, was written after the letter No. 121, which 
was from the prisoner to the deceased; and he thought there 
was evidence to go to the jury so as to enable them to judge 
whether the letter No. 121 was not received by the deceased, 
and whether the present letter was not an answer to,it, as 
allusions were made in this leiver to almost every sentence of 
the former. He would not read all the passages, but it 
appeared to him that, with the light cast by other letters, 
there was enough to connect the document with them. He 
did not go so far as to say that the evidence before the Court 
as to this matter, or the circumstances of its being a copy 
made by a copying-press, amounted to that legal and com- 
plete evidence which must bind the jury. Had it been 
necessary to go so far as this, he would have felt more hesi- 
tation than he was now inclined to do; but he thought it was 
an important adminicle of evidence, and one as to which the 
jury ought to be allowed to form their own conclusion as to 
whether it was received or not. It seemed to him to have 
very many of the characteristics the want of which were 
objected to in the case of the memorandum-book, and to be 


381 


Madeleine Smith. 


linked together with the other letters. It was also regularly | 
copied by a machine, and not like some of the other docu- 
ments, which were merely imperfect memoranda. On the 
whole, he could not withhold it from the consideration of the 
jury, subject to such remark as to its weight which might 
competently be made. 

Lord Hanpystp—E—The question is, whether this is com- 
petent and admissible evidence to be laid before the jury? I 
think it is. There seems to me to be a manifest distinction 
between the case of a draft or scroll, which we have lately 

~decided, and a document like the present; and I also go 
greatly on its connection with some of the letters that precede 
it in date, and also with that which follows it. I do not go 
over these references in detail. Lord Ivory has already 
alluded to several of them. But, speaking generally, I think 
this document is connected intimately with those already re- 
ceived. Questions are put to which answers are required, and 
these answers are found in other letters. It is also a full and 
complete document. Thrown off by a copying-press, it is a 
copy of a document intended to be despatched, and that may, 
‘I think, be presumed to have been despatched. I infer also 
that it was received, because in a subsequent letter various 
matters of inquiry are referred to. I think, therefore, that 
this document stands in a position which prevents our reject- 
ing it. There is undoubtedly some delicacy when the original 
has not been traced into the hands of the prisoner, and, had 
there been a production of correspondence on both sides, and 
had this letter not been found among those produced by the 
prisoner, I should have had much hesitation in admitting it. 
But where the original writings of L’Angelier are not acces- 
sible, I think the document is, in the circumstances, admis- 
sible. Its value is, of course, subject to much observation. 

The Lorp Justice-CLerK—I do not think that the admis- 
sion or rejection of this particular document will be of great 
moment to the present case ; because it is quite plain from the 
panel’s letter 121 that the same questions which are put in 
119 had been put to the panel in some letter or other, and in 
the same tone as in 119. So much is that the case, that the 
panel’s letter 121 (which is supposed to be an answer to 119) 
is perfectly intelligible and complete without the aid of 119. 
Hence the reception of 119 is, in my opinion, immaterial in 
this case, but to the general question respecting the admis- 
sibility of a copy or scroll of a letter, of the despatch of 
which there is not a particle of evidence, which has been 
argued, I attach the greatest importance, and, as I have the 
misfortune to differ from the majority of the Court, I shall 

express my opinion in a few words. I am not aware of any 

382 


Appendix I, 


case, and the Lord Advocate has not referred to any case, in 
which any document from another party has been admitted 
without separate and independent proof that the document 
was sent to and received by the prisoner. Morally we may 
have no doubt of its having been so received, but we may be 
morally certain of many things which yet are not legally 
proved and not legally admissible in proof. It is said that 
questions contained in other letters are answered in this; but 
the deceased may have written and sent another letter, and 
this one may never have been despatched, and I cannot there- 
fore think that a copy—press copy it is supposed—is com- 
petent evidence in a criminal charge against another party. 
For this, be it observed, is not a question between L’Angelier 
and the prisoner, but a criminal prosecution against her at 
the instance of the Lord Advocate. On these grounds, I do 
not think ‘this document ought to be admitted. I repeat that, 
in the actual state of this wretched correspondence, J think 
the reception of this letter is of the slightest importance. 
But the general point is one of the greatest importance, and 
I dread much the use which may be made, in other cases, of 
the relaxation of the general rule which the decision here 
seems to sanction. 

The objection was repelled, and the document admitted. | 


No. 119. 
[Press Cory or Lerr=r. ] 


Glasgow, March 5th, 1857. 

My dear, sweet pet Mimi,—I feel indeed very vexed that the 
answer I recd. yesterday to mine of Tuesday to you should prevent 
me from sending you the kind letter I had ready for you. You must 
not blame me, dear, for this, but really your cold, indifferent, and 
reserved notes, so short, without a particle of love in them (especially 
after pledging your word you were to write me kindly for those letters 
you asked me to destroy), and the manner you evaded answering the 
questions I put to you in my last, with the reports I hear, fully con- 
vince me, Mimi, that there is foundation in your marriage with 
another; besides, the way you put off our union till September with- 
out a just reason is very suspicious I do not think, Mimi dear, that 
Mrs. Anderson would say your mother told her things she had not, 
and really I could never believe Mr. Houldsworth would be guilty of 
telling a falsehood for mere talking. No, Mimi, there is a foundation 
for all this. You often go to Mr. M/s house. and common sense 
would lead any one to believe that if you were not on the footing 


383 


Madeleine Smith. 


reports say you are you would avoid going near any of his friends. I 
know he goes with you, or at least meets you in Stirlingshire. Mimi, 
dear, place yourself in my position and tell me am I wrong in believing 
what I hear. I was happy the last time we met—yes, very happy. I 
was forgetting all the past, but now it is again beginning. 

Mimi, I insist in having an explicit answer to the questions you 
evaded in my (sic) last. If you evade answering them this time, I 
must try some other means of coming to the truth. If not answered 
ina satisfactory manner, you must not expect I shall again write you 
personally or meet you when you return home. I do not wish you to 
answer this at random. I shall wait a day or so if you require it. I 
know you cannot write me from Stirlingshire, as the time you have to 
write me a letter is occupied in doing so to others. There was a time 
you would have found plenty of time. 

Answer me this, Mimi—Who gave you the trinket you showed me. 
Is.it true it was Mr. Minnoch. And is it true that you are, directly 
or indirectly, engaged to Mr. Minnoch or to any one else but me. 
These questions I must know. 

The doctor says I must go to B. of A. I cannot travel 500. miles 
to the I. of W. and 500 back. What is your object in wish- 
ing me so very much to go south. I may not go to B. of A. 
till Wednesday; if I can avoid going I shall do so for your 
sake. I shall wait to hear from you. I hope, dear, nothing will 
happen to check the happiness we were again enjoying. May God bless 
you, Pet, and with many fond and tender embraces believe me with 
kind love your ever affte. husband, Emme L’ ANGELIER. 


No. 123. 


Envelope addressed—‘‘ Mr. E. L’Angelier, Mrs. Jenkins, 11 
Franklin Place, Great Western Road, Glasgow.” 


[Posted at Bridge of Allan, 10th March, 1857; reached Glasgow 
about 5.30 p.m.; deliverable between 6 and 8 same evening. ] 


[Lerrer. ] 


My own best loved pet,—I hope you are well. I am very well, 
but it is such a cold place—far colder than in Town. I have never 
been warm since I came here. There are very few people that we know 
staying in the Village. Have you ever been here, my own dear, little 
pet. I hope, sweet one, it may make you feel well and strong again, 
and that you will not again be ill all the summer. You must try and 
keep well for my sake, will you, my own dear little Emile. You love 
me, do you not. Yes, Emile, I know you do. We go to Perth this 
week to see some friends. I am going to Edr. the end of this menth. 


384 


Appendix I. 


B/ will, I think, go too. I saw you pass the morning we left—and 
you, little love, passing the front door and I was at the window, but 
you would not look up, and I did know where you were going to. 
We shall be home Monday or Tuesday. I shall write you, sweet love, 
when we shall have an interview. I long to see you, to kiss and 
embrace you, my own, only sweet love. Kiss me, sweet one—my 
love, my own dear sweet little pet. I know your kindness will forgive 
me if I do not write you a longer letter, but we are, just going to the 
train to meet meet (sic) friends from the north, so I shall conclude with 
much, much love tender embraces and fond kisses. Sweet love, Adieu! 
Ever with love, yours Mint. 


No. 125. 


Envelope addressed—‘‘ Mr. L’Angelier, Mrs. Jenkins, 11 Franklin 
Place, Great Western Road, Glasgow.” 


[Posted at Bridge of Allan, 13th March, 1857; reached Glasgow 
10.45 same night; deliverable next morning, first delivery. ] 


[Lerter. J 


Dearest & Beloved,—I hope you are well. I am very well, and 
anxious to get home to see you, sweet one. It is cold, and we have 
had snow all the week, which is most disagreeable. I feel better 
since we came here. I think we shall be home on Tuesday, so I shall 
let you know, my own beloved sweet pet, when we shall have a dear, 
sweet interview, when I may be pressed to your heart and kissed by 
you, my own sweet love. A fond, tender embrace—a kiss, sweet love. 
I hope you will enjoy your visit here. You will find it so dull, no 
one here we know, and I dont fancy you will find any friends, as they 
are all strangers, and dont appear nice people. I am longing to see you, 
sweet one of my heart, my only dear love. I wish we had not come 
here for another month as it would have been so much nicer—it would 
then be warm. I think if you could wait a little it would do you more 
good, but you know best when you can get away. Adieu, my only 
love, my own sweet pet. A kiss, dear love. A tender embrace, love, 
and kisses. Adieu. Ever yours, with love and fond kisses, I am ever 
yours, Mint. 


No. 127. 
Envelope addressed—‘‘ Thomas F. Kennedy, Esqr., 10 Bothwell | 
Street, Glasgow.” 
[Lerrers. | 


Dear Tom,—I arrived safe, and feel a deal better; it is much 
warmer than Glasgow; the wind is south. I never saw finer weather. 


IB 385 


Madeleine Smith. 


I enclose you a P.O. Order, which please get cashed for me. Pens 
and ink, also wafers, are very scarce, and not to be had at present. 

In expectation of seing you on Saturday, George M‘Call bought a 
bottle of pickles, warranted free from copper. I shall be at the arrival 
of the train leaving Glasgow at 4.15 p.m. Drop a line if you are coming, 
or else you will have no dinner. Yours, &c.. Eine L’ ANGELIER. 


—< 


If you come, dine with me, 4 Forth St., at 7 p.m., letting me 
know by letter to-morrow night. If Mc. comes, bring him too; but, 
above all things, bring me a box of small Victoria segars from the 
late MacKillop, payine for same. Yours, G. M‘C. 

Thursday. 


No. 129. 


Envelope addressed—‘‘ T. F. Kennedy, Esq., W. B. Huggins & Co., 
10 Bothwell Street, Glasgow. 


[Lerter. | 
Edinburg, Monday. 

Dear Tom,—We recd. your note on Saturday, and were very sorry 
to hear you were unwell and unable to come. In one respect it was 
lucky, as it poured all Saturday afternoon. 

I hear at Bridge of Allan it is very cold, and snow. I think [ 
will start for there to-morrow. I dont feel so well as I did, but I 
think it is the want of sleep. I think the P.O. people beautifully 
ignorant, not to know a man’s name from a woman’s. I shall write 
to Oxford about it. 

I suppose I am not wanted yet; if I should be, let me know, please. 
Dont send any more letters to P.O. here after 10 a.m. to-morrow. 

Excuse haste, and believe me, your sincere friend, 

P. Emus L’ ANGELIER. 


I recd. the letters you addd. to me, and another to-day. 
No. 131. 


Envelope addressed—‘‘ Monsieur Thuau, Mrs. Jenkins, 11 Franklin 
Place, Great Western Road, Glasgow.” 


{Lerrer. | 


Mon cher Monsieur,—Je viens de recevoir la votre de Samedi, 
at je vous remercie de votre attention. Je compte venir coucher a 


386 


Appendix I. : 


Glasgow demain ainsi je vous prie de retenir mes depéches aprés ce 
sour. 

Je me porte un peu mieux mais cela ne va pas comme je le 
vondrais. Je ne* point de lettres de Mr. Mitchell, j’aurais bien 
voulu savoir ce qu’il me voulait. En vous serrant la main, je suis 
tout avous, Emme LANGELIER. 

Lundi, 11 heures 

*Je n’ai (?). 


No. 133. 


Envelope addressed—‘‘ William Minnoch, Esq., 124 St. Vincent 
Street, Glasgow.” 


[Posted at Stirling, 16th March, 1857; reached Glasgow 5.50 same 
afternoon; deliverable between 6 and 8 same night.] 


[Lerrer. | 


My dearest William,—It is but fair, after your kindness to me, 
that I should write you a note. The day I part from friends I 
always feel sad. But to part from one I love, as I do you, makes me\ 
feel truly sad and dull. My only consolation is that we meet soon. 
To-morrow we shall be home. I do so wish you were here to-day. 
We might take a long walk. Our walk to Dumblane I shall ever 
remembe® with pleasure. That walk fixed a day on which we are % 
begin a new life—a life which I hope may be of happiness and long 
duration to both of us. My aim through life shall be to please you 
and (sic) study you. Dear William, I must conclude, as Mama 
is ready to go to Stirling. I do not go with the same pleasure as I did 
the last time. I hope you got to Town safe, and found your sisters 


well. Accept my warmest kindest love and ever believe me to be, 


yours with affecn., MADELEINE. 


Monday, 
Prospect Villa. 


Joa 


No. 135. 
[MzMoRANDUM. ] 


‘« Jusqu’a demain dix heures—Post Office, Stirling.” 
‘« Aprés dix heures—Post Office, Bridge of Allan.”’ 


No. 137. 


Envelope addressed—“ Mr. L’Angelier, Mrs. Jenkins, i1 Franklin 


Place, Great Western Road, Glasgow.” 
387 


Madeleine Smith. 


No. 139. 
Enyelope addressed—‘‘ Mr. Langelier, Post-Office, Stirling.” 
No. 141. 


Envelope addressed—‘‘ Miss Perry, 144 Renfrew Street, 
Glasgow.’’ 5 


[Posted at Bridge of Allan, 20th March, 1857; reached Glasgow 
10.45 p.m. same night; deliverable first delivery next morning.] 


[Lerrer. ] 


Bridge of Allan, 20th March. 

Dear Mary,—I should have written to you before, but I am so 
lazy writing when away from my ordinary ways. I feel much 
better, and I hope to be home the middle of next week. 

This is a very stupid place, very dull. I know no-one; and 
besides, it is so very much colder than Edin. I saw your friends 
at Portobello, and will tell you about them when I see you. 

I should have come to see some one last night, but the letter 
came too late, so we are both disappointed. Trusting you are quite 
well, and with kind regards to yourself and sister, Believe me, yours 
sincerely, P. Emme L’ANGELIER. 


I shall be here till Wednesday. 


No. 143. 


Envelope addressed—‘‘ W. A. Stevenson, Esq., 10 Bothwell 
Street, Glasgow.’’ 


(Lerrer. ] 


Bridge of Allan, Friday. 

Dear William,—I am happy to say I feel much better, though 
I fear I slept in a damp bed, for my limbs are all sore and scarcely 
able to bear me, but a day or two will put all to rights. 

What a dull place this is. I went to Stirling to-day, but it was 
so cold and damp that I soon hurried home again. Are you very 
busy. Am I wanted, if so, I am ready to come at any time—just 
drop me a line at P.O. “You were talking of taking a few days to 
yourself, so I shall come up whenever you like. 


388 


Appendix I. 


If any letters come, please send them to me here. I intend to be 
home not later than Thursday morning. Yours sincerely, 
P. Emme LANGELIER. 


No. 145. 


Envelope addressed—‘‘T. F. Kennedy, Esq., Western Lodge, 
Woodlands Road, Glasgow.” 


[Lerrer. } 


Bridge of Allan, 
Friday, 20th March. 

Dear Tom,—I was sorry to hear from Thuau that you were laid 
up. I hope by this time you are better. Are you well enough to 
come here to-morrow, there is a train at 12.30, 4.15, and 6.15. I think 
it would do you good. Plenty of Lodgings to be had here. If you 
come, it it (sic) is of no use writing, as the latest post arriving is 
10 a.m.; but as the walk to the trains is short I shall be on the look- 
out. I am two doors from there in Union Street. 

I am getting short of tin, bring with you, please, two or three 
pounds, or if not send them. I was in Stirling to-day, but it was 
very cold, so I came back again. I have, I fear, slept in damp 
sheets, for all my timbers are quite sore. I weary by myself here, 
and I long to be back again. The place is worth seeing, but as dull 
as a chimney can. Yours very sincerely, P. Emme L’ ANGELIER. 


No. 147. 


Envelope addressed—‘‘ P. E. L’Angelier, Esq., Post-Office, 
Bridge of Allan.” 


[Lerrmn. J 


39 Abercorn Street, 
2ist March, 1857. 

Dear Langelier,—I duly received your note to-day, but was 80 
busy I had not time to drop you an answer. I am glad to hear 
you are enjoying yourself, and making it better. It must be very 
cold with you to-day. We have a good stiff E. wind blowing. We 
are not busy, tho’ I am kept occupied with stocks, so you need not 
hurry back if a few days longer are likely to be of benefit to you 
in strengthening your frame. 


389 


Madeleine Smith. 


I rather suspect I shall not go away this spring—at all events, 
not before April. 

T. F. Kennedy has been confined to his bedchamber for four 
days, but expects to (be) out on Monday 

I hope you secured a nice collection of ferns for me while in 
Edin. 

Drop me a note if you do not intend to be home this next week. 
With kind regards, yours very truly, W. A. SrEvENson. 


No. 149. 


Envelope addressed—‘‘ Mr. E. L’Angelier, Mrs. Jenkins, 11 
Franklin Place, Great Western Road, Glasgow.” 


[Posted at Glasgow, General Offica or pillar-box, 21st March, 
1857, between 9 a.m. and half-past 12 p.m. if pillar-box, and if 
General Office between 11.45 a.m. and 1 p.m., and deliverable between 
1.30 and 3 same afternoon.] 


(Lerrsn. ] 


Why my beloved did you not come to me. Oh beloved are you 
ill. Come to me sweet one. I waited and waited for you but you 
came not. I shall wait again to-morrow night same hour and arrange- 
ment. Do come sweet love my own dear love of a sweetheart. Come 
beloved and clasp me to your heart. Come and we shall be happy. 
A kiss fond love. Adieu with tender embraces ever believe me to 
be your own ever dear fond Mint. 


No. 151. 


[Lerrer. ] 


Samedi soir 6 heures. 

Mon cher Monsieur,—Je trouve cette lettre. Elle est arrivée 
parait il enver midi ou midi & demi. Je m’empresse de la mettre 
& la poste pour qu’elle puisse partir s’il en est temps encore. 

Je vous serre bien cordialement la main, Votre devoué, 

A. Txuav. 

Rien de neuf. Je n’ai pas revu Kenedy. Je vais le voir ce soir. 

Je vous ai envoye une lettre A Stirling le soir de votte départ. 


390 


ae TeX 7, 


Se oe es er pe afin 
Madeleine ence Deter of 21st March. 


Se Pe ae 
a = 
aN, 
= f 
a 
yp 

. 

. 
‘Ss 

> 


APPENDIX II. 


ARTICLES ON THE ARsENIC-EatiInc Hasrr. 
(From Chambers’ Journal and Blackwood’s Magazine.) 


TuE Porson-EatTERs. 
Chambers’ Journal, December, 1851. 


A very interesting trial for murder took place lately in Austria. 
The prisoner, Anna Alexander, was acquitted by the jury, who, in 
the various questions put to the witnesses, in order to discover 
whether the murdered man, Lieutenant Mathew Wurzel, was a 
poison-eater or not, educed some very curious evidence relating to 
this class of persons. As it is not generally known that eating poison 
is actually practised in more countries than one, the following account 
of the custom, given by a physician, Dr. T. von Tschudi, will not 
be without interest. In some districts of Lower Austria and in 
Styria, especially in those mountainous parts bordering on Hungary, 
there prevails the strange habit of eating arsenic. The peasantry 
in particular are given to it. They obtain it under the name of 
Hedri from the travelling hucksters and gatherers of herbs, who, 
on their side, get it from the glass-blowers, or purchase it from the 
cow-doctors, quacks, or mountebanks. The poison-eaters have a two- 
fold aim in their dangerous enjoyment; one of which is to obtain 
a fresh healthy appearance, and acquire a certain degree of embon- 
point. On this account, therefore, gay village lads and lasses employ 
the dangerous agent, that they may become more attractive to each 
other; and it is really astonishing with what favourable results their 
endeavours are attended, for it is just the youthful poison-eaters 
that are, generally speaking, distinguished by a blooming complexion 
and an appearance of exuberant health. Out of many examples I 
select the following :— 

A farm-servant who worked in the cow-house belonging to 
was thin and pale, but, nevertheless, well and healthy. This girl 
had a lover whom she wished to enchain still more firmly; and in 
order to obtain a more pleasjng exterior she had recourse to the well- 
known means, and swallowed every week several doses of arsenic. 
The desired result was obtained; and in a few months she was much 
fuller in the figure, rosy-cheeked, and, in short, quite according to 
her lover’s taste. In order to increase the effect, she was so rash 
as to increase the dose of arsenic, and fell a victim to her vanity ; 
she was poisoned, and died an agonising death. 

The number of deaths in consequence of the immoderate enjoy- 
ment of arsenic is not inconsiderable, especially among the young. 
Every priest. who has the cure of souls in those districts where the 

391 


Madeleine Smith. 


abuse prevails could tell of such tragedies; and the inquiries I have 
myself made on the subject have opened out very singular details. 
Whether it arises from fear of the law, which forbids the unauthorised 
possession of arsenic, or whether it be that an inner voice proclaims 
to him his sin, the arsenic-eater always conceals as much as possible 
the employment of these dangerous means. (Generally speaking, it 
is only the confessional or the deathbed that raises the veil from the 
terrible secret. 

The second object the poison-eaters have in view is to make them, 
as they express it, ‘‘ better winded ! ”—that, is, to make their respira- 
tion easier when ascending the mountains. Whenever they have far 
to go and to mount a considerable height they take a minute morsel 
of arsenic, and allow it gradually to dissolve, The effect is sur- 
prising; and they ascend with ease heights which otherwise they 
could climb only with distress to the chest. 

The dose of arsenic with which the poison-eaters begin consists, 
according to the confession of some of them, of a piece the size of 
a lentil, which in weight would be rather less than half a grain. To 
this quantity, which they take fasting several mornings in the week, 
they confine themselves for a considerable time; and then gradually, 
and very carefully, they increase the dose according to the effect 
produced. The peasant R——, living in the parish of A—-g, a 
strong, hale man of upwards of sixty, takes at present at every 
dose a piece of about the weight of four grains For more than 
forty years he has practised this habit, which he inherited from his 
father, and which he in his turn will bequeath to his children. 

It is well to observe that neither in these nor in other poison- 
eaters is there the least trace of an arsenic cachexy discernible; that 
the symptoms of a chronic arsenical poisoning never show them- 
selves in individuals who adapt the dose to their constitution, even 
although that dose should be considerable. It is not less worthy of 
remark, however, that when, either from inability to obtain the acid, 
or from any other cause, the perilous indulgence is stopped, symp- 
toms of illness are sure to appear, which have the closest resemblance 
to those produced by poisoning from arsenic. These symptoms 
consist principally in a feeling of general discomfort, attended by a 
perfect indifference to all surrounding persons and things, great 
personal anxiety, and various distressing sensations arising from the 
digestive organs, want of appetite, a constant feeling of the stomach 
being overloaded at early morning, an unusual degree of salivation, 
a burning from the pylorus to the throat, a cramp-like movement 
in the pharynx, pains in the stomach, and especially difficulty of 
breathing. For all these symptoms there is but one remedy—a, return 
to the enjoyment of arsenic. 

According to inquiries made on the subject, it would seem that 
the habit of eating poison among the inhabitants of Lower Austria 
has not grown into a passion, as is the case with the opium-eaters in 

392 


Appendix II. 


the East, the chewers of the betel nut in India and Polynesia, and of 
the coco-tree among the natives of Peru. When once commenced, 
however, it becomes a necessity. 

In some districts sublimate of quicksilver is used in the same 
way. Qne case in particular is mentioned by Dr. von Tschudi, a 
case authenticated by the English Ambassador at Constantinople, 
of a great opium-eater at Brussa, who daily consumed the enormous 
quantity of forty grains of corrosive sublimate; and in Bolivia the 
practice is still more frequent, where this poison is openly sold in the 
market to the Indians. 

In Vienna the use of arsenic is of every-day occurrence among 
horse-dealers, and especially with the coachmen of the nobility. They 
either take it in a pulverised state among the corn, or they tie a bit 
the size of a pea in a piece of linen, which they fasten to the curb 
when the horse is harnessed, and the saliva of the animal soon 
dissolves it. The sleek, round, shining appearance of the carriage- 
horses, and especially the much admired foaming at the mouth, is 
the result of this arsenic feeding. It is a common practice with the 
farm-servants in the mountainous parts to strew a pinch of arsenic 
on the last feed of hay before going up a steep road. This is done 
for years without the least unfavourable result; but, should the 
horse fall into the hands of another owner, who withholds the arsenic, 
he loses flesh immediately, is no longer lively, and even with the best 
feeding there is no possibility of restoring him to his former sleek 
appearance. 

The above particulars, communicated by a contributor residing in 
Germany, are curious only inasmuch as they refer to poisons of a 
peculiarly quick and deadly nature. Our ordinary ‘‘ indulgences ”’ 
in this country are the same in kind, though not in degree, for we 
are all poison-eaters. To say nothing of our opium and alcohol con- 
sumers, our teetotalers are delighted with the briskness and sparkle 
of spring-water, although these qualities indicate the presence of 
carbonic acid or fixed air. In like manner, few persons will object 
to a drop or two of the frightful corrosive, sulphuric acid (vitriol) 
in a glass of water, to which it communicates an agreeably acid 
taste; and most of us have, at some period or other of our lives, 
imbibed prussic acid, arsenic, and other deadly poisons under the 
orders of the physician, or the first of these in the more pleasing 
form of confectionery. Arsenic is said by Dr. Pearson to be as harm- 
less as a glass of wine in the quantity of one-sixteenth part of a 
grain; and in the cure of agues it is so certain in its effects that the 
French Directory once issued an edict ordering the surgeons of the 
Italian army, under pain of military punishment, to banish that 
complaint, at two or three days’ notice, from among the vast numbers 
of soldiers who were languishing under it in the marshes of Lom- 
bardy. It would seem that no poison taken in small and diluted 


; 393 


Madeleine Smith. 


doses is immediately hurtful, and the same thing may be said of 
other agents. The tap of a fan, for instance, is a blow, and so is 
the stroke of a club; but the one gives an agreeable sensation, and 
the other fells the recipient to the ground. In like manner the 
analogy holds good between the distribution of a blow over a com- 
paratively large portion of the surface of the body and the dilution 
or distribution of the particles of a poison. A smart thrust upon 
the breast, for instance, with a foil does no injury; but if the 
button is removed, and the same momentum thus thrown to a point, 
the instrument enters the structures, and perhaps causes death. 

But the misfortune is, that poisons swallowed for the sake of the 
agreeable sensations they occasion owe this effect to their action upon 
the nervous system; and the action must be kept up by a constantly 
increasing dose till the constitution is irremediably injured. In the 
case of arsenic, as we have seen, so long as the excitement is un- 
diminished all is apparently well; but the point is at length reached 
when to proceed or to turn back is alike death. The moment the dose 
is diminished or entirely withdrawn, symptoms of poison appear, 
and the victim perishes because he has shrunk from killing himself. 
It is just so when the stimulant is alcohol. The morning experience 
of the drinker prophesies, on every succeeding occasion, of the fate 
that awaits him. It may be pleasant to get intoxicated, but to get 
sober is horror. The time comes, however, when the pleasure is at 
an end, and the horror alone remains. When the habitual stimulus 
reaches its highest, and the undermined constitution can stand no 
more, then comes the reaction. If the excitement could go on ad 
infinitum, the prognosis would be different; but the poison-symptoms 
appear as soon as the dose can no longer be increased without pro- 
ducing instant death, and the drunkard dies of the want of drink! 
Many persons, it cannot be denied, reach a tolerable age under this 
stimulus; but they do so only by taking warning in time—perhaps 
from some frightful illness—and carefully proportioning the dose to 
the sinking constitution. ‘‘I cannot drink now as formerly,” is a 
common remark—sometimes elevated into the boast, ‘‘I do not drink 
now as formerly.’’ But the relaxation of the habit is compulsory; 
and by a thousand other tokens, as well as the inability to indulge 
in intoxication, the ci-devant drinker is reminded of a madness which 
even in youth produced more misery than enjoyment, and now adds 
a host of discomforts to the ordinary fragility of age. As for arsenic- 
eating, we trust it will never be added to the madnesses of our own 
country. Think of a man deliberately condemning himself to devour 
this horrible poison, on an increasing scale, during his whole life, 
witn the certainty that if at any time, through accident, necessity, 
or other cause, he holds his hand, he must die the most agonising of 
all deaths! In so much horror do we hold the idea that we would 
have refrained from mentioning the subject at all if we had not 

394 


Appendix II. 


observed a paragraph making the round of the papers, and describing 
the agreeable phases of the practice without mentioning its shocking 
results. 


THE Naxcotics wE INDULGE W. 


Blackwood’s Magazine, December, 1853. 


* * * * * * * * 


1. The Hating of Arsenic.—White arsenic, as is well known, is a 
violent poison. In large doses it is what in medical language is 
called an irritant poison, but in very minute doses it is what is 
known by professional men to be a tonic and alterative. It is rarely 
administered as a medicine, however, by regularly educated prac- 
titioners, except perhaps in homeopathic practice, and is never used 
as a household medicine by the people of this country. 

In some parts of Lower Austria, however. and Styria, and especi- 
ally in the hilly region towards Hungary, there prevails among the 
peasantry an extraordinary custom of eating arsenic. The common 
people obtain it, under the name of Hidri, from itinerant herbalists 
and pedlars, who bring it from the chimneys of the smelting-houses 
in the mining regions. Large quantities of arsenic are sublimed 
during the roasting of the ores of lead and copper, and deposited in 
the long horizontal or inclined chimneys which are attached to the 
furnaces in which this operation is carried on. The practice is one 
which appears to be. of considerable antiquity, is continued often 
throughout a long life, and is even handed down hereditarily from 
father to son. It is eaten professedly for one or both of two pur- 
poses—(1) That the eater may thereby acquire freshness of com- 
plexion and plumpness of figure. For this purpose, as will readily 
be supposed, it is chiefly eaten by the young. (2) That the wind 
may be improved, so that long and steep heights may be climbed 
without difficulty of breathing. By the middle-aged and the old it 
is esteemed for this influence, and both results are described as fol- 
lowing almost invariably from the use of arsenic. 

To improve their appearance young peasants, of both sexes, have 
recourse to it, some no doubt from ~ranity, and some with the view 
of adding to their charms in the eyes of each other. And it is very 
remarkable to see how wonderfully well they attain their object; 
for these young poison-eaters are generally remarkable for blooming 
complexions, and a full, rounded, healthy appearance. Dr. von 
Tschudi gives the following case as having occurred in his own 
practice :—‘‘ A healthy but pale and thin milkmaid, residing in the 
parish of H——, had a lover whom she wished to attach to herself 
by a more agreeable exterior. She therefore had recourse to the 
well-known beautifier, and took arsenic several times a week. The 
desired effect was not long in showing itself, for in a few months 

395 


Madeleine Smith. 


she became stout, rosy-cheeked, and all that her lover could desire. 
In order, however, to increase the effect, she incautiously increased 
the dose of arsenic, and fell a victim to her vanity. She died 
poisoned—a very painful death! ’’ The number of such fatal cases, 
especially among young persons, is described as by no means incon- 
siderable. 

For the second purpose—that of rendering the breathing easier 
when going uphill—the peasant puts a small fragment of arsenic in 
his mouth, and lets it dissolve. The effect is astonishing. He ascends 
heights with facility, which he could not otherwise do without the 
greatest difficulty of breathing. 

The quantity of arsenic with which the eaters begin is about half 
a grain. They continue to take this quantity two or three times a 
week, in the morning fasting, till they become habituated to it. They 
then cautiously increase the dose as the quantity previously taken 
seems to diminish in its effects. ‘‘ The peasant R » says Dr. 
von Tschudi, ‘‘a hale man of sixty, who enjoys capital health at 
present, takes for every dose a piece about two grains in weight. For 
the last forty years he has continued the habit, which he inherited 
from his father, and which he wilf transmit to his children.” 

No symptoms of illness or chronic poisoning are observable in any 
of these arsenic-eaters, when the dose is carefully adapted to the 
constitution and habit of body of the person using it. But if from 
any cause the arsenic be left off for a time, symptoms of disease 
occur which resemble those of slight arsenical poisoning; especially 
a great feeling of discomfort arises, great indifference to everything 
around, anxiety about his own person, deranged digestion, loss of 
appetite, a feeling of overloading in the stomach, increased flow of 
saliva, burning from the stomach up to the throat, spasms in the 
throat, pains in the bowels, constipation, and especially oppression 
in the breathing. From these symptoms there is only one speedy 
mode of relief—an immediate return to arsenic-eating ! 

This custom does not amount to a passion, like opium-eating in 
the East, betel-chewing in India, or coca-chewing in Peru. The 
arsenic is not taken as a direct pleasure-giver or happiness-bestower, 
but the practice, once begun, creates a craving, as the other practices 
do, and becomes a necessity of life. 

In Vienna arsenic is said to be very extensively used for pro- 
ducing the same effects upon horses, especially among gentlemen’s 
grooms and coachmen. They either sprinkle a pinch of it among the 
oats, or they tie a piece as big as a pea ina bit of linen, and fasten 
it to the bit when the bridle is put into the horse’s mouth. There 
it is gradually dissolved by the saliva and swallowed. The sleek, 
round, glossy appearance of many of the first-rate coach-horses, and 
especially the foaming at the mouth, which is so much admired, is 
owing to the arsenic they get. In mountainous districts, also, where 
horses have to drag heavy burdens up steep places, the drivers often 

396 


Appendix II. 


put a dose of arsenic into the last portion of food they give them. 
This practice is continued for years without the least injury. But 
if a horse which is used to it comes into the possession of one who 
does not give arsenic, it loses flesh and spirits, becomes weak, and 
the most nutritious food is found unable to restore the animal to 
its former appearance. 

Though a substance so very different in kind from all the nar- 
cotics we have described, yet the effects which result from the eating 
of arsenic in the way just mentioned have a remarkable resemblance 
to those which some of the narcotics produce. Thus arsenic resembles 
coca in making the food appear to go further, or to have more effect 
in feeding or fattening the body, while, like coca also, it gives the 
remarkable power of climbing hills without breathlessness. And, 
further, it resembles both coca and opium, and especially the latter, 
in creating a diseased and uncomfortable craving, and in thus be- 
coming, through long use, a necessity of life. 

The chemico-physiological action of arsenic, in producing these 
curious effects, has not as yet been experimentally investigated. From 
the nature of the results, we think it probable that, when experi- 
ments come to be made, they will show that the quantity of carbonic 
acid given off by the lungs is diminished by the use of this drug. 
The effects of this, supposing it to be the case, are (1) that less 
oxygen is required to be inhaled, and hence the greater ease of 
breathing under all circumstances, but which is especially perceived 
in climbing hills; and (2) that the fat of the food which would other- 
wise have been used up in supplying carbonic acid to be given off 
by the lungs is deposited instead in the cellular tissue beneath the 
skin, and thus pads, plumps out, and renders fair the animal that 
uses it. 

But in whatever way the physiological effects are produced, their 
existence appears to be beyond dispute; and the perusal of them 
can scarcely fail to recall to our minds the dreamy recollections of 
what we have been accustomed to consider as the foolish fancies of 
easy and credulous times. Love-philters, charms, and potions start 
up again as real things beneath the burning light of progressive 
science. From the influence of hemp and arsenic no heart seems 
secure; by their assistance no affection unattainable. The wise 
woman whom the charmless female of the East consults administers 
to the desired one a philter, which deceives his imagination, cheats 
him into the belief that charms exist and attractive beauty where 
there are none, and defrauds him of a love which, with the truth 
before him, he would never have yielded. She acts directly upon his 
brain with her hempen potion, leaving the unlovely object he is to 
admire all unlovely as before. It is a case of odylic moonshine! 

But the Styrian peasant-girl, stirred by an unconsciously growing 
attachment, confiding scarcely to herself her secret feelings, and 

397 


Madeleine Smith. 


taking counsel of her inherited wisdom really adds to the natural 
graces of her filling and rounding form, paints with bseighter hues 
her blushing cheeks and tempting lips, and imparts a new and 
winning lustre to her sparkling eyes. Every one sees and admires 
the reality of her growing beauty; the young men sound her praises, 
and become suppliants for her favour. She triumphs over the affec- 
tions of all, and compels the chosen one to her feet. 

And dost thou, too, cruel arsenic—so often the minister of crime 
and the parent of sorrow—dost thou, too, bear a blessed jewel in 
thy forehead; and, as a love-philter, canst thou really become the 
harbinger of happiness, the soother of ardent longings, the bestower 
of contentment and peace! 

It is probable that the use of these and many other love-potions 
has been known to the initiated from very early times; now given 
to the female to enhance her charms, now administered: to the lords 
of the creation to lend imaginary beauties to the unattractive. And 
out of this use must often have sprung fatal results to the female, as 
is now sometimes the case in Styria from the incautious use of the 
poisonous drug; to the male, as happens daily in the East, from the 
maddening effects of the fiery hemp. They must also have given 
birth to hidden crimes, which only romance now collects and pre- 
serves—the ignorance of the learned having long ago pronounced 
them unworthy of belief. 


Porson-Eaters. 
Chambers’ Journal, February, 1856. 


In certain numbers of Chambers’ Hdinburgh Journal the custom 
of poison-eating was first made known in England. It was some- 
thing so new and marvellous, and at the same time so opposed to 
our former notions of the power and properties of arsenic, that many 
persons—the greater number, perhaps—looked upon it as incredible. 
The papers in question, however, attracted attention; for the facts 
they stated were too extraordinary to pass unnoticed. They were 
copied by innumerable journals and magazines, and were also quoted 
in scientific works. But though read, and talked of, and quoted as a 
marvel, the statements in question do not seem to have induced any 
one in England to turn the information thus acquired to practical 
account. And yet, it might be thought, that on medico-legal con- 
siderations merely, it would be worth inquiring about. The circum- 
stance of those papers appearing anonymously may perhaps have 
had some influence on the amount of confidence or mistrust with 
which the reader was inclined to receive them. Indeed, the author 
of the two articles on poison-eating is well aware that his statements 
have been considered by several as more than improbable; while, 
on the other hand, those who were still inclined to believe have 
addressed themselves, through the editor, to the author, to beg for 


398 


eee a eC Ce ee ee ee ea a | “—* 


Appendix II. 


more details,and to ask a further verification on sundry points which 
seemed too startling. 

Whether the believers in the given accounts be numerous or not, 
it is at all events certain that the interest they have excited warrants 
a return to the subject; and this for two reasons; first, in order that 
the writer of the former papers as well as of the present one may, 
by no longer appearing anonymously, thus openly take upon himself 
the responsibility of his assertions; and, secondly, because he is 
enabled to add some facts to his first accounts, and to insist on their 
correctness with even more fitmness than before. 

Dr. von Tschudi, who has been so obliging as to make some 
interesting communications to the author on the subject of poison- 
eating, observes in his letter—‘‘ I am well aware that my observations 
and the facts I have recorded have met with much opposition in 
England, and the veracity of my assertions been doubted by many, 
especially, if I mistake not, in Scotch journals. Against my facts, 
however, my opponents have only brought doubts and suppositions ; 
which, of course, is much the same as bringing nothing at all. The 
observations communicated by me are based on the strictest truth 
and on an experience of several years. It cannot be denied that, 
for this neighbourhood at least, my communications were of: great 
importance, for here the custom of arsenic-eating is pretty general.” 

The importance of the discovery of such practices has not been 
overlooked by the Austrian law Courts. In many cases of suspected 
poisoning Dr. von Tschudi has been called upon, as one whose ex- 
perience could not but facilitate the inquiry after truth, to test the 
facts of the case by his knowledge of the results of arsenic being 
taken as daily food. In a letter to the undersigned he has been 
good enough to cite one instance, which shows clearly enough that 
henceforward both judge and jury, as well as advocate and medical 
witness, must take cognisance of this accession to our physiological 
knowledge when examining or deciding on the cases brought before 
them. 

‘““A few years ago,’’ writes the doctor, a remarkable criminal 
case was tried at the sessions held in our immediate neighbourhood. 
The body of a man who had been buried eight years was disinterred, 
vague suspicions and assertions having been afloat that he had met 
his death by foul play; and, in fact, a chemical analysis proved the 
presence of arsenic. The counsel for the prisoner made use of my 
communications; I was also called on to give my evidence; and, 
after numerous witnesses had been examined, the conclusion arrived 
at was, almost beyond the possibility of doubt, that the man sus- 
pected to have been poisoned was a poison-eater. And as the rest of 
the evidence against the accused was not well founded, the prisoner 
was acquitted; whilst, without the knowledge of the strange practice 
of eating arsenic, a condemnation would most surely have followed. 


This is but one case among many similar to it which I could cite.”’ 
399 


Madeleine Smith. 


The story given, of the gentleman who was in the habit of taking 
arsenic daily with his breakfast, is one that has called forth most 
doubts. This particuldr case Dr, von Tschudi considers ‘‘ especially 
important.” The gentleman in question, who is described as not 
only taking it himself, but as being anxious that his workmen should 
also accustom themselves to its use, in order to counteract the baneful 
effects of the poisonous fumes, is a director of arsenic works belonging 
to the Crown. The account was given Dr. von Tschudi by a high 
law officer of the imperial Court of justice, the names of the party 
being stated, and every attendant circumstance well authenticated. 

With regard to the effects of arsenic on personal appearance, the 
writer of this begs to state the following in support of what has 
already been made known :—On meeting an acquaintance after a 
long absence, he was greatly surprised at the blooming complexion, 
fulness of face, and bright sparkling eye of him whom he had not 
seen for so many months—the gentleman in question having been 
ill, and undergone a protracted cure some distance off. For a man 
of his age this freshness and bloom were something unusual; but it 
was the more striking, as neither the rosy fulness nor the lustrous 
eye had been observable before this cure. These appearances, as it 
was afterwards discovered, were attributable to the quantity of 
arsenic which had been administered to him in large doses, leaving 
him not only perfectly free from the disease for which he had been 
treated, but hale, hearty, and looking as has been above described. 
He continued to take arsenic for some time afterwards; it was given 
to him in pills, however; and he never knew, nor does to this day, 
that for a long time he had been in the habit of taking daily a large 
dose of a deadly poison. 

The other case is that of a young girl, now about twenty years 
of age. For the last two years she has taken daily half a grain of 
arsenic; for a time the dose was one grain, but it + 3 reduced to 
half the quantity. During the two years she has not been out of the 
house, and, delicate and suffering as she is, this indoor life, under 
ordinary circumstances, would naturally produce a paleness of com- 
plexion, and give her the appearance of ill-health. On the contrary, 
however, her cheeks are full and blooming, her eyes are bright, and 
there is nothing in her appearance to denote that for so long a period 
she has been confined to a sick room; her appetite, moreover, is very 
good. 

The author ventures to assert that in a late trial in England*— 
‘the slow-poisoning case ’’—various foregone conclusions on the part 


.__, * Since the above was written, a letter has appeared in the Times on thi - 
ject, in which particular attention is called to the two former articles on ve 
eating” in this journal. It is therein Sg ache that the supposed victim was in 
the habit of taking arsenic, a bottle of Fowler’s solution having been found in a 
basket, and that, having determined to leave off the habit, its sudden discontinuance 
prea it jg ten in short, ie was poisoned by ceasing to take poison—a 
radox, but which, in reality, i i 
patie, A Sacco ty, 1s a possible, and, in this case, even a 


400 


Appendix II. 


of witnesses would hardly have been come to had it been known that 
arsenic may be taken innocuously for a“long time; and that the 
presence of such poison in the human body is not always a proof 
that murder has been attempted. In the trial alluded to the very 
small doses said to have been administered would probably not have 
caused death; and, had the patient outlived the illness by which she 
was attacked, the arsenic—if given—would rather have contributed 
to improve her looks, and cause the fulness and freshness of health 
instead of thinness and pallor. 

A circumstance has come to the author’s knowledge lately, which 
is interesting to him, inasmuch as it shows that the fact of arsenic 
being taken otherwise than medicinally is known more generally than 
at first seemed the case. He was told by a person, of whom we 
made inquiries concerning the use of the poison in stable economy, 
that they remembered long ago to have read that Napoleon was in 
the habit of taking arsenic to insure himself against being poisoned. 
It being the first time the author had read this report, he inquired 
of other persons in quite another sphere of life, and of them, too, 
he learned that the tale was not new. Now, whether true or not 
that Napoleon did take arsenic—though his known inclination to 
stoutness, later in life, might seem to lend additional probability to 
the story—it is sufficient that such report was current to show that 
arsenic-eating not only existed, but was generally known to exist; 
for without such foundation no one would have ever thought of 
building up so seemingly improbable a fiction. All popular tradi- 
tions, if traced back, will be found to derive their strength and 
vitality from having sprung up in the atmosphere of truth; although, 
by the time they come down to us, they may be overgrown by the 
moss of ages, till their outward appearance is changed, and they 
look wizard-like and unearthly. 

But if the use of arsenic is found so incredible, what shall we say 
to the practice of the Turks, who take corrosive sublimate as an 
antidote to that derangement of the system produced by an im- 
moderate use of opium? This is nothing new; nor is the habit, like 
that of arsenic-eating, attempted to be concealed. The use of the 
last-named poison is very general in the East; they come across to 
Greece from Smyrna or buy their stock in Macedon; and such 
adepts are they in the art of preparing their wares for the market 
that he must indeed be a connoisseur who is not deceived by their 
blandishments by the time they appear in the Athenian market. 
They all, without exception, mix arsenic with their horses’ pro- 
vender. Some years ago an apothecary at Athens—he may even be 
there now—had, in his stable, horses, which for sleekness and beauty, 
and fineness of coat, were the admiration of every one; these were 


fed with arsenic. 
* * * * * ” * * 


St. Emeran, Ratisbon, Bavaria. Cuartes Boner. 
Ic 401 


Madeleine Smith. 


Tue ARSENIC-EATING QUESTION. 
Chambers’ Journal, July, 1856. 


Mr. Boner’s papers on this subject have attracted the attention— 
by no means favourable—of the scientific world; and, among others, 
Mr. Robert Hunt has most warmly remonstrated, and Dr. Thomas 
Inman, of Liverpool, has either explained away or denied the facts 
mentioned by our contributor. These facts, our readers may re- 
member, are chiefly that there is a practice of eating arsenic in small 
doses in Styria and other parts of Europe; that the people indulging 
in the drug believe it produces a, blooming complexion, a brilliant 
eye, and an appearance of embonpoint; that it is dangerous to take ; 
it at any other time than the increase of the moon; that the dose, 
beginning with half a grain, may be increased to several grains; and 
that symptoms of poisoning appear when the practice is given up. 
As for the amount of the dose, Dr. Inman remarks that as it is 
stated to be procured by the ‘‘ Styrian peasantry from hucksters, 
herbalists, &c.,”” the probability is that it may in reality contain only 
a@ moderate percentage of arsenious acid; and on this point—the 
strength of the dose and its effect upon the personal appearance—he 
makes the following statement :—‘‘ The human being will bear a 
certain very small quantity of arsenic without any marked effect; 
in an adult the tenth of a grain per day is the limit. After this has 
been continued about ten days or a fortnight (a time equal to the 
‘increase of the moon’), the body is saturated, and certain symptoms 
follow, amongst which are ‘ swelling of the face and a mild inflam- 
mation of the eye’ (the blooming complexion, appearance of embon- 
point, and the brilliant eye of the Styrian peasantry)! When this 
appearance is noted, the careful physician always suspends the use 
of the drug, knowing that to continue it will be attended with danger. 
Without understanding the reason, the peasant does the same, for 
he suspends arsenic-eating while the moon wanes. Experience has 
shown that a fortnight only is requisite to discharge arsenic from 
the body. By leaving, therefore, an interval of some fourteen days 
between one set of doses and another, the peasant always begins 
de novo. When you consider the stress laid by the Styrians upon a 
fortnightly suspension of the drug, it is easy to believe that the 
notion, ‘that the symptoms of poisoning come on when the practice 
is altogether given up,’ has no foundation in fact.” 

This seems sufficiently satisfactory to persons who, like ourselves, 
have no pretensions to a knowledge of the subject; but it may be 
remarked that a description of the medical use of opium in this 
country would not be considered a refutation of the extraordinary 
facts related of the practice of eating that poison in China and 
Turkey. At the same time, there is doubtless a great difference in 
the nature of the two substances, the one being more immediately 


402 


Appendix II. 


deadly than the other. But when Dr. Inman proceeds to say that 
the notion of the drug strengthening the wind of tbe chamois-hunter 
when ascending a height must be quite illusory, because the quantity 
he takes is ‘‘ too small to have any appreciable effect,’’ we demur to 


_ the argument. The quantity mentioned by Mr. Boner, supposing 


it to be pure, is declared preposterously great, while, if impure, 
the relative amount of the adulteration is wholly unknown to either 
party. On the other hand, the necessity supposed by Mr. Boner to 
exist for persisting in the use of the drug after it has been once 
fairly begun appears inconsistent with his statement that a fort- 
night must intervene between each course—during which fortnight, 
according to Dr. Inman, the poison vanishes altogether from the 
body. The sleekness of the horses to which arsenic has been ad- 
ministered, is accounted for by the medical critic by its being the 
property of the drug to make the hair fall off, Dr. Inman supposing 
that it is only the long hairs that perish, while there continues 
constant growth of young and smaller ones. 

‘‘Tf any of your readers,’’ concludes Dr. Inman, “ still feel dis- 


‘posed to try the effects of arsenic, let me give them the following 


cautions :—To use only a preparation whose real strength they know; 
Fowler’s solution contains the 1-120th of a grain in every drop. Very 
few indeed can bear to take five drops three times in a day. It is best 
borne on a full. stomach. It soon produces griping, sickness, and 
purging. It is well to remember the Styrian rule, and invariably 
suspend its use every alternate fortnight. The dose cannot be in- 
creased indefinitely or with impunity. When once the full dose 
which can be borne is ascertained, it is better to begin with that, and 
go on diminishing it to the end of the fortnight, than to begin with a 
small dose, and go on increasing it. daily. Lastly, let me urge upon 
all who adopt the Styrian system, to make some written memorandum 
that they have done so, lest, in case of accident, some of their friends 
may be hanged in mistake.” 

The use of arsenic as described by Dr. von Tschudi and Mr. Boner 
is well known in various continental countries, although nobody, 
perhaps, is aware of the quantity of arsenious acid contained in the 
dose; and in England the information was widely spread by news- 
paper paragraphs before we mentioned the subject at all. Since it 
is impossible, therefore, to conceal the fact of the poison being 
eaten, the closer investigation the question receives the better. The 
notion that investigation is dangerous inasmuch as it is ‘‘ likely to 
put the thing in people’s heads’’ proceeds, obviously, from -nere 
mistake. Arsenic is not consumed like opium or alcohol, for the sake 
of the sensation it produces; it causes no exhilaration or intoxica- 
tion—no bewildering of the judgment; it is swallowed merely as a 
medicine, that it may bring about certain results; and if, as Dr. 
Inman tells us, it has no such power, the experiment would not be 

403 


Madeleine Smith. 


repeated. A course of arsenic is not in question as an experiment, 
for the result is said to be produced at once; you give a horse, for 
instance, a dose at the bottom of the hill, that he may be in good 
enough wind to get easily to the top. We consider, therefore, Dr. 
Inman’s concluding paragraph relative to the proper dose the most 
important part of his communication, as it may serve to keep out of 
mischief those silly or curious persons who might be tempted to 
tamper with so dangerous a drug merely to try whether it would 
not improve their complexions. 


APPENDIX III. 


A Brier Account or THE Lire or L’ ANGELIER. 


Prmere Emme L’ANGELIER was a native of Jersey, and although 
therefore not. a Frenchman, as usually stated, he was of French 
extraction, his father having fled from and finally left France at 
the time of the Revolution in 1830 and having settled as a nursery- 
man in Jersey, where he died, leaving a widow and young family, 
of whom Pierre was the eldest son. The business at Jersey was 
continued for the benefit of the widow and children; and in order 
that Pierre might acquire the requisite training to enable him 
to conduct it properly, he was in 1842, at the age of 16, sent by 
his mother to Edinburgh, where he obtained a situation and re- 
mained for over five years with Dickson & Co., seedsmen, Waterloo 
Place. During those five years he improved his position with that 
firm by dint of intelligence, industry, and courtesy. In 1847, how- 
ever, a desire to go to France appears to have induced him to leave 
Edinburgh; and in Paris he held a good situation for four years, 
and as a member of the National Guard experienced some of the 
exciting influences of the Revolution of 1848. In 1851 he returned 
to Edinburgh, at the prompting, it is believed, of an attachment 
he had for a Fifeshire young lady resident in the Scottish Capital, 
with whom he had four years previously exchanged affections. To 
his chagrin, that lady on meeting him informed him that, despair- 
ing of his return, and of his ability to keep a wife respectably even 
if he should return, she had accepted an offer from and was on the 
point of marriage with another gentleman. Dejected, in poverty, 
and without employment, L’Angelier lived on the bounty of a 
tavern-keeper in Edinburgh till January, 1852, when he proceeded 
to Dundee and obtained a situation with the late Mr. W. P. 


404 


Appendix III. 


Laird, seedsman there, remaining with him till September of that 
year, when he went to Glasgow, and through the efforts of a lady 
whose acquaintance he had made in Edinburgh through selling 
flowers to her at Dickson & Co.’s, obtained the situation as packing 
clerk with Huggins & Co., 10 Bothwell Street, which he held till 
his death on 23rd March, 1857. 


APPENDIX IV. 


Summary or Lecat Pornts ARISING OUT OF THE TRIAL OF 
MapeE.terne SMITH. 


I. Indictment. 


The major proposition charged ‘“‘the wickedly and feloniously 
administering arsenic or other poison to any of the lieges with 
intent to murder.”” The minor proposition set forth that, on two 
occasions specified, the. accused ‘‘did, wickedly and feloniously, 
‘administer to, or cause to be taken by,’’ the deceased, a quantity of 
arsenic. The phrase italicised was objected to by the defence as 
being either (a) superfluous, or (b) not covered by the major pro- 
position; and on the motion of the prosecutor it was deleted from 
the libel. 


II. Medical Witnesses. | 


As a general rule, medical witnesses will not bo allowed to’ 
remain in Court to hear evidence on symptoms with regard to which 
they are subsequently to be called to express their opinion, but in 
special circumstances this rule allows of relaxation. _ 

[Save in exceptional circumstances, medical witnesses are now 

of consent allowed to remain in Court, but they must 
retire before medical testimony is led.) 


III. Memorandum Jottings. 

Certain jottings in a memorandum-book kept by the deceased, 
and proved to be in his handwriting, decided to be inadmissible . as 
evidence of a fact against the accused, even although corroboration 


of some of these jottings otherwise available. 
405 


Madeleine Smith. 


IV. Evidence. 


(1.) Certain documents found in the deceased’s repositories, 
recovered by the Procurator-Fiscal in virtue of Sheriff’s warrant, 
and retained under his control and for some time not inventoried. 


Held that such irregularity did not necessarily exclude said 
documents as evidence for the prosecution if it could be 
sufficiently proved that they were found in the deceased’s 
repositories. 


Observed that, after issue of Sheriff’s warrant, a report of its 
execution should have been returned to the Sheriff, and 
that the Procurator-Fiscal should not have obtained pos- 
session of the documents recovered under said warrant until 
the Sheriff-clerk had made an inventory of them. 


(2.) The written scroll of a letter held inadmissible as evidence, 
there being no proof that a principal was ever sent, or even 
written. 


Observed that, where a letter has been copied by a copying- 
press, there is a presumption that the original letter has 
been sent, and that consequently the copy letter should 
not be withheld from the Jury. 


(3.) A press-copy letter admitted, its contents shewing its con- 
nection with letters preceding and following it. 


APPENDIX V. 


Cory or Pockret-Book MEmMoRANDA BY L’ANGELIRR. 


1857. 


Wed. 11 Feb.—Dined at Mr J. Mitchell’s 
Saw M. @ 12 P.M. 
In C.H. Room 
Thurs. 12 Feb.—Spent the Even @ Pat. Kennedy’s 
Major Stuart and wife 
D. Jameson-& family 
Frid. 13 Feb.—Saw Mr Phillpot 
»» Mimi 
dined at 144 Renfrew St. 
Sat. 14 Feb.—a letter from M.— 
Sun. 15 Feb.—St. Judes 
406 


EE 


a wh Say a a 


) yi a Pi Let Pb Gr 


Specimen of the Handwriting of Emile L’Angelier. 


Appendix V. 


1857. 
Mon. 16 Feb.—Wrote M.— 
Saw Mr Philpots 
Tues. 17 Feb.—Dined @ 144 Renfrew St 
Thars. 19 Feb.—Saw Mimi 
a few moments 
was very ill during the night 
Frid. 20 Feb.—Passed two pleasant hour 
with M. in the Drawing Room 
Sat. 21 Feb.—don’t feel well 
went to T. F. Kennedy’s 
Sun, 22 Feb.—Saw Mimi in Drawing Room 
Promised me French Bible 
Taken very ill 


1857. 


Mon. 23 Feb.—rec’d a letter from Mrs L. 
Tues. 24 Feb.—Wrote M. 

Wed. 25 Feb.—M wrote me. 

Sat. 28 Feb.—Mimi wrote me. 


Mon. 2 Mar.—Wrote M L-—Mies R. 
Brown 
Tues. 3 Mar.—Memi wrote 
wrote Mimi 
Saw her in 8.8. 
Wed. 4 Mar.—reo @ letter from Brown 
saw Mimi gave her a 
note and got one from her 
Thurs. 5 Mar.—a letter from Brown 
saw Mimi gave her a note 
and rec’d one—saw Midsumer’s dream 
Frid. 6 Mar.—Mimi goes to B of A 
Sat. 7 Mar.—went to the gardens 
Mon. 9 Mar.—Tea @ 144 Renfrew Street. 
Tues. 10 Mar.—Went to Edin 
‘Wed. 11 Mar.—Mrs White 5 Buccleugh Street 
Mrs Jones 
. M‘Call 
Thurs. 12 Mar.—saw M ‘Call 
Frid. 13 Mar.—Diner— 
Sat. 14 Mar.—Saw the Gallery of Paintings 
Dine with M‘Call 


Madeleine Smith. 


APPENDIX VI. 


On Fry-Lear at Enp or Pockert-Boox. 


T insist to have an explicite 
answer to the questions you 
evaded 

Who gave you the 
tricket 

And is it true you are 

directly or indirectly engaged 

to Mr M. or any one else 

but me. I must insist 

on this answer 


APPENDIX VII. 


THE FOLLOWING REGULATIONS WERE MADE WITH REFERENCE TO THE 
Triau oF Mapeteine Smira :— 


Norick IN REGARD TO THE TRIAL ON THE 30TH INSTANT. 


1. No one, except Judges, to be introduced to the Bench, unless 
on application to the Court. J 

2. No one to be within the Bar except the gentlemen engaged 
on the case and the Faculty Reporter. 

3. No one to be admitted at the door opposite the Reporters’ 
seat except Advocates and the Reporters, and the Policemen will 
send in to the Reporters the cards of their messengers. 


4. The side seat opposite the jury box to be kept for the Glasgow 
Reporters. 


5. No one to be allowed to stand in the passages. 

6. One of the side galleries to"he kept, so far as necessary, for 
Advocates, whose Officer will attend. It is expected that Advocates 
who attend the trial shall be in their Court Dress, and that those 
only take their places who mean to attend for the day, as the 
private stair is so close to the Bench that going up and down 
disturbs the Judges much. 

7. To the other side-gallery admission will* be given on orders 
from the proper Officer. 

8. Strict orders are given that no money be taken at the doors. 

9. The doors will be opened at eight. 


10. A policeman to be on the outside and at the inside of each 
door of the Court. 


11. The police to keep the passages clear. 
408 


Appendix VIII. 


APPENDIX VIII. 


PHReNowocicaL INDICATIONS OF THE CHARACTER OF MADELEINE 
Smira: A DELINEATION MADE FROM A PERSONAL EXAMINATION 
BY A PHRENOLOGIST. 


This young lady’s head is of an English form, and of the usual 
size, but more than usual force of character, owing to large com- 
bativeness, self-esteem, love of approbation, and firmness, powerful 
affections. She possesses both the masculine and femining 
qualities, more especially the former. Has great talent for 
engineering, architecture, designing, and surveying; should be 
very good at mathematics. The drawbacks to these talents is a 
warm, sanguine temperament, great love of travelling, varied 
scenery, variety of study. Requires amusement and recreation. A 
great flirt; will at all times have a warm side towards gentlemen, 
and will prefer their society to that of her own sex. They will be 
fond of her, for she possesses a magnetism which will draw them 
round her like bees round a rose tree. Owing to her strong affec- 
tions and healthy temperament, she will make a treasure of a wife 
to a worthy husband. Kind to animals; fond of horses, dogs, &c. 
Just and generous. Fiery, quick temper, her anger not lasting. 
Not large in veneration. Has a chance to be religious. Great 
love for the Fine Arts. Martial music wili please her. Memory 
good for events, faces, places, and history. Will enjoy a little 
fun and drollery and conviviality. Orderly, and has great taste 
for dress. Reasoning powers are good. Apt to look on the bright 
side of things. On the whole, a very clever head. 


APPENDIX IX. 


A Bruiser Account oF THE JUDGES AND COUNSEL ENGAGED IN THE 
Tray or Mapzirerne Situ. 


Tur Ricut Hon. Jonn Horr. Lorp Jusrice-Cienx, was the son of 
the Right Hon. Charles Hope of Grantoun, Lord President of the 
Court of Session, and Charlotte, daughter of John, Earl of Hope- 
toun. He was born in Edinburgh in 1794, was called to the 
Scottish Bar in 1816, was Solicitor-General from 1823 to 1830, and 
was Dean of the Faculty of Advocates from 1830 to 1841. He 
was appointed Lord Justice-Clerk in 1041, and held that office till 
his death on 14th June, 1858. 

409 


Madeleine Smith. 


Influence, popularity, and ability secured for Hope a large 
practice at the Bar; but as a Judge, though upright and fearless 
in the discharge of his duties, he made himself unpopular on 
account of a soiee arrogance of manner, and an objectionable 
habit of ‘‘ nagging” counsel pleading before him, 

The diary of Sir Walter Scott, under date 13th December, 1825, 
contains the, following estimate of Hope when he was Solicitor- 
General :— 

“‘ Walked home with the Solicitor—decidedly the most hopeful 
young man of his time; high connections, great talent, spirited 
ambition, a ready elocution, with a good voice and dignified man- 
ners, prompt and steady courage, vigilant and constant assiduity, 
popularity with the young men, and the good opinion of the old, 
will, if I mistake not, carry him as high as any man who has arisen 
here ‘since the days of old Hal Dundas. He is hot, though, and 
rather hasty; this should be amended. They who would play at 
single-stick must bear with pleasure a rap over the knuckles.” 


James Ivory (Lorp Ivory) was the son of Thomas Ivory, watch- 
maker, Dundee, where he was born in 1792. He received his 
preliminary education in his native town, and on the completion 
of a course of study at the Universities of St. Andrews and Edin- 
burgh, he was called to the Scottish Bar in 1816. In 1830 he was 
appointed an Advocate-Depute, and after having held the respec- 
tive Sheriffships of Caithness and Bute, he became Solicitor-General 
in 1839. In 1840 he was raised to the Bench. He resigned in 
1862, and died in Edinburgh on 18th October, 1866. 

Of amiable disposition and stainless honour, Ivory, though not 
a fluent orator, was popular and energetic as a counsel; and his 
tenure of office as a judge was noteworthy for the ability, courtesy, 
and assiduity by which it was marked. 


Rosert Hanpysipe (Lorp Hanpysipe) was the son of William 
Handyside, W.8., Edinburgh, where he was born in 1798. He was 
called to the Scottish Bar in 1822, was appointed an Advocate- 
Depute in 1835, Sheriff of Stirling in 1840, and Solicitor-General in 
1852, and was promoted to the Bench in 1853. He died in Edin- 
burgh on 17th April, 1858. 

Handyside was a painstaking counsel, and an able, upright, and 
assiduous judge; and his administration of the criminal law was 
marked in an especial degree by the humanity and consideration 
which he invariably displayed in his treatment of offenders. 


James Moncrerrr was the second son of Sir James Wellwood 
Moncreiff, ninth baron of Tullibole. He was born in 1811, and 
in 1833 was called to the Scottish Bar. He was Solicitor-General 
trom February, 1850, to April, 1851; and as Lord Advocate he had 

410 


Appendix IX, 


four separate periods of office, t.e., Apr., 1851—Feb., 1852; Dec., 
1852—Mar., 1858; June, 1859—July, 1866; and Dec., 1868—Oct., 
1869. He was Dean of Faculty from 1858 to 1869, in which year 
he was appointed Lord Justice-Clerk. That office he adortied by 
his great abilities until his resignation in 1888. 

As Lord Advocate, the painful duty devolved upon Moncreiff of 
leading in the case for the Crown against Madeleine Smith; and 
his famous speech in that case is a splendid example of calmness, 
moderation, and humanity—qualities accentuated by the eloquence 
with which they were expressed. 

Full of years and honours, Moncreiff left behind him a record of 
devoted service to his country; and during forty years of practically 
incessant political life, he contributed greatly to Scotland’s educa- 
tional and economic advancement. 


Epwarp Francis Marrnanp was the son of Adam Maitland, 
Esquire, of Dundrennan, one of his predecessors on the Scottish 
Bench, and was born in Edinburgh in 1808. He received his 
education at the High School and University of Edinburgh, and 
was admitted an Advocate in 1831. In 1847 he was appointed 
an Advocate-Depute, and in 1852 Sheriff of Argyllshire. He was 
twice Solicitor-General for Scotland—1854-8 and 1859-62; and on 
the death of Lord Ivory in 1862, he was raised to the Bench, and 
as Lord Barcaple fulfilled the duties of his high office till about 
the time of his death, which occurred on 23rd February, 1870. 

Endowed with strong powers of observation and of reasoning, 
and with a particularly retentive memory, Maitland as a pleader 
did excellent work; and his speeches in the M‘Iver divorce suit and 
the Yelverton marriage case are notable examples of forensic skill. 
As a Judge, he has been described as ‘‘an excellent listener to a 
good argument and a dangerous critic for a bad one.” 

The following estimate of Barcaple appeared at the time of his 
death :— ‘‘He was no fussy, smiling flatterer, no cringing courtier, 
no adroit artist in hiding his contempt for the contemptible. On 
the contrary, he spoke out the truth gruffly, stamped upon every 
first appearance of falsehood or deceit, and duly earned the hatred 
of all pettifoggers and vulgar votaries of tact and untruth.” 


Dowatp Mackenzie—who, as an Advocate-Depute in 1857, had 
the duty of drawing and signing the indictment against Madeleine 
Smith, and of taking a part in directing the preparation of the 
case against her—was born in 1818. He was a grandson of the 
Rev. John Jamieson, D.D., the compiler of the well-known 
‘Dictionary of the Scottish Language.” 

Mackenzie had originally qualified for tne medical profession, 
but he subsequently took to the study of the law, and became an 


4it 


Madeleine Smith. 


advocate in 1842. He twice held office as an Advocate-Depute— 
1854-8 and 1859-61; and in 1861 he was appointed Sheriff of Fife. 
In 1870, in succession to Lord Barcaple, he was promoted to the 
Bench, with the title of Lord Mackenzie, and was unremitting and 
untiring in his judicial work till the time of his death, which 
occurred on 19th May, 1875. 

As a pleader, Mackenzie’s career was one of unflagging industry ; 
and as a Judge his reputation for able and conscientious work was 
as high as it was well merited. 

It has been remarked of him that his share in the preparation of 
the case against Miss Smith was characterised by greater hopeful- 
ness from an official point of view than was apparent among her 
other prosecutors. 


JoHn Inexiis, Lorp Justice-GenerRaL or ScoTLAND AND LorpD 
PRESIDENT OF THE Court or Session (1867-1891), was the youngest 
son of the Rev. Dr. John Inglis, one of the ministers of Old Grey- 
friars Parish, Edinburgh, and was born in George Square, Edin- 
burgh, on 21st August, 1810. Equipped with an excellent educa- 
tion in literature and law, he was in 1835 called to the Scottish Bar, 
at which, in course of time, his conspicuous abilities acquired for 
him an extensive practice. In 1852—in which year he was, within 
a period of seven months, successively appointed Solicitor-General, 
Lord Advocate, and Dean of Faculty—he, as Solicitor-General, in 
the course of his ‘unsuccessful contest of Orkney and Shetland as 
Conservative candidate, made the following interesting reference 
to himself :—‘‘I embarked in the (legal) profession without family 
influence or hereditary wealth. I embarked on my own resources, 
and, thank God, I have succeeded hitherto. But even on such an 
occasion as this, I must not forget that my father left me a legacy 
which I have ever held to be a jewel of great price; he left me 
his name—a name which he had taught the world to respect as 
that of a thoroughly honest and honourable man, and I may truly 
say it has been the great object of my life to maintain that name 
pure and unsullied and as I received it. Led by that pole-star, I 
have hitherto gone on to fortune, and, please God, I shall follow its 
guidance still "’ 

In July, 1858, Inglis was appointed Lord Justice-Clerk; and in 
February, 1867, he was installed as Lord: Justice-General of Scot- 
land and Lord President of the Court of Session. These high 
offices he held and adorned till his death, which occurred at Glen- 
corse on 20th August, 1891—just one day before the completion of 
his eighty-first year. 

As a pleader, Inglis was eloquent and skilful, and one of his 
most famous achievements was his brilliant. and successful defence 
of Madeleine Smith. It was said that Miss Smith was the only 
client he ever visited within the walls of a prison. As a judge, 

412 


Appendix IX. 


he manifested exceptional ability and a profound knowledge of 
the law; and patience, courtesy, and dignity, combined with 
conscientiousness, impartiality, and a power of lucid expression, 
were marked features of his judicial demeanour and conduct, 

The following description of Inglis, when Lord Advocate in 1858, 
is culled from a contemporary print :—‘‘ Tall and erect, with one 
of those lithe, graceful figures, whose spontaneous movements seem 
to sympathise with the current and the emphasis of his argument, 
Mr. Inglis is further remarkable for features which, if they cannot 
be called ‘striking’ in the largest sense of the word, at once arrest 
attention by their shrewdness, and by the clear, piercing expression 
which animates them. His voice, although only of moderate 
compass, is remarkably clear, while his elocution is easy and dis- 
tinct. Add to this that there is a certain undefinable persuasive- 
ness about his manner and delivery, and you may form some idea 
of the externals of the man.” 


Gzorce Younc was the eldest son of Alex. Young, Esquire of 
Rosefield, Kirkcudbright, procurator-fiscal of Dumfriesshire. He 
was born in Dumfries in 1819, and was called to the Scottish Bar 
in 1840. In 1853 he was appointed Sheriff of Inverness, and in 
1860 Sheriff of Haddington and Berwick. He twice held office as 
Solicitor-General for Scotland, i.e., 1862-6 and 1868-9; and from 
1869 to 1874 he was Lord Advocate, and in that capacity did great 
service to the cause of education in Scotland by his promotion of 
the Education Act of 1872. 

On 18th February, 1874, he was raised to the bench, with the 
title of Lord Young; and his long and distinguished tenure of 
judicial office has been marked by painstaking and energetic dis- 
charge of duty, independence of judgment, und a desire to promote 
equity iv jurisprudence. He retired in May, 1905. 

In the arduous task of preparing and conducting the defence of 
Madeleine Smith Mr. Young took a leading part, and to his strenuous 
exertions the success of that defence was in considerable measure 


due. 


Avexanper Moncrzerr was the eldest son of Hugh Moncrieff, a 
gentleman well known and respected in Glasgow as the head of a 
legal firm of high standing in that city. He was born and édu- 
cated in Glasgow, and in 1852 was. called to the Scottish Bar. 
In 1862 he was appointed an Advocate-Depute, and five years later 
Sheriff of Ross and Cromarty. He died suddenly on Wednesday, 
1st June, 1870, at the early age of forty-three. 

As a pleader, Moncrieff was ready, acute, and persuasive. He was 
possessed of considerable literary tastes and attainments; and— 
to quote from an obituary notice of him—his nature was ‘‘in an 
unusual degree, pure, truthful, and generous, and throughout life, 


unsoiled by the world.” 
413 


4 
cy 
\ « 
Bed 

= 
ts 


a tare 
ra y 
= 
Bn 
in Pe re S 
-_ Seg hap diced 

a Te ale L- 
ae 2 wee pas is 22) ~~ 
. y 2 a ‘ 
F | 


