HDINBURGH | 
UNIVERSITY §& 


LIBRARY 


Edinburgh University 
Library 


e om 
ele] S34 


NOTABLE BRITISH TRIALS SERIES 


General Editor—HARRY HODGE 


Trial 
Mary Queen of Scots 
King Charles I, 
The Bloody Assizes 
Captain Kidd 
Captain Porteous 
The Annesley Case 
Lord Lovat 
Mary Blandy 
James Stewart, 
Eugene Aram 
Katharine Nairn 
The Dougias Cause 
Duchess of Kingston 
Deacon Brodie 
Abraham Thornton 
Henry Fauntleroy 
Thurtell and Hunt 
Burke and Hare 
J. B. Rush 
William Palmer 
Madeleine Smith 
Mrs. M‘Lachian 
Franz Muller 
Dr, Pritchard 
The Wainwrights 
The Stauntons 
E, M. Chantrelle 
Kate Webster 
City of Glasgow Bank 
Charles Peace 
Dr, Lamson 
Adelaide Bartlett 
Mrs. Maybrick 
T. N, Cream 
A, J. Monson 
G. Chapman 
S. H. Dougal 
Adolf Beck 
Oscar Slater 
H, H. Crippen 
J. A. Dickman 
Steinie Morrison 
The Seddons : 
George Joseph Smith 
Sir Roger Casement 
Harold Greenwood 


Bywaters and Thompson 


Ronald True 
H. R. Armstrong 


J. P. Vaquier 


J. D. Merrett 
Browne and Kennedy 


Dr. Smethurst 


“Bounty ” Mutineers 
Gardiner (Peasenhalf) 


Field and Gray 


Date of Trial 


(1879 
(1879 
(1879 


Bae 
fos} fe) 
BIO CHW SOLO W'S? 


) 


Editor 
A. Francis Steuart 
J. G. Muddiman 
J. G. Muddiman 
Graham Brooks 
William Roughead 
Andrew Lang 
David N. Mackay 
William Roughead 
David N. Mackay 
Eric R, Watson 
William Roughead 
A. Francis Steuart 
Lewis Melville 
William Roughead 
Sir John Hall, Bt. 
Horace Bleackley 
Eric R. Watson 
William Roughead 
W. Teignmouth Shore 
Eric R. Watson 
F. Tennyson Jesse 
William Roughead 
H. B. Irving 
William Roughead 
H. B. Irving 
J. B. Atlay 
A. Duncan Smith 
Elliott O’Donnell 
William Wallace 
W. Teignmouth Shore 
H. L. Adam 
Siz John Hall, Bt. 
H. B. Irving 
W. Teignmouth Shore 
J. W. More 
H. L. Adam 
F. Tennyson Jesse 
Eric R. Watson 
William Roughead 
Filson Young 
S. O. Rowan-Hamilton 
H. Fletcher Moulton 
Filson Young 
Eric R. Watson 
George H. Knott 
Winifred Duke 
Filson Young 
Donald Carswell 
Filson Young 
R. H. Blundell 
R. E. Seaton 
William Roughead 
W. Teignmouth Shore 


IN PREPARATION. 


The Baccarat Case 
Queen Caroline 
Sydney H. Fox 
L. M. J. Voisin 


Wm. Hodge & Co., Ltd., Edinburgh and London 


bok tee 


nk Geek Meek ee 


a mS 
eee 


Harold Greenwood 


Trial of 


/ } 
(TLe . 
EDITED BY 


Winifred Duke 


Author of ‘‘The Laird,” ‘‘Scotland’s Heir,” ‘Tales of Hate,” 
**Continuing City,” &c., &c. 


poe 
r 
o. 


Vitor Vis 


EDINBURGH AND LONDON : 
WILLIAM HODGE & COMPANY, LIMITED 


f 
if 


MADE AND PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN 
BY 
WILLIAM HODGE AND COMPANY, LIMITED 
GLASGOW AND EDINBURGH 
November, 1930 


THIS VOLUME IS INSCRIBED 
BY HIS KIND PERMISSION 
TO 
Sir EDWARD MARLAY SAMSON, K.C. 
LEADING COUNSEL FOR THE CROWN IN 
THE GREENWOOD TRIAL 
WITH THE EDITOR’S GRATITUDE 


PREFACE. 


Tue trial of Harold Greenwood for the alleged poisoning of his first 
wife remains one of the most interesting and outstanding cases of its 
kind. In preparing this volume I have received much timely help and 
invaluable assistance. Sir Edward Marlay Samson, K.C., who led for 
the Crown, has lent me numerous documents, notably from his own 
private archives, which have been of incalculable use, and I cannot 
thank him too cordially for his patience and courtesy in the answering 
of incessant questions and the elucidation of tangled points. In 
addition to revising his own speeches, he has been good enough to read 
the proof-sheets, and to make many illuminating suggestions. 

I am indebted to Miss B. Evans, Carmarthen, for great kindness to 
a stranger in a strange land, as well as for her practical aid in looking 
up the back files of newspapers for dates and details otherwise unobtain- 
able. She also has lent me her own private collection of documents 
relating to the case. 

I have to thank Sir Edward Marlay Samson, Sir Archibald Bodkin, 
and Mr. E. Willis Jones, Llanelly, the foreman of the jury, for their 
united permission to make public for the first time the written verdict 
in the Greenwood case. Mr. Willis Jones has kindly supplied me with 
the precise wording of this, as well as a list containing full particulars 
of the jury. 

The publishers of the Western Maal, Cardiff, have kindly lent for 
reproduction the photograph of Harold Greenwood which forms the 
frontispiece. The Daily Mail, The South Wales Dazly Post, and The 
Llanelly and County Guardian have given me permission to publish the 
several interviews which Mr. Greenwood gave to their representatives. 

Mr. William Roughead, W.S., Edinburgh, Mr. James Christison, 
F.S.A.(Scot.), Montrose, and Mr. David Low, Dundee, have all been most 
kind and helpful. Mr. Harry Hodge, the General Editor of the series, 
has facilitated the work in every possible way, and has placed his wide 
experience’ and great knowledge ungrudgingly at my service. Dr. 
William Robertson has also been good enough to read the proof-sheets 
of the medical evidence. Wook. 


Cotinton, November, 1930. 


CONTENTS. 


PAGE 
Introduction, - - . - . : : = “i : : : - 1 
Leading Dates, - : : = - Z = : y : i 5 25S 
THe TRraL— 

First Day—Tvuxspay, 2Np Novemper, 1920. 
Opening Speech for the Prosecution, - - = 3 3 - < * 563 
Evidence for Prosecution. 
Ernest Haigh, - - - - 81 Florence Lorraine Phillips, - 85 
Rev. D. Ambrose Jones, - + 82 Elizabeth Lewis Jones, - - 88 
Mrs. Sarah Edwards, - - - 84 Dr. Thomas R. Griffiths, - - 94 
Thomas Foy, - - - - 84 
SEconD Day—WeEDNESDAY, 3RD NovemBer, 1920. 
Evidence for Prosecution (continued). 

Dr. Thomas R. Griffiths, es 114 James Bruce M‘Phee, - - 120 
Mary Adelina Griffiths, - 103 Charles Dobson, - - - 121 
Margaret Ann Morris, - - 107 William Edward Bell, - - 12] 
Lily Gwyneira Powell, - - 109 John Llewellyn Wild, 121 
Hannah Williams, -- : - 109 William Gould, 122 
Mrs. Annie Groves, - : - 116 John Sharff, - - 122 
Mary Morris, - - - ee be! TG. Anfield, - - 123 
Gwyneth David, - : - 118 William Thomas Morgan, - 123 
Thomas Evans, - : ae bt) Dr. Alexander Dick, - - 123 
Henry George Harrison, - - 120 Police Supt. Samuel Jones, 124 
John Clifford Jones, - - - 120 


Tuirp Day—TuurspAay, 4TH NovEMBER, 1920. 


Evidence for Prosecution (continued). 


Police Supt. Samuel Jones, =) 126 William Edward Bell (recalled), 136 
Police Insp. Nicholas, - - 130 Mrs. Annie Groves (recalled), - 137 
Hannah Williams (recalled), - 431 John Webster, - - 138 
Police Sergt. Hodge Lewis, - 134 Dr. William Henry Willcox, - 144 


Fourtu Day—Fripay, 5tH NovemBer, 1920. 
Evidence for Prosecution (concluded). 
Dr. William Henry Willcox, - 152 / Dr. Thomas R. Griffiths 


Supt. Samuel Jones (recalled), - 157 | (recalled), - A5T 
| Mary Adelina Griffiths (roouliedy, 157 


Opening Speech for the Defence, - . : : z : : - 158 


Ewidence for the Defence. 


Harold Griffiths, - - - 164 Dr. William Griffiths, - += 174 
Dr. Frederick Sherman Toogood, 164 Harold Greenwood, - - LTT 


7 
if 


= CONTENTS. 


Firra Day—Saturpay, 6TH NovremsBsr, 1920. 


Evidence for the 
Harold Greenwood, - - - 194 
Dr. Thomas R. Griffiths (recalled), 206 
Elizabeth Lewis Jones (recalled), 207 


Sixta Day —Monpay, 


Closing Speech for the Defence, - 
Closing Speech for the Prosecution, 
Charge to the Jury, - - - 


Defence (concluded). 


Beatrice Brooks, - ye 


Mrs. Martha Morris, - - 
Irene Greenwood, - : 


8TH NovEMBER, 1920. 


SrventH Day—Turspay, 9TH NovEMBER, 1920. 


Charge to the Jury ee - 
The Verdict, - 


APPENDICES. 


I. THE Coroner’s INQUEST, 


First Day—Fripay, 16TH APRIL, 1920. 


Seconp Day—Tvugspay, 15TH June, 1920. 


Police Sergt. Hodge Lewis, 269 
Dr. Thomas R. Griffiths, - 270 
Florence Lorraine Phillips, 273 
Elizabeth L. Jones, 274 


Miss Bowater, - 

Dr. William Henry Willcox, 
Hannah Maggie Williams, - 
Margaret Ann Morris, - 


Tuirp DAay—Wepnezspay, l6rH JuNE, 1920. 


Dr. Willcox (recalled), - 283 
Margaret Ann Morris (recalled), 283 
Mary Adelina Griffiths, - - 284 
Hannah M. Williams (recalled), - 287 
Rev. D. Ambrose Jones, 288 
Mrs. Annie Groves, - - - 289 


Coroner’s Address to the es 
Verdict, - - - 


II. Poxtce Court Prockrrpincs— 


Thursday, 17th June, 1920, - 
Friday, 25th June, 1920, - E 


John Clifford Jones, - - 
Dr. Carl Basil Edwards, - 
Edward Roberts, - - 
Gwyneth David, - - 
Lily Gwyneira Powell, - 
Martha Morris, - - 


PAGE 


208 
208 
210 


221 
239 


- , 255 


257 
265 


PAGE 


269 


280 
280 
282 
283 


291 
291 
292 
293 
294 
294 


295 
298 


299 
299 


APPENDICES. xi 


First Day—Tuurspay, Ist Jury, 1020. 


PAGE 

Opening Speech for the Prosecution, - a - : - - 2 - 300 
Beidence for the Prosecution. 
William Thomas Morgan, - - 3804 Mary Adelina Griffiths, — - - 314 
Dr. Alexander Dick, - - - 304 Hannah Maggie Williams, - - 3815 
Police Sergt. Hodge Lewis, - 305 Rev. D. Ambrose Jones, - - 318 
Dr. Thomas R. Griffiths, - - 305 Gwyneth David, - - - 319 
Florence Lorraine Phillips, - 309 John Clifford Jones, - - - 319 
Elizabeth Lewis Jones, - = 313 
Seconp Day—Fripay, 2Np Juty, 1920. 
Evidence for Prosecution (continued). 
Margaret Ann Morris, - - 319 Charles Johnson, - : - 323 
Lily Gwyneira Powell, - - 321 William Edward Bell, - - 324 
Mrs. Annie Groves, - - 321 John Llewellyn Wild, - - 324 
Police Supt. Samuel Jones, - 322 John Sharff, - - - 324 
Mary Morris, - - - 322 Henry George Harrison, - - 324 
James Bruce M‘Phee, | : = 323 William Gould, - - ° - 324 
Tairp Day—Sarturpay, 3rnp Jury, 1920. 
Hwidence for the Prosecution (concluded). 

Thomas Edward Evans, - - 325 John Webster, - = as at 
Edward Roberts, - - - 325 Dr. William Henry Willcox, - 327 
Til. List of Exhibits, - - - - - - - ; - : - 384 
IV. Interviews with Mr. Greenwood, - : - - - - 340 
V. Brief Account of Judge and Counsel, - - . - - - - 345 


VI. List of Jurymen, - . 2 - : : 2 ‘ : P - 347 


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS. 


Harold Greenwood, 

Mabel Greenwood, 

Rumsey House, Kidwelly, - - 
Sir Edward Marlay Samson, K.C., - 
Greenwood’s signature, 

Sir Edward Marshall Hall, K.C., 
Greenwood arriving for trial, 

Mr. and Mrs. Greenwood, 

Mr. Justice Shearman, 


Plan of Rumsey House and Grounds, 


Frontispiece 


- facing page 


I] 


16 
48 


128 


192 
240: 
256 
348 


HAROLD GREENWOOD. 


INTRODUCTION. 


I. 


MurpeER, almost more than any other operating force, takes 
the obscure, the uninteresting, the hitherto unknown, and 
thrusts him or her relentlessly under the full blaze of pub- 
licity. A certain locality, previously a dot on the map to 
the great majority, becomes for a brief period the one name 
on everybody’s lips. The searchlight of inquiry is directed 
mercilessly into the private lives, loves, and hates of a 
handful of individuals whose patronymics, during the swift 
course of a cause célébre, are household words. Exactly 
a decade ago, Carmarthen, a small township in South Wales, 
was the spot upon which the attention of the entire British 
Isles was focussed throughout one breathless week. Harold 
Greenwood’s trial at Carmarthen Assizes for the alleged 
poisoning of his first wife, the probing into the supposed 
taking of a single life just after the conclusion of four years’ 
wholesale murder, distracted the public attention from any- 
thing else of moment or importance. 

The village of Kidwelly lies some twelve or more miles 
beyond Carmarthen. Kidwelly is one of the oldest boroughs 
in the country, and dates back over eight hundred years. 
The neighbourhood is rich in historical and archeological 
interests, boasting a famous castle and much legendary and 
antiquarian lore, but it is safe to say that at no time in 
its annals did Kidwelly’s name and fame create such in- 
tense public excitement and heart-burning as during the 
hectic months of its ill-gotten celebrity through the Greenwood 
case. 

The stranger to Kidwelly alights at its picturesque little 
station, and, in order to visit the village, follows a country 
road for about a quarter of a mile. Kidwelly’s crooked main 
street, a double row of low-browed houses and small, dark 
shops, climbs at one end towards the open landscape, and at 

B Fy ! 


Harold Greenwood. 


the other runs over a bridge across a sluggish river. Just 
before the bridge is reached a substantial three-storeyed 
stone mansion used to stand back from the road in its own 
grounds. These now lie a neglected wilderness, while the 
building itself has been entirely reconstructed inside, and 
converted into a Wesleyan chapel and manse, but in 1919 
the place was Rumsey House, the residence of Mr. and Mrs. 
Greenwood. 

Harold Greenwood was the second son of William Norman 
Greenwood, of Greenwood Leigh, Ingleton, Yorks. On 2nd 
July, 1896, he had married Mabel, the younger daughter of 
Mr. William Vansittart Bowater, of Bury Hall, Edmonton, 
Middlesex. Mr. and Mrs. Greenwood lived in London for 
the first two years of their married life, and in 1898 came 
to reside at Broomhill, Kidwelly. Greenwood had been 
admitted a solicitor the same year, and bought a partnership 
in the firm of Messrs. Johnson & Stead, Llanelly, an indus- 
trial town a few miles away. Later, he started to practise 
on his own account, going regularly to his office at Frederick 
Street, Lianelly, each morning at 10.30, and returning to 
Kidwelly in the evening about 5.30. It was his habit to 
lunch at the office of the Llanelly Mercury, the local news- 
paper, an influential weekly organ, with the proprietor, 
Mr. W. B. Jones, and his sons. Greenwood’s practice was 
not an extensive one, being chiefly concerned with dealings 
in house property, while his principal clients were Jews and 
money-lenders. Neither legally nor locally was his reputa- 
tion too good, and it is significant that when whispers of 
a criminal charge against him crept abroad no single voice 
was raised in his defence or favour. 

The Greenwoods removed from Broomhill to the Priory, 
Kidwelly, and in November, 1916, Greenwood purchased 
Rumsey House. Mrs. Greenwood seems to have been much 
liked and esteemed, and somewhat of a personality in the 
place. She took a sympathetic and practical interest in 
village affairs, was a regular attendant at St. Mary’s Church, 
shared any social activities of the neighbourhood, and, 
despite the handicap of her somewhat frail health, supported 
local tennis and croquet clubs with enthusiasm. Kidwelly’s 
opinion of her husband was not so favourable. A candid 
(male) acquaintance described him as not having a single 


Introduction. 


man friend, and being fond of stirring up mischief and 
trouble. On the other hand, he was exceedingly popular 
with the opposite sex. Genial and lively, fond of a joke, 
unable to help making himself pleasant and agreeable, when 
his character came to be investigated he was accused of 
“‘ carrying-on ’’—a convenient term conveying anything from 
affability to adultery—with sundry ladies in the 
neighbourhood. 

Outwardly the Greenwoods seemed an average couple, 
regarded by their circle of acquaintances and, what is still 
more important, by their servants, as happy and harmonious 
in their relations. In June, 1919, the occupants of Rumsey 
House comprised Mr. and Mrs. Greenwood; Irene, the elder 
daughter, the oldest of their family of four children, who 
had come of age the previous April; Kenneth, the younger 
son, a boy of ten, being educated at home; three women 
servants, and an outside gardener. The other son and 
daughter, Eileen, aged seventeen, and Ivor, aged fifteen, 
were away at their respective boarding-schools. The three 
maids were Margaret Morris, the cook, aged thirty-eight, 
who had been in the Greenwoods’ service for two years; 
Hannah Maggie Williams, a girl of eighteen, employed as 
parlourmaid by them for nine months; and Gwyneira Powell, 
between-maid, who had been nearly as long as Margaret 
Morris at Rumsey House. Miss Edith Bowater, Mrs. Green- 
wood’s sister, had been living there, paying a certain sum 
per week and possessing the furniture of one bedroom, but 
she had gone away about six weeks previously. Greenwood 
declared that this was in consequence of a quarrel with Mrs. | 
Greenwood, a statement unsubstantiated by any one else. 
That it cannot have been serious is proved by Miss Bowater’s 
intention, as stated by herself, of joining Mrs. Greenwood 
at Portishead on 24th June for a fortnight’s holiday, and 
afterwards returning with her to Rumsey House. She 
came back immediately the day of Mrs. Greenwood’s death, 
and remained there until Greenwood’s second marriage in 
the following October. 

For some considerable time Mabel Greenwood’s health had 
been unsatisfactory. The ordinary relations between husband 
and wife had had to be discontinued on this account. Green- 
wood declared that Mrs. Greenwood was of opinion that she 

3 


f 
iZ 


Harold Greenwood. 


had never felt fully recovered since the birth of her youngest 
child ten years before. She was a woman of forty-seven, who 
suffered from a weak heart, causing prolonged fainting 
attacks and other disabilities. More than once she expressed 
a fear of cancer, but declined to take steps to ascertain 
whether the dreaded malady were real or imaginary. For 
sixteen years she had been a patient of the Kidwelly doctor, 
Dr. Thomas Robert Griffiths, and she appears to have had 
complete confidence in his treatment. None of his prescrip- 
tions for her at any time contained arsenic. For some 
months prior to her death she was under his care for a 
condition which he diagnosed as either a temporary incon- 
venience incidental to her age, or an internal growth. The 
subsequent post-mortem revealed that the latter surmise was 
correct, a small tumour, possibly painful and uncomfortable, 
but in no sense dangerous to life, being discovered. 

Mrs. Greenwood was able to go about, and to discharge 
her social and domestic duties up to the last day of her life. 
No one associated with her, even her medical man, appre- 
hended any sudden or fatal termination. When it became 
known in Kidwelly that she had passed away after a few 
hours’ illness in the early morning of Monday, 16th June, 
much sympathy was felt for the widower and his motherless 
children. A wider circle was apprised of Mr. Greenwood’s 
bereavement the following day by a somewhat snobbish 
announcement in the deaths column of The Tames for 17th 
June— 

GREENWOOD. —On the 16th of June, suddenly, Mabel Greenwood, 
the dearly-loved wife of Harold Greenwood, Esq., of Rumsey House, 
Kidwelly, and the younger sister of Col. and Ald. Sir Vansittart 
Bowater, Bart. 

It is important to consider minutely Mrs. Greenwood’s state 
of health for some time prior to her death. Her husband, 
on oath in the witness-box at his trial, said that ‘‘ she would 
not have lived long because she was broken up.’’ The post- 
mortem revealed no trace of natural disease other than the 
afore-mentioned non-malignant tumour. The heart was 
much decomposed, but no signs of disease in the valves were 
detected by the experts who examined them. Her husband 
was naturally the person most intimately associated with 
her, and certainly had the best opportunity of judging of her 


condition. According to his own statement, as far back as 
4 


Introduction. 


January of 1919 Mrs. Greenwood was complaining of pains 
in her heart, and also of pains internally. She was unable 
to sleep on her left side for a year before her death, and if 
she attempted this declared that she felt suffocated. In May, 
1919, she expressed an opinion that she would not live long, 
and Greenwood persuaded her to let him write to her brother, 
requesting him to bring down a specialist to examine her. 
Mrs. Greenwood approved of the letter, but in the end 
refused to have it posted. It was ultimately decided that after 
her holiday at Portishead, if her health had not improved, 
she should submit to a thorough medical overhauling. Unfor- 
tunately, Greenwood, who was obviously unable to keep his 
affairs to himself, told these arrangements to his friends «et 
the Mercury office. Stories of Mrs. Greenwood’s serious state 
crept about in a garbled form, and on 5th June Greenwood 
wrote a furious and insulting letter to a Miss Gwyneth 
David.* In it he expressed surprise that she should have 
told a neighbour, Miss Alice Jones, that Mrs. Greenwood 
was not ill, and accused her of telling deliberate lies, and 
trying to break his friendship with the Joneses, the family 
into which he subsequently married. The prosecution made 
a good deal of this letter, alleging that it proved that Green- 
wood was wishful to create the impression locally that his 
wife was seriously ill in order that her sudden death might 
occasion no surprise, and also to suggest to another woman 
that he would soon be free to marry her. 

On Sunday, 8th June, Mrs. Greenwood was at church by 
herself. On Monday, 9th June, she had tea with a neigh- 
bour in the Castle'grounds during an Histeddfod. On Wed- 
nesday, 11th June, she and her husband were out in his car. 
On Thursday, 12th June, she attended an antiquarian meet- 
ing at Kidwelly Town Hall. Greenwood stated afterwards 
that several people, whose names he quoted, remarked on how 
ill she looked, and one especially noticed that she seemed to 
have great difficulty in mounting the stairs. Poor woman! 
Little did she reck that exactly a year later that same Town 


* Miss David was a Llanelly lady, who had been friendly with 
Greenwood’s daughter, Irene, until her father, after the affair of 
the letter, insisted on her discontinuing the intimacy. According to 
Irene, Miss David on one occasion came to tea at Rumsey House, 
and afterwards complained of the tea that she was given, and said 
that Mrs. Greenwood was like an icicle! : 


Harold Greenwood. 


Hall would be the scene of a coroner’s inquest upon her 
decsying and mutilated body. Her husband described her 
as ‘‘ very depressed ’’ that night, and an acquaintance who 
called at Rumsey House the next evening warned Greenwood 
that if he were not careful he would not have her long. 
On Friday, 13th June, Mrs. Greenwood was fitted for a 
new dress, and alluded to her forthcoming holiday to the 
dressmaker. On Saturday, 14th June, she was unusually 
active, and one person, seeing her so recently and apparently 
well, at once harboured a grave suspicion as to her very 
sudden death. 

Greenwood stated that his wife never complained of her 
ailments. She was sensitive and reticent about them, but 
during the last week of her life she seemed depressed, miser- 
able, suffering, and expressed a constant wish to be in 
heaven. Kidwelly’s candid opinion that her husband had 
assisted her to obtain this desire led to an exhumation, an 
inquest, a charge of wilful murder, and a seven days’ trial 
to prove or disprove the same. 

On the Saturday morning Mrs. Greenwood visited an old 
servant, Martha Morris, still employed by her former mis- 
tress for daily work at Rumsey House. This woman, who 
had originally been nurse to Irene Greenwood, said in her 
evidence at the trial that for weeks prior to Mrs. Green- 
wood’s death she had noticed her increasing feebleness and 
loss of flesh, had seen her faint, and heard her complain 
that she suffered from diarrhoea. On this particular date 
Mrs. Greenwood looked very ill and sat down in Mrs. Morris’s 
kitchen. She had seemed depressed the whole week. Green- 
wood stated that his wife had come to him immediately 
after breakfast and said that her heart was causing her 
to feel as if she were suffocating, and she intended to call 
at her doctor’s for a different medicine. Greenwood could 
not say definitely whether she went, but during the morning 
she was undoubtedly out. Besides the visit to Mrs. Morris, 
Mrs. Greenwood called at the Phoenix Stores, a wine 
merchant’s in Bridge Street, a few yards from Rumsey 
House, and purchased from Sarah Edwards, the proprietor’s 
wife, a bottle of burgundy. This was wine supplied by 
Messrs. Gilbey, called ‘‘ Real Pure Wine,’”’ and bearing a 
red label. The Greenwoods had been regular customers for 

6 


Introduction. 


burgundy and whisky sitice they had come to Rumsey House, 
their purchases invariably being a bottle at a time.* This 
particular bottle was placed by Hannah Williams, when 
laying the luncheon table next day, before Mrs. Greenwood’s 
seat, and a good deal of contradictory evidence at the trial 
concerned it. The maid swore that she put it out when 
laying the cloth for supper, and never saw it subsequently. 
She looked for it in the sideboard the following day, but 
could not find it. She went out on the Sunday evening 
at 5.30, and on her return the supper things had been 
taken away, by whom she was unable to state. On her 
evening off duty Irene Greenwood sometimes performed this 
domestic task, but Hannah Williams did not know whether 
she had done so this particular night. As Irene was much 
occupied with her mother’s sudden illness, it seems unlikely. 
The maid Powell was also out, and the movements of the cook, 
who was suffering from a gathered finger, were not touched 
upon. Irene Greenwood swore that she drank burgundy at 
both lunch and supper on Sunday, 15th June, and asked 
Miss Phillips, a guest at the latter meal, to have wine, 
which she refused. Miss Phillips swore that she saw no wine 
of any kind on the supper-table, ‘‘ as if there had been any 
she would have had some.’’ The prosecution sought to prove 
that Greenwood mixed arsenic, in the form of diluted weed- 
killer, with the missing bottle of burgundy, and by this 
means poisoned his wife. 

The alleged motive was undoubtedly the weakest link in 
the chain of fact and evidence which the Crown strove to 
weave until it became the hangman’s noose. Servants, 
friends, acquaintances, the family doctor, all described the 
Greenwoods as a happy couple, and apparently attached to 
each other. The only contrary evidence came from two 
women, the above-mentioned Miss Phillips, an intimate friend 
of Mrs. Greenwood’s for eleven years, and Miss Mary 
Griffiths, whose brother attended Mrs. Greenwood in the 
capacity of her medical adviser. Harold Greenwood was 


* When Miss Bowater was an inmate of Rumsey House she 
shared the wine ordered from Brigstocke’s, a wine merchant in Car- 
marthen. Greenwood occasionally bought whisky. Between 8th 
January and 17th April, 1919, the amount of wine and spirits 
ordered from Brigstocke’s was—20 bottles of Beaune burgundy, 15 
bottles of Pauilac claret, two bottles of Scotch whisky, and 6 
bottles of sparkling Moselle wine. ? 


Harold Greenwood. 


undoubtedly what is known as a “‘ ladies’ man,’’ and his 
popularity on this score, according to these wise virgins, 
aroused his wife’s jealousy. Miss Phillips averred that he 
was fond of doing so, and that she had witnessed ‘‘ scenes ”’ 
which had their origin in Greenwood’s attentions tosome lady, 
and Mrs. Greenwood’s resentment thereat. In the course of 
the police court proceedings prior to the trial Miss Phillips 
was pressed by Mr. Ludford, the defending solicitor, 
to name one specific instance of these alleged ‘“‘ tiffs and 
brawls.’? She became very truculent, refused at first to 
answer, and declared that it was most unfair that Greenwood- 
should be putting Mr. Ludford up to the questions he was 
asking her. Greenwood vowed that Miss Phillips was known 
as ‘‘ the Kidwelly postman,’’ that she spent her time largely 
in collecting and repeating gossip, and that if she saw him 
speaking to, or walking with, any woman, particularly Miss 
Griffiths, she went at once to tell Mrs. Greenwood. Miss 
Griffiths denied that Mrs. Greenwood was jealous of her on 
account of Greenwood. She stated that ‘‘ things were not 
very comfortable at times ’’ between the Greenwoods because 
of his flirtations. -Mrs. Greenwood had once said to Miss 
Griffiths in Greenwood’s presence: ‘‘ That is Harold’s weak- 
ness. He is too fond of women.’’ Miss Griffiths subsequently 
admitted to having been on very friendly terms herself with 
Greenwood, though she indignantly denied the story that 
she had sat on his knee in a railway carriage. The Griffiths, 
brother and sister, lived opposite to Rumsey House, a fact 
which became of importance during the last hours of Mrs. 
Greenwood’s life. 


1: 


On Saturday, 14th June, Mr. and Mrs. Greenwood lunched 
early, as she was wishful to attend a tennis meeting at Ferry- 
side, five miles away. Greenwood stated that he did his 
best to persuade his wife not to undertake such a fatiguing 
expedition, but she declared herself better, and was deter- 
mined to go. Greenwood walked with her to Kidwelly Sta- 
tion. On the way she complained of a pain in her heart 
which she ascribed to flatulence. She sat for some time on 
a wall near the Railway Inn, then walked the remaining 
distance to the platform. Greenwood again endeavoured to 

8 


Introduction. 


induce her to give up the Ferryside project, but she was 
adamant. He left her, on seeing the Kidwelly vicar, the 
Rev. David Ambrose Jones, coming down the lane, Mrs. 
Greenwood having previously mentioned that she expected him 
to be at the meeting. 

Greenwood’s own movements on the Saturday were scarcely 
touched upon. He stated that he was at home all day, but 
after tea he went to the local telephone exchange and asked 
for the Llanelly Mercury office. The operator stated that a 
lady’s voice answered, and she heard Greenwood say: ‘‘ I am 
happy, I am satisfied now.’’ This was not admissible as 
evidence at the trial, but the fact of Greenwood ringing up 
the same number every Saturday, and being answered by 
the same feminine voice, was regarded by the prosecution as 
proof of a very close association with his second wife prior 
to the death of his first. 

Mrs. Greenwood and her clergyman travelled to Ferryside 
in the same compartment. On reaching the station they 
walked three-quarters of a mile to the tennis grounds, and 
the same distance when returning. He described her after- 
wards as looking unwell, but she made no allusion to her 
health, and was cheerful, as well as taking a keen interest in 
the business part of the meeting. A game of croquet was 
suggested, but Mrs. Greenwood whispered to her companion 
that she would rather not play, so the idea was abandoned. 
The vicar travelled back with her to Kidwelly, and they 
parted just outside the station. He never saw her again. 
Irene Greenwood, who had come from Carmarthen by the 
same train, but in another compartment, overtook her mother 
at the station gate, and they walked home together. Irene 
stated subsequently that she seemed perfectly well, and 
nothing in any way unusual occurred that evening. Mrs. 
Greenwood retired to bed about 10.15, but, according to her 
husband, was very restless, and went in several times to see 
Kenneth, who was sleeping soundly. Poor soul! Had she 
some prevision of the approaching separation ? 

Mrs. Greenwood was seen by two other people besides the 
vicar on the Saturday. Martha Morris came to Rumsey 
House in the evening, found her sitting on the verandah 
with Miss Phillips, and thought her (Mrs. Greenwood) ‘‘ very 


low and very ill.’’? On the other hand, Miss Phillips, who 
9 


Harold Greenwood. 


stayed some little time, during which she and Mrs. Greenwood 
were ‘‘laughing and talking,’’? described her as ‘‘ quite 
bright and unusually well.’’ Miss Phillips was particularly 
struck by her friend’s complexion. ‘‘ It was a lovely sort 
of pink, which was quite unusual with her.”’ Mrs. Green- 
wood was not a woman who was given to improving her 
appearance by artificial aids. On the other hand, arsenic, 
as testified by such experts as Madeleine Smith and Mrs. 
Maybrick, is a noted beautifier, whether taken internally 
or applied externally. The latter, in Mrs. Greenwood’s 
case, was utterly unlikely. The former possibility was not’ 
touched upon. 

On Sunday, 15th June, the Greenwood family spent a 
leisurely, and (so far as their duty to their Maker was con- 
cerned) unprofitable morning. They breakfasted at 10 
o’clock, the meal consisting of eggs, cooked in various ways, 
coffee, and bread and butter. Afterwards, Irene attended to 
sundry domestic duties, and later sat in the garden with a 
book. At the trial she swore that she never saw her father 
go into the house the whole forenoon. Mrs. Greenwood’s 
Sabbatic occupations and activities up to 1 o’clock are not 
recorded other than by her husband’s subsequent statement 
that she was reading on the lawn. Hannah Williams said that 
she saw her mistress writing letters, and this was more or 
less corroborated by Irene Greenwood’s testimony that she 
took two letters to the post in the afternoon. Mr. and Mrs. 
Greenwood had previously arranged to go to church, but she 
declared herself too unwell, and Greenwood, preferring clean- 
liness to godliness, was busy overhauling his car, with the 
assistance of Tom Foy, the manager of the local cinema. 
Foy both saw and spoke to Mrs. Greenwood several times 
before lunch, and thought her in her usual health. At the 
trial Hannah Williams swore that at 12.30 Greenwood went 
into the china pantry, and remained there for half an hour. 
She was hindered in laying the table for lunch, as the 
silver basket was kept in the china pantry, and she did not 
like to go in and fetch it while he was there. She declared 
that she had never known him to do this before. Greenwood 
stated, and witnesses were called to prove, that he constantly 
and frequently used the sink in the china pantry to wash his 


hands after working at his car or in the garden. A towel 
10 


Introduction. 


was kept behind the door for his special use. On this 
occasion he went in just as the gong sounded for lunch, and 
did not remain there for more than a few minutes. The 
Crown called Foy at the trial, but the defence endeavoured 
to twist his statements in Greenwood’s favour as establishing 
that the accused man had been in Foy’s company the whole 
morning, thus disposing of the parlourmaid’s story of a 
lengthy sojourn in the china pantry. Margaret Morris, the 
cook, stated that she was in the kitchen all the forenoon, and 
did not see Greenwood go into the china pantry, the door of 
which was opposite the kitchen, but admitted that he might 
have done so without her knowledge. Mrs. Greenwood came 
into the kitchen once between breakfast and lunch, looking 
very ill. This was the last time the cook saw her alive. 

Lunch consisted of a hot joint,* vegetables, gooseberry tart, 
and custard. The meal was served at 1 o’clock, and was 
partaken of by all the four Greenwoods, and afterwards by 
the servants. Nobody, excepting Mrs. Greenwood, suffered 
any ill-effects. Hannah Williams swore at the trial that 
Greenwood drank whisky, Mrs. Greenwood burgundy, and 
Irene and Kenneth water. Miss Phillips called at Rumsey 
House about 1 o’clock. The family were at lunch, but Mrs. 
Greenwood came out from the dining-room. Miss Phillips 
subsequently described her friend as looking pale and pinched, 
and speaking in a very low voice. That nothing serious or 
untoward was apprehended is shown by Mrs. Greenwood’s 
invitation to Miss Phillips to return to supper at Rumsey 
House the same evening. 

After lunch, according to Irene Greenwood, Mrs. Green- 
wood first walked round the garden with her, and then 
retired to lie down. Greenwood stated that his wife went 
straight to her bedroom from the luncheon-table. Later, she 
sat on the lawn with a book. Tom Foy, who was giving 
Irene a lesson in driving the car, took her out in it about 
3 o’clock. He saw Mrs. Greenwood seated in a deck-chair, 
reading. ‘‘ She seemed to be quite well, and pleased at 
our going out,’’ Foy stated. Mrs. Greenwood spoke to him, 


* The cook, Margaret Morris, said in her evidence at the trial 
that this was a leg of lamb. The between-maid, Gwyneira Powell, 
described it as roast beef. The parlourmaid, Hannah Maggie 
Williams, although asked as a special test of her memory whether 
it were beef or mutton, was unable to say which. " 


Harold Greenwood. 


but the noise of the engine prevented Foy’s hearing what 
she said. When he returned at 4.30 he did not see either 
her or Greenwood, and only heard of her being ill later 
in the evening. Foy was always emphatic in his declaration 
that this Sunday, 15th June, was the only occasion when 
he took Miss Greenwood out in the car, and that he had never 
confused the date with the previous Sunday, 8th June. 

At half-past 3 (the statement rests on Greenwood’s word 
alone) Mrs. Greenwood came to him and complained that 
she was suffering from diarrhea. This is one of the most. 
prominent symptoms of arsenical poisoning, and usually 
manifests itself very early after the poison has been swallowed. 
The Crown sought to establish the first indications of Mrs. 
Greenwood’s fatal illness as soon as possible after lunch, to 
substantiate their contention that the arsenic was adminis- 
tered in the burgundy drunk at this meal. Against the 
theory is the undisputed fact, vouched for by several inde- 
pendent and unbiassed witnesses, that Mrs. Greenwood was 
apparently quite well so late as 6 o’clock on the Sunday 
evening. When the parlourmaid brought tea into the draw- 
ing-room at 4.30 she noticed nothing amiss. The other maid, 
before she went out at 6 p.m., saw Mrs. Greenwood and her 
daughter talking together in the garden. At tea, in com- 
pany with her husband and family, she had some tea and 
bread and butter, and afterwards lay down for a while. 
Between 5 and 6 o’clock she was sufficiently well to be in the 
garden again. Between 6.30 and 7 o’clock, whilst strolling 
with her husband, she complained of sickness and suffocating 
pains in the region of the heart. Greenwood administered 
brandy, which caused vomiting. It was afterwards a disputed 
point whether he gave her the brandy on the lawn or in 
the house. He and Irene, with considerable difficulty, took 
Mrs. Greenwood upstairs to her bedroom. Shortly before 7 
o’clock Greenwood went across for Dr. Griffiths. He came at 
once, and found the patient sitting on a couch, and vomiting. 
She told him that the gooseberry tart eaten at lunch had 
disagreed with her, ‘‘ as it always did.’? The Crown con- 
tended that the suggestion of the gooseberry tart being the 
cause of her indisposition came from Greenwood, and was 
said by him in reference to the alleged attack of diarrhea 


at 3.30. No mention of this feature of Mrs. Greenwood’s 
12 


Introduction. 


illness was then made to the doctor, He directed that she 
should be put to bed, and given sips of brandy and soda- 
water. Whilst her daughter was helping her to undress she 
had an attack of diarrhoea and vomited again. Greenwood 
and the doctor, in the meantime, went down to the garden 
and played several games of clock-golf. Greenwood stated 
that he was anxious about his wife, and wished to detain 
the doctor on her account. Dr. Griffiths saw Mrs. Greenwood 
in bed before returning to his own house, and sent her over 
a bottle of medicine containing a bismuth mixture, dis- 
pensed by himself. On his second visit he considered her 
better, and the sickness had ceased for the time. 

Miss Phillips arrived at Rumsey House about 7.30. She 
was greeted by Greenwood with the remark, ‘‘ The wife 1s 
very ill; run upstairs.’’ The guest did so, and met Irene 
coming out of Mrs, Greenwood’s bedroom. Irene announced 
that her mother was very ill, and she was putting her to 
bed. Miss Phillips, without inquiring the nature of the indis- 
position, took for granted that Mrs. Greenwood was suffering 
from her heart. She went immediately to fetch the district 
nurse, Nurse Jones, who lived a short distance from Rumsey 
House. In her evidence at the trial Irene Greenwood stated 
that ‘‘ Daddy and 1” suggested to Mrs. Greenwood that 
Nurse Jones, who had previously attended members of the 
family and was on friendly terms at Rumsey House, should 
be sent for, and that Miss Phillips volunteered to bring her. 
Miss Phillips afterwards claimed the credit for having pro- 
posed the nurse. She called at her house with the information 
that ‘‘ Mrs. Greenwood was very bad with her heart,’’ and 
requested her to come at once. On her arrival at Rumsey 
House, which she subsequently stated was about 8 o’clock, 
Nurse Jones found Mrs. Greenwood very cold and collapsed, 
with a low temperature. The nurse considered her so ill 
that she at once desired that the doctor should be summoned. 
Miss Phillips, who had hurried back without waiting for the 
nurse, replied that Dr. Griffiths had already seen Mrs. Green- 
wood, and sent her some medicine. The nurse, believing 
this to be medicine for a heart case, decided to wait and see 
what effect it had on the patient. One dose had been taken 
out of the bottle, and the nurse administered a second. 


Greenwood told the nurse that ‘‘ Mrs. Greenwood complained 
13 


Harold Greenwood. 


that the medicine caught her at the back of the throat.’’ 
Nurse Jones tasted it herself and suffered no ill effects. What 
ultimately became of this bottle of medicine is not known. 
Presumably it was thrown away after Mrs. Greenwood’s death, 
together with a large quantity of bottles containing patent 
remedies and Dr. Griffiths’s other prescriptions, which Martha 
Morris stated that she got rid of at Miss Bowater’s orders. 

Nurse Jones remained for an hour with her patient, and 
then returned home to put her child to bed. At the trial the 
defending counsel pressed her very hard upon the point, 
demanding why she left Mrs. Greenwood if she considered her 
so ill. The nurse declared that ‘‘ she had to go,’’ and that 
she left Miss Phillips and Irene Greenwood in charge. Miss 
Phillips stated afterwards that during the nurse’s absence 
Mrs. Greenwood was ‘‘ sort of dosing ’’ and very weak. 
Nurse Jones came back at 10 o’clock, and always averred that 
at no time from this onwards was Mrs. Greenwood any better. 
Dr. Griffiths paid his patient several visits, the hour of one 
of these subsequently becoming a matter of importance and 
dispute. On this point his evidence, and that of Greenwood, 
Miss Phillips, and Nurse Jones, are strikingly at variance. 
The doctor could only recall four visits—at 6 p.m., at 7 p.m. 
(before leaving the house), about 9 p.m., and at 3 a.m. He 
afterwards varied these hours to 6.30, 7.30, 10 or 10.30 p.m., 
and 3 or 3.30 a.m. Throughout Mrs. Greenwood’s illness he 
saw nothing inconsistent with gastric trouble, due to the 
gooseberry tart. He denied that the nurse ever spoke to him 
of its being a serious case, or hinted that there was anything 
wrong. He had no recollection of paying any visit at 
1 o’clock a.m. At his last visit the nurse told him that the 
diarrhoea was ‘‘ uncontrollable,’’ but Dr. Griffiths did not 
ask to see the excreta. ; 

Greenwood’s conduct on the last night of his wife’s life 
was greatly called in question. It was afterwards alleged 
against him that when Mrs. Greenwood’s condition had become 
materially worse, her husband, sent by the nurse to fetch 
Dr. Griffiths, was so long in returning with or without him 
that Irene had to go to the doctor’s house to discover the 
reason of his delay. Greenwood swore that he was not absent 
for more than ten minutes, an opinion endorsed by Miss 


Griffiths, in whose company he had been. Miss Phillips 
14 


Introduction. 


and Nurse Jones both agreed that he was away for nearly 
an hour. Still later, when Mrs. Greenwood was practically 
at the point of death, Greenwood, urged to bring Dr. 
Griffiths, came back alone, saying that he could not rouse 
him. The nurse went over and wakened the doctor at once. 
The prosecution made much of these two incidents as empha- 
sising that Greenwood’s conduct was highly inconsistent with 
his supposed anxiety about his wife. 

It may perhaps be permitted to inquire here: where were 
the servants? Mrs. Greenwood’s fatal illness commenced 
between 6.30 and 7 p.m., and terminated in death about 
3.30 a.m. During this time Miss Phillips states that she 
procured hot water from the kitchen, and herself fetched the 
nurse. In addition, she and Irene, at Nurse Jones’s direc- 
tions, filled hot-water bottles. It was Greenwood who went 
repeatedly in person for Dr. Griffiths. The two younger 
maids, Williams and Powell, were both out up to a late 
hour; but surely when they returned they did not callously 
go to bed without troubling to ascertain whether they could do 
anything for their mistress, who, they learned at 9.30, was 
very ill? All three servants slept together in the same room, 
immediately over Mrs. Greenwood’s. Hannah Williams com- 
plained that she was kept awake by Mrs. Greenwood’s groan- 
ing, a statement contradicted by her fellow-servants. At 
about 3 a.m. Irene Greenwood roused the younger maids and 
sent them to fetch Miss Phillips, who had gone home at 11 
o’clock, but Mrs. Greenwood was dead before they returned. 
At the trial all three maids were called as witnesses, but only 
examined with regard to the laying of the luncheon-table 
much earlier in the day, and the general relations between 
their employers. 

Much of what occurred in Mrs. Greenwood’s bedroom that 
night rests on the testimony of Nurse Jones. According to 
her sworn and separate statements, Mrs. Greenwood grew 
steadily worse after the nurse’s return at 10 o’clock. She 
was given brandy, milk, soda and brandy at intervals of a 
quarter of an hour, but could retain nothing. Diarrhea, 
of a kind that the nurse stated she had never seen before in 
her professional experience of over twenty years, continued 
incessantly up to midnight. Yet at none of his visits did 


Dr. Griffiths express any alarm or call to see the patient 
15 


if 


Harold Greenwood. 


without being summoned, and Greenwood, as well as Irene, 
appears to have felt no undue concern. According to his 
account, Mrs. Greenwood was rational and collected, explain- 
ing where anything required for her was to be found, 
and talking quite composedly.* According to the nurse, 
Greenwood seemed perfectly indifferent to his wife’s sufferings, 
did not suggest at any time sending for the doctor, but had 
to be told to fetch him, and beyond repeatedly asking Mrs. 
Greenwood how she felt, to which the poor woman, when able 
to speak, replied ‘‘ Very bad,’’ displayed neither interest 
nor sympathy. The nurse also stated that Mrs. Greenwood 
asked her ‘‘ to tell Mr. Greenwood not to sit on the bed.”’ 
Another version of this request was given by Irene, who 
stated that she sat on her mother’s bed when in the room 
about 1 a.m., and Mrs. Greenwood objected to the weight 
and desired her to move. 

Despite her sufferings and discomfort, Mrs. Greenwood 
seems to have been thoughtful and unselfish to a degree. She 
repeatedly apologised to the nurse for giving her trouble, 
and both Nurse Jones and Miss Phillips testified that Mrs. 
Greenwood was ‘‘ very considerate about other people ’’ and 
‘‘ not one to complain.’’ At 11 o’clock she expressed a wish 
that her daughter should go to bed, in order to be fit for 
her work at the bank next morning, and that Miss Phillips 
should return home. The latter did so, according to her own 
statement, ‘‘ very reluctantly.’’ Before she went Nurse Jones 
mentioned to her about the sickness and diarrhea. ‘‘ She said 
it was of a very peculiar nature, and she was very worried, 
as she had never seen anything like it before. She would 
have to speak to the doctor about it.’? Nurse Jones after- 
wards denied that she had said this. Miss Phillips was seen 
off the premises by Greenwood, who told her not to worry. 
He added that he had often known his wife much worse, and 


* Greenwood stated in his proof: ‘‘ During the time nurse was 
away I kept going into the room and chatted with them all, and my 
wife seemed quite easy. I asked her several times if she had any 
pain about her heart, but she replied each time she had none, but that 
she felt very weak. She showed me how blue her fingers were, and 
I rubbed them for her several times. . . . About 10.30 my wife 
suggested that nurse should have a cup of tea, and I said I would 
have one too. About 11 o’clock my wite suggested that Irene should 
go to bed, and she went. It was a beautiful night. I said I would 
take a walk round the garden, but my wife said, ‘Oh, don’t leave 
me,’ so I did not go.” 


16 


Mabel Greenwood. 


Introduction. 


she would be all right by the morning. This conversation 
took place outside the gate of Rumsey House. Dr. Griffiths, 
who was taking his customary evening stroll, came up and 
asked how Mrs. Greenwood was. Greenwood replied that she 
was “‘easier,’? a statement which the nurse subsequently 
declared she could not understand his making. On hearing 
this Dr. Griffiths did not go in to see the patient, and averred 
that he had no recollection afterwards of paying her any visit 
until the last one about 3 a.m., a short time before she died.* 

By 1 a.m. Mrs. Greenwood seems to have realised the 
seriousness of her condition, if no one else did. She asked 
the nurse if she were dying, and said that she did wish she 
could have lived to bring up her children. ‘Irene still 
needed mothering.’’ The nurse heard her praying, and she 
afterwards said to her that if she (Mrs. Greenwood) did not 
recover Miss Bowater was to be told it was her sister’s wish 
that she should look after the children, ‘‘ and bring them 
up in the way I should like to have them brought up.’’ This 
conversation took place when Greenwood was out of the room, 
having been dispatched by Nurse Jones for Dr. Griffiths. 
The nurse subsequently stated that by 1 a.m. ‘‘ she had 
become suspicious that things were not as they should be.”’ If 
this were the case, and Miss Phillips, two hours before, had 
felt similarly uneasy and dissatisfied, why was no sugges- 
tion made of calling in another doctor? 

During the trial the question was hotly debated of what 
certain pills, prescribed by Dr. Griffiths for Mrs. Greenwood, 
had contained. Greenwood fetched the parcel with them from 
the doctor’s, and at the time of the death no question arose 
as to their being other than a harmless and necessary remedy. 
There is considerable confusion as to when they were ordered 
and administered. Dr. Griffiths said that he gave them at 
his 10 o’clock visit. The nurse and Greenwood both stated 
that it was at 1 o’clock. Immediately after taking these pills 
Mrs, Greenwood relapsed into coma or sleep, and never woke 
again. When suspicion had grown rife that her death was 
caused by unnatural means, Greenwood averred that the pills 
were ‘‘ too strong,’’ and had killed his wife. ‘‘ If she had 


* Miss Phillips stated that between Mrs. Greenwood’s death and 
her funeral she heard Greenwood telling Miss Bowater that ‘‘ the 
doctor was so good; he came over every half-hour.” 


Cc 17 


Harold Greenwood. 


not had the pills she would be all right to-day.’’ Irene 
Greenwood stated that, both before and after the exhumation 
of her mother’s body, her father told her that ‘‘ morphia 
pills’? had been the cause of her death. Green- 
wood alleged that he first became suspicious about the pills 
by Nurse Jones saying ‘‘ Damn those pills! ’’ that they had 
killed Mrs. Greenwood, and requesting him not to mention 
this to Dr. Griffiths! Nurse Jones denied on oath that on 
the morning of Mrs. Greenwood’s death there had been any 
talk about the pills, or that she had at any time asked Green- 
wood not to mention them. Dr. Griffiths likewise denied that 
at the time of the exhumation Greenwood had discussed or 
alluded to the pills in conversation with him. At the inquest 
and the police court proceedings the doctor swore that he gave 
Mrs. Greenwood two morphia pills. At the trial he declared 
on oath that during the previous hearings he had confused 
morphia with opium, and that the pills were opium pills. 
From the defence point of view this was both inconvenient 
and exasperating, as, relying on the statement made at 
the previous examinations that the pills were morphia pills, 
the defence was prepared to call two medical experts to swear 
that Mrs. Greenwood died of morphia poisoning. 

Mrs. Greenwood died at 3.30 a.m. on Monday, 16th June. 
Her illness certainly exhibited two known symptoms of 
arsenical poisoning—vomiting and diarrhcea—but not its 
other usual features of cramp and thirst. Nurse Jones 
declared that the widower did not seem to be put out in any 
way, though on another occasion she stated that he was 
““ upset ’? by the death, and unconcerned throughout the 
preceding illness. On the other hand, Miss Phillips, when 
she returned to Rumsey House in the early morning, saw 
Greenwood walking about the room shedding tears, and 
Nurse Jones weeping and unable to speak. Dr. Griffiths 
certified the death as due to valvular disease of the heart. 


Lt. 


About 8 a.m. on the morning of 16th June Nurse Jones 
called at the vicarage with the news of Mrs. Greenwood’s 
death. Whether Greenwood sent her, or she went of her own 
initiative, does not appear. The vicar stated afterwards that 


‘‘he was very much vexed ’’—whether at the loss of a personal 
18 


Introduction. 


friend or of a wealthy parishioner does not appear either. 
The earliest hint of a dreadful suspicion which was ultimately 
to lead to a criminal charge seems to have dated from this 
conversation between the local clergyman and the district 
nurse. Mr. Jones, having been so recently in Mrs. Green- 
wood’s company, when she appeared in her usual health, was 
perplexed and uneasy at hearing of her very sudden passing. 
Nurse Jones, agitated and upset, probably let slip more than 
she intended. Afterwards there was a considerable mystery 
over ‘‘ one thing which she would never tell.’’ It finally 
transpired, being wrung from her by the coroner at the 
inquest, that this was the vicar’s inquiry whether she thought 
there had been foul play in connection with Mrs. Green- 
wood’s death. Mr. Ludford, who represented Greenwood at 
the inquest, asked if the suggestion of foul play had come 
from the vicar, and sarcastically included him amongst the 
*“band of gossips’’ who had been discussing the case in 
Kidwelly.* The nurse admitted telling the vicar that she 
thought there ought to have been a consultation, and after 
the funeral regretted that there had not been a post-mortem. 

Greenwood’s own conduct on the morning of his wife’s 
death was so flagrantly foolish and uncircumspect that it 
seems more consistent with innocence than guilt. At 10 
o’clock he motored to Llanelly, and drove straight to the 
Mercury otfice. Here he told his friend Mr. Llewellyn Jones 
of Mrs. Greenwood’s death, and accepted his offer to call at 
the undertaker’s. Greenwood had forgotten the keys of the 
safe in his Llanelly office. He borrowed twenty pounds from 
Mr. Jones’s sister, Gladys, the lady whom he afterwards 
married as his second wife, and accompanied her to various 
shops, purchasing his mourning. During his absence the 
vicar called at Rumsey House, and, finding Greenwood out, 
paid another visit later in the day. They went together to 
the churchyard, where Greenwood chose a site for his wife’s 
grave. He told the vicar that heart failure had been the cause 
of her death, but there was no mention of any feature of the 
illness. At this time no suggestion was uttered of suicide, 
but on the day that Mrs. Greenwood’s body was exhumed 
Greenwood sent for the vicar, and during their interview 


*T£ he were not one of the ‘‘ band of gossips,’ the vicar was 
undoubtedly among the local prophets. He made the cryptic remark 
to Sergeant Hodge Lewis: ‘‘ When that body is got up people will 
stiffen their backs, and you will get to know a good deal mi : 


Harold Greenwood. 


some discussion arose as to this possibility. According to the 
vicar’s statement, he was with Greenwood for a quarter of an 
hour, during which “‘ Mr. Greenwood did the talking and I 
listened.’’ At the inquest the vicar indignantly repudiated 
the suicide theory. Mrs. Greenwood had been a cheerful, 
genial woman, keenly interested in everything, and the last 
person likely to do such a thing as take her own life. He 
regarded the suggestion as ‘‘ an infamous slander on the 
character and memory of a deceased lady who was not there 
to defend herself.’? The vicar was probably right. Mrs. 
Greenwood was a religious woman, and, apart from the 
unlikelihood of her attempting such a terrible act through 
ill-health and depression, where could she have obtained the 
arsenic to accomplish her purpose? She was of a reticent 
nature, and never discussed her husband with her clergyman, 
who had no reason to suppose that she was other than happy in 
her married life. Greenwood was a member of the congrega- 
tion, and, with his first wife and family, had been a regular 
worshipper at St. Mary’s Church, but after the exhumation 
he never attended services there again. 

On Thursday, 19th June, Mrs. Greenwood was buried in 
the somewhat congested churchyard round St. Mary’s 
Church. The vicar, assisted by his curate, performed the 
ceremony. The Rev. Ambrose Jones’s smouldering suspi- 
cions as to the death were fanned to a steady flame by Green- 
wood’s failure to send him the death certificate. Irene Green- 
wood had duly registered her mother’s death, and the certi- 
ficate was perfectly in order, so that there was absolutely 
no reason for Greenwood’s neglect in the matter. Unfor- 
tunately, it added another to the current rumours that all 
had not been well, and formed an excellent opening for the 
interview which the police had with Greenwood on 24th 
October. Mrs. Greenwood was laid in the grave selected for 


her reception by Greenwood, where her body remained undis- 
turbed until the following April.* 


* The coffin was placed in a brick cavity about 2 ft. 6 ins. deep, 
which was covered with stone slabs. The bottom of the grave was 
about 7 ft. from the surface. No earth was in contact with the 
coffin, which bore a brass plate engraved with the name and date 
of death of deceased. The body was in two coffins, the inner of 
elm and the outer of oak. When exhumed, there was water in 
the brick chamber, but none in the coffin, which had not rotted. 
Nothing was injected into the body before burial for preservation. 
At the exhumation the undertaker noticed that it was exceptionally 
well preserved. 


20 


Introduction. 


The vicar was not the only person to whom Nurse Jones 
confided her doubts and uneasiness touching Mrs. Green- 
wood’s death. To Mrs. Smart, president of the District 
Nursing Association, who had remarked that it was very 
sad for Mrs. Greenwood to die so suddenly, the nurse replied : 
““Yes, this case has worried me a lot. I did not quite under- 
stand it. I have never seen a case like it before.’’ On 
another occasion Nurse Jones said to the same lady: ‘I 
wish I had my time over again. I should insist on a post- 
mortem, although I don’t like them.’’ Mrs. Smart not 
unnaturally asked if the nurse thought there had been any- 
thing wrong, to which her answer was: ‘‘ Oh, no, I don’t 
think that. Do what I would I couldn’t get Mrs. Greenwood 
warm.’’ At the inquest Nurse Jones, with the utmost reluct- 
ance, admitted that she had said these things in conversation 
with Mrs. Smart, excepting the remark referring to the post- 
mortem. She also agreed that the conversations between her- 
self and the vicar had taken place, but the admission had 
almost to be dragged from her by the coroner. She fainted 
at the inquest proceedings on hearing that arsenic had been 
found in Mrs. Greenwood’s remains. 

These remarks, no doubt exaggerated, were quoted and 
repeated about Kidwelly, and came eventually to the ears 
of the police authorities. Nurse Jones was interviewed by 
Sergeant Hodge Lewis, and from the police point of view 
proved unsatisfactory and evasive. At the inquest she denied 
having said to him: ‘‘ You can look through me, sergeant ; 
I am telling the whole truth. I have had many cases like 
this. There was nothing unusual about the death.’”’ She 
further denied that at another interview with the officer 
she told him that she would not say anything more unless 
compelled. Since Mrs. Greenwood’s death Nurse Jones had 
been going to Rumsey House, alleging that Greenwood was 
looking after some business for her in connection with the 
affairs of a recently deceased uncle. On one occasion, between 
the death and the exhumation of Mrs. Greenwood’s body, 
Greenwood asked Nurse Jones: ‘‘ What is this rumour that’s 
about? ’’ She told him that people were saying that Mrs. 
Greenwood had died an unnatural death. Greenwood replied : 
“ Any one that will slander my name will have to pay for 
it.’’? Nurse Jones continued to visit Rumsey House, and the 


night before Greenwood’s second marriage she was pales 


Harold Greenwood. 


with him up to a late hour. She admitted to telling his 
fortune, but denied that she had ever said to him that if he 
knew what people were saying about him his hair would stand 
on end. 

Possibly in time the gossip and rumours touching Mrs. 
Greenwood’s end might, unlike the unfortunate subject of 
them, have died a natural death had it not been for her 
husband’s insane folly in marrying again within four months. 
At the trial Sir Edward Marshall Hall, Greenwood’s counsel, 
who defended and excused practically every single action on. 
the part of his client except this one, spoke in condemna- 
tion of Greenwood’s foolish haste, which naturally afforded 
the prosecution a strong motive for the alleged poisoning 
of the first wife. On the other hand, the defending counsel 
stressed Greenwood’s “‘ loneliness,’ and his difficulties with 
regard to other women, as accounting for his desire to 
re-marry so speedily, and, as it proved, so rashly. 

Greenwood’s position when a widower was a delicate and 
peculiar one. His earnings as a solicitor would never have 
sufficed to keep up an establishment such as Rumsey House. 
His first wife had a comfortable annual income* which, if it 
had passed to Greenwood after her death, would, as his counsel 
pointed out at the trial, have offered overwhelming motive 
for compassing her destruction. On the contrary, her hus- 
band lost in a financial sense, if in no other, by her demise. 
Her life was not insured, either by herself or by him. She 
made no will, and under the terms of her father’s the income 
was hers for life, and afterwards had to go to her children in 
equal shares. She had no power to dispose of it otherwise. 
Her mother had left her a few hundreds, her personal estate, 
when Greenwood took out letters of administration, being 
sworn at between three and four hundred pounds. Her 
jewellery was legally his, and the day after her death he 
divided it between his two daughters. The diamond ring 
which had been his wife’s engagement ring Greenwood gave 
to his daughter Irene, but subsequently revoked the gift. He 
decided to have the ring made into something for his own 
wear, and offered Irene a new ring instead. Ultimately she 

* The exact amount of Mrs. Greenwood’s income was a matter of some 
dispute at the trial. Greenwood stated in his evidence that he did not 


know the precise figure, but put it at about £900 a year. Iam informed 
from a private source that it was between £600 and £700. 


22 


Introduction. 


received the ring originally intended for her, and the newly 
purchased one, costing £55, became the property of Miss 
Gladys Jones, later the second Mrs. Greenwood.* 

Life at Rumsey House that summer was scarcely enjoyable. 
The atmosphere outside seethed with rumours of which Green- 
wood must have been perfectly aware. The domestic atmo- 
sphere inside was strained and uncomfortable. Miss Bowater, 
as joint mistress of the establishment, together with her elder 
niece, evidently proved uncongenial to her brother-in-law. 
“* T felt so hopelessly out of it—it was not like a home,’’ he 
declared at his trial, when asked whether he showed his alleged 
affection for his first wife by marrying a second so speedily. 
There may also have been a grain of truth in his statement 
in the letter to Miss Griffiths that ‘‘ he was fed-up with Miss 
Bowater, and was going to get rid of her.’’ The only way 
in which the wretched widower could assume the mastery of 
his own house was by a second marriage. Between three and 
four months after Mrs. Greenwood’s death Kidwelly tongues 
were set wagging afresh at the news that he was about to 
replace her. 

Apart from the strong motive of domestic strife and dis- 
comfort urging Greenwood to marry again with such 
unseemly haste, it should be remembered that these events 
took place less than a year after the conclusion of the 
Great War. Death had lost its dignity and importance. 
Mourning was regarded as obsolete, and the outward observ- 
ances of bereavement were curtailed or disregarded. Speedy 
marrying and giving in marriage, war weddings, followed 
by a similar ceremony in a few months’ time, had become 
commonplaces. In Greenwood’s case it cannot be stressed too 
strongly that the usual sordid reason for a hurried wedding 
was entirely lacking. The element of the crime passionel 
could not be traced. Miss Gladys Jones was a woman of 
over thirty,t whom Greenwood had known intimately since 


* Correspondence relating to the purchase of the ring will be 
found in the Appendix. At the trial Irene was not asked any ques- 
tions by the defence to corroborate Greenwood’s story that the ring 
had been originally bought for her. Although the marriage did not 
take place until Ist October, Greenwood proposed to Miss Jones 
within a month of his wife’s death, and the ring was obviously 
ordered by him as an engagement-ring. 

+ The marriage certificate, dated 1st October, 1919, describes her 
as thirty-one. Greenwood, giving evidence at his trial, thirteen 
months later, described her as ‘‘ about thirty-four.” es 


Harold Greenwood. 


her childhood. The friendship between himself and her 
family dated back to the year 1898, when he first came to 
Llanelly. He was completely unknown, but through his 
aunt, Mrs. Treherne, he secured an introduction to Mr. 
W. B. Jones, whose wife was a sister of Mrs. Treherne’s 
husband, Dr. Treherne. Mr. Jones was a well-known and 
influential figure in Llanelly, being, amongst his many other 
activities, part-proprietor of the Llanelly Mercury. In return 
for financial help with his paper, at a time when it was in 
difficulties, Mr. Jones assisted Greenwood to build up his 
solicitor’s practice. Mr. Jones had a large family of sons 
and daughters. These were Greenwood’s friends over a 
period of twenty years, and hardly a day passed without 
his visiting the Joneses’ house or the Mercury office, or one or 
other of the sons going to Greenwood’s business premises. 
There was little or no social intercourse between Rumsey 
House and the Joneses. The first Mrs. Greenwood probably 
looked upon them as her husband’s business acquaintances. 

Another motive that may have impelled the bridegroom’s 
haste was possibly anxiety.to wed before he was wedded. A 
widower is considered the lawful prey of female tongues 
and attentions. Greenwood, always popular with petticoats, 
in vulgar parlance, was doubtless ‘‘ chased ’’ by every single 
lady of his acquaintance, until he sought refuge through 
marrying one of them. Kidwelly, like all small villages, 
was a hotbed of gossip. Miss Griffiths told Greenwood that 
she had heard his name coupled with those of Miss Phillips, 
Nurse Jones, and two women unknown to him. 


IV. 


In the words of Sir Edward Marshall Hall at Greenwood’s 
trial : ‘‘ No human being could say what the relationship was 
between Greenwood and Miss Griffiths.’”? The night before 
Mrs. Greenwood’s death there had been an extraordinary 
conversation between them, vouched for by Miss Griffiths 
and emphatically denied by Greenwood. Greenwood went 
over to the house to fetch Dr. Griffiths at Nurse Jones's 
request. The hour was a disputed point, as well as the 
length of time which elapsed before his return with the 
doctor. Miss Griffiths admitted him, and, on hearing 


that Mrs. Greenwood was ill, inquired if she were suffering 
24 


Introduction. 


from one of her usual heart attacks. Greenwood, who seemed 
in excellent spirits, replied that his wife was worse than 
usual, and it was possible that she might not recover. Miss 
Griffiths denied that she detained him, or that he was with 
her for longer than ten minutes. Ultimately Irene fetched 
him, and as he was leaving the room Miss Griffiths made 
some reference to taking a holiday. Greenwood rejoined 
that he had been told by a fortune-teller that his next trip 
would be a honeymoon. For a man married twenty-three 
years the remark was somewhat startling. At his trial Green- 
wood averred that Miss Griffiths had been ‘‘ got at ’’ by the 
police, that the entire conversation as alleged by her to have 
taken place was a fabrication, and that the observation 
about the honeymoon was made to her a few days before his 
second marriage. The prosecution stressed all this heavily 
as instancing callousness and indifference. In Greenwood’s 
defence it should perhaps be remembered that he was more or 
less accustomed to his wife’s severe attacks of illness, and, 
if innocent of any hand in this one, probably did not feel 
anxious about her, while his usual manner was cheerful and 
jocular. 

Two days after Greenwood had intimated to the registrar 
of marriages at Llanelly his intention of wedding Miss Jones 
at the Bryn Chapel on Ist October, 1919, he wrote the 
following letter to Miss Griffiths on 26th September :— 


Rumsey House, Kidwelly, 
Carmarthenshire. 
(Friday.) 

My dearest May,—I have been trying hard to get to you this last 
fortnight, but no luck; always some one going in or you were out. 
Now, I want you to read this letter very carefully and to think very 
carefully, and to send me over a reply to-night. There are very 
many rumours about, but between you and I (sic) this letter reveals 
the true position. Well, it is only right that you should know that 
Miss Bowater and Miss Phillips between them have turned my 
children against you very bitterly—why, I don’t know. It is only 
right that you should know this, as you are the one I love most in 
this world, and I would be the last one to make you unhappy. Under 
these circumstances, are you prepared to face the music? I am 
going to do something quickly, as I must get rid of Miss Bowater 
at once, as I am simply fed up. 

Let me have something from you to-night.—Yours as ever, 
HaARo_p. 


At the trial both Greenwood and Miss Griffiths gave his and 


her separate explanations of this extraordinary production. 
25 


Harold Greenwood. 


Miss Griffiths, for reasons best. known to herself, kept the 
letter. In her evidence at Greenwood’s trial she admitted 
telling Superintendent Jones (of the local police) about it. 
She was asked for it at the inquest by Mr. Seward Pearce, 
Assistant Director of Prosecutions. Miss Griffiths throughout 
maintained the attitude that the letter was written in jest, 
that ‘‘ there was nothing in it,’’ and that she was unable 
to explain it otherwise, or to account for its existence becom- 
ing known. Greenwood’s versions of the matter most 
unchivalrously ‘‘ give away ’’ the lady. At first he stated 
that on the Friday prior to his second wedding-day he was 
over at the Griffiths’ house, and in the course of conversa- 
tion with Miss Griffiths some allusion was made to his motor, 
which he had recently shown her. Greenwood remarked that 
he thought of going in the car for his honeymoon. Miss 
Griffiths, acquainted with the prevailing rumours, asked if 
it were true that he was to be married the following Wednes- 
day. Greenwood told her not to listen to gossip, enquired 
from whom she had heard the story, and, finally, very 
foolishly, observed that he was free enough to propose to her. 
Miss Griffiths ‘‘ dared him to do it,’’ whereupon he promised 
to write her an offer of marriage. For a solicitor it was 
surely the height of folly, even though he safeguarded him- 
self by wording the alleged proposal so ambiguously that 
it might easily have been construed to mean several other 
things besides matrimony. Greenwood stated that he called 
in person for his answer on Sunday, and was ‘“‘ very 
frightened that she might accept.’’ Miss Griffiths said 
“*No,’’ and then asked if he meant to take her refusal 
seriously. Greenwood replied, ‘‘ Oh, no,’’ and made a speedy 
escape. On the Tuesday, the night before his wedding, Nurse 
Jones came to Rumsey House with a note from Miss Griffiths,* 
asking if it were true that the marriage was to be next day, 
and “‘ was it too late?’ Greenwood, by way of proving that 
it was too late, showed Nurse Jones the marriage licence. 
Nurse Jones went back to Miss Griffiths, returning in a 
short time with a message from her to the effect that the 
licence was only a piece of paper and could be torn up. 
Greenwood refused to agree to this, Nurse Jones carried his 


* Had Greenwood been able to produce this note it would have 
materially corroborated his story. 


26 


Introduction. 


decision to Miss Griffiths, and brought over a final message 
that Miss Griffiths said that there was nothing to be done, 
and had retired to bed in tears.* The bride’s opinion of 
this imbroglio is not recorded. 

Giving evidence at his trial Greenwood explained the letter 
by saying that it was written by him at Miss Griffiths’s 
request. When he went to tell her of his forthcoming marriage 
to Gladys Jones, Miss Griffiths burst into tears, declared 
that he had ‘‘ let her down ”’ by paying her considerable 
attention, and she had always anticipated becoming the 
second Mrs. Greenwood herself. She was subjected to chaff 
on the part of acquaintances, and asked Greenwood to pro- 
pose to her in order to be able to tell people that she had 
refused him. Greenwood agreed to say that he had done 
so, but Miss Griffiths demanded a letter, written evidence 
being unassailable, whereas no one would believe her mere 
assertion. He acquiesced, and sent the letter, after compos- | 
ing several other attempts, none of which he had kept. Next 
day she said ‘‘ No,” ‘‘in a laughing way.’’ The remark 
about the honeymoon, alleged to have been made by Green- 
wood on the night prior to Mrs. Greenwood’s death, had 
been confused by Miss Griffiths with his reference to the 
motor car trip a few days before he was married for the 
second time. He acquitted her of any malice in the matter, 
as he knew that she had not been questioned by the police 
until some months after his first wife’s death, and dates were 
mixed up in her memory.t Miss Griffiths, in the witness- 
box, asseverated firmly that Greenwood had spoken of a 
honeymoon and a fortune-teller on the night of Mrs. Green- 
wood’s fatal illness, and denied practically everything that 
he had said regarding the ambiguous letter. 

The marriage with Gladys Jones took place on Ist October, 
1919. Irene Greenwood, only apprised of it by her father 
two days before the ceremony, was greatly shocked and sur- 
prised. Before Greenwood and his second wife had returned 


* The conclusion of the whole matter, in Greenwood’s elegant 
phrasing, was: ‘‘ May had_ said ‘ There’s nothing to be done,’ and 
had gone to bed howling. I was married the next morning.”’ 

+If the remark about the honeymoon were made to Miss Griffiths 
on 26th September, and she was questioned by the police so soon 
after as October or November, it is curious that she should have 
confused the date when the conversation took place with the night 
prior to Mrs. Greenwood’s death. 

27 


Harold Greenwood. 


from their honeymoon Irene left Rumsey House, and went 
to her mother’s relatives in London. She and the similarly 
ousted Miss Bowater did not set up housekeeping together 
elsewhere. One of the strangest facts in this tangled and 
obscure story is the undisputed one that when inquiries 
began to be set on foot regarding the death of the first 
Mrs. Greenwood, her daughter, a woman of twenty-one, who 
had been in the house and with her for the greater part of 
her brief illness, who was present at her death-bed, and 
might reasonably be supposed to know as much of the cir- 
cumstances as Miss Phillips, Nurse Jones, Maggie Williams, 
Tom Foy, or Dr. Griffiths, all of whom were interrogated by 
the police at a very early date, was never interviewed by 
them, or asked to make any statement. 

Despite Greenwood’s long friendship and almost daily 
association with his second wife’s family, Irene Greenwood’s 
acquaintance with her stepmother, prior to Miss Jones assum- 
ing this relationship, appears to have been very slight. 
Irene and her sister Eileen once joined Miss Jones for some 
shopping expedition, and on another occasion the three visited 
a cinema together. She admitted having, at her father’s 
suggestion, invited Gladys Jones for a week-end to Rumsey 
House in 1918. This was during Mrs. Greenwood’s absence, 
and without her knowledge, though she was told of it after- 
wards. Miss Jones was accompanied by her sister Gertrude, 
and as both were engaged to be married Irene saw nothing 
suspicious or undesirable in her father’s wish that Miss 
Jones should be asked on a visit. Mrs. Greenwood had given 
her daughter permission to invite a friend while she herself 
was away at the seaside. Irene proposed having Miss 
Gwyneth David, and Greenwood wanted to include Miss Jones 
in the invitation. When Miss David proved unable to come, 
Miss Gertrude Jones was substituted for her. This entirely 
harmless and natural episode was magnified to appalling pro- 
portions afterwards. Irene acknowledged that her mother 
was ‘‘ displeased ’’ when she returned and heard about it, 
but there was no unpleasantness. On the other hand, local 
gossip told of ‘‘a dreadful row’’ as soon as Mrs. Green- 
wood discovered the presence of these unauthorised visitors by 
‘“‘ chocolate boxes all over the house.’’ The happy party 


broke up on the Monday morning, Irene and Miss Gertrude 
28 


Introduction. 


Jones departing by an early train to Carmarthen, whilst 
Greenwood and Miss Gladys Jones went off by a later one 
to Llanelly. Miss Griffiths related the story of the ‘‘ dreadful 
row ’’ to Sergeant Hodge Lewis, but afterwards admitted 
that she was speaking from hearsay, based on Kidwelly 
gossip, and not from any personal knowledge. 

The week-end visit was only one of several incidents, harm- 
less in themselves, but capable of a sinister explanation, which 
the prosecution fastened upon. Greenwood’s unlucky pur- 
chases of a lady’s dressing-bag, weed-killer, and a diamond 
ring were all gossiped about, magnified, and misinterpreted. 
Miss Griffiths alleged that before Mrs. Greenwood’s death Miss 
Jones was constantly in the habit of ringing Greenwood up 
on the telephone at Dr. Griffiths’s, Rumsey House possessing 
none. There was a tale of a drive in Greenwood’s car, with 
Miss Jones as passenger, on an occasion when Greenwood 
had been telegraphed for to return home from Pontardulais 
as his wife was dangerously ill. In the grate at his office 
Greenwood’s caretaker discovered the remains of a partially 
burned letter, containing the phrase, ‘‘ It will be nice 
when I am your wife.’’ The handwriting was Gladys 
Jones’. The date on which she saw this letter, which she 
declared was the morning of Mrs. Greenwood’s death, and 
the date of a receipt for the diamond ring bought by Green- 
wood, also found by Mrs. Groves as waste paper, were 
certainly confused in her mind. 

Rumour, especially in a small place, has seven-leagued 
boots. Greenwood’s second marriage gave a fresh lease of life 
to the sinister whisper abroad in Llanelly, Kidwelly, and the 
neighbourhood all the summer. The hints and suspicions 
regarding his first wife’s death became so definite that, 
shortly after the bridegroom’s return from his honeymoon, 
Police Superintendent Jones and Inspector Nicholas, of Llan- 
elly, visited his office on 24th October, 1919, and took a 
lengthy statement from him. There was a further inter- 
view on 3lst October, when Greenwood produced the death 
certificate, asked for at the first interview, which he said 
was in his office safe, but had been unable to find. The first 
visit by the superintendent lasted from two and a half to 
three hours. At the conclusion the superintendent informed 


Greenwood that having regard to the current rumours, and 
29 


Harold Greenwood. 


people gossiping so freely, he was afraid that the police would 
have to apply for an order to exhume the body. Greenwood 
replied: ‘‘ Just the very thing. I am quite agreeable.” 
Subsequently Greenwood, who had refused to sign the state- 
ment which Superintendent Jones took down in a note-book, 
objected to much of the contents. Certain material points 
and details, he averred, had been omitted, and things which 
he had never said appeared in it. At the trial the afore- 
said note-book was the cause of a wordy battle between 
Superintendent Jones and the defending counsel, Sir Edward 
Marshall Hall. Allegations were made as to leaves having 
been torn out and other pages substituted. The whole 
episode, during which the taking of evidence was entirely 
suspended for a spirited exchange of what is technically 
known as ‘‘ back-chat ’’ betwixt counsel and witness, although 
not materially important, was unsatisfying and undignified. 

Despite the difficulty of extracting sufficient evidence from 
reluctant witnesses to justify further and more serious steps 
being taken, the authorities quietly pursued their investiga- 
tions until the following spring. On 9th March, 1920, the 
chief constable of Carmarthenshire, Mr. Picton Philipps, 
embodied the accumulated results of his own and his sub- 
ordinates’ researches into the circumstances of Mrs. Green- 
wood’s death in a lengthy report to the Home Office. After 
detailing the facts regarding a death ‘‘ surrounded by 
mystery, falsehood, and, as it seems to me, culpable negli- 
gence and callousness,’? Mr. Philipps requested an opinion 
on the propriety of exhuming Mrs. Greenwood’s body, 
‘““ either in the interests of justice, or, if that should happily 
not be so, then to relieve the husband of a terrible suspicion 
which will otherwise probably cling to him for life.”? In 
consequence of this report the Director of Public Prosecu- 
tions was consulted, and decided that the facts should be 
sent to the coroner, Mr. J. W. Nicholas, who would have 
the power to order exhumation and hold an inquest. Regret 
was expressed by the Home Office that this step had not 
been taken sooner. It was recommended that after the 
coroner had been communicated with an unobtrusive watch 
should be kept on Greenwood in case he attempted to leave 
the country. 


The coroner, after considering the circumstances, was 
30 


Introduction. 


inclined to order an exhumation of the body, but expressed 
a doubt whether any very definite results would accrue, in 
view of the fact that death had taken place nine months 
before. On 16th April, 1920, Mrs. Greenwood’s remains 
were exhumed from the grave in Kidwelly churchyard. Her 
family, the Bowaters, when the news became public property, 
were emphatic in their declaration that the movement for 
this step had not come from them, and they were as much 
horrified and surprised as any one else. There had certainly 
been rumours of a possible exhumation long before it actually 
was an accomplished fact. Greenwood’s caretaker told him 
on his return from his honeymoon that she had heard that 
Miss Bowater intended to have her sister’s body exhumed, 
*“to see if she had been poisoned,’’ but Mrs. Groves was 
unable to remember her informant. 

A post-mortem examination of Mrs. Greenwood’s remains 
was held in Kidwelly Town Hall on the morning of 16th 
April by Dr. Alexander Dick, of Llanelly. Two other Llan- 
elly doctors were present—Dr,. John Davies and Dr. Dixon 
Smith—as well as Dr. Griffiths, of Kidwelly. An inquest was 
opened and adjourned after formal evidence had been 
taken, and the following day certain organs removed 
from the body were sent in sealed jars for the pur- 
pose of analysis to Mr. Webster, official analyst to the Home 
Office. He could discover no valvular disease, or other natural 
cause to account for the death, but found arsenic present in all 
the organs examined. The total amount was 18 milligrams, 
or rather more than one-quarter of a grain. Dr. Willcox,* 
consulting medical adviser to the Home Office, a famous 
authority, also examined all the organs in the possession of 
Mr. Webster, and came to similar conclusions. 

On the Tuesday following the exhumation Greenwood met 
an acquaintance, Mr. Smart, of Mountain View, Kidwelly, 
the husband of the lady in whom Nurse Jones had confided 
her doubts regarding Mrs. Greenwood’s death. The two men 
discussed the matter in the train to Llanelly. Greenwood 
remarked : ‘‘ They say that I was seen on the Town Bridge 
the night my wife’s body was exhumed. That was not true. 
I was in bed fast asleep, and damn fast asleep too’? On a 
later date Greenwood said to Mr. Smart: ‘‘ They are taking 


* Now Sir William Willcox. ae 


Harold Greenwood. 


a long time over my case. I don’t suppose they can find 
anything.’’ On 17th April, the day after the exhumation, 
Greenwood gave an interview to a representative of the Dadly 
Mail. He described himself as ‘‘ a victim of village gossip, 
of village scandal,’’ and complained that ‘‘ it all started 
from the fact that four months after my first wife’s death I 
married again.’? Greenwood gave the same newspaper 
another interview on 12th June, as well as the one to the 
South Wales Daily Post.* He professed himself unable to 
understand how arsenic could have been found in his wife’s 
body, but would not have been surprised had poison of some 
sort been discovered, owing to her habit of constantly taking 
medicines of every kind. He pooh-poohed the possibility of 
suicide, although he had previously suggested to the vicar 
Ahat his wife might have ‘‘ taken something ’’ herself. 
Another point which he stressed was the difficulty of obtain- 
ing arsenic. He would have had to sign the poison-book, 
and the transaction could easily have been traced to him. 
As a matter of fact, Greenwood had done so when buying 
Cooper’s Weedicide twice in June, 1917. 

The adjourned inquest on the body of the late Mrs. Green- 
wood was opened at 11 a.m. on Tuesday, 15th June, 1920. 
The proceedings occupied two days, being again held in the 
Town Hall, Kidwelly. By a grim coincidence 16th June, the 
concluding day, was the first anniversary of the poor woman’s 
death. Mr. J. W. Nicholas, the coroner, presided, with Mr. 
Seward Pearce, Assistant Director of Prosecutions, sitting 
near. Mrs. Greenwood’s brother and sister, Sir Thomas 
Vansittart Bowater and Miss Bowater, were present. She 
was briefly examined with regard to Mrs. Greenwood’s money 
affairs, but was not called at the trial. Greenwood was 
represented by Mr. Ludford, his solicitor. He had received 
a subpoena to attend, but, acting on Mr. Ludford’s advice, 
did not appear. 

A full report of the evidence and the coroner’s summing-up 
may be read in the Appendix. It is sufficient to say here 
that altogether eighteen witnesses were examined, one or two 
being recalled. The coroner’s summing-up occupied about 
three-quarters of an hour, following which the jury—thirteen 
in number—retired. After an absence of thirty-five minutes, 


* These three interviews are printed in the Appendix. 
32 


Introduction. 


they requested a consultation with the coroner, and remained 
in private with him for a quarter of an hour. Soon after- 
wards they returned into Court, and handed in the following 
verdict in writing by their foreman, Mr. George Jones :— 


‘“ We are unanimously of opinion that the death of the 
deceased, Mabel Greenwood, was caused by acute arsenical 
poisoning, as certified by Dr. Willcox, and that the poison 
was administered by Harold Greenwood.’’ 


It throws a horrible searchlight on the prevailing feeling 
in Kidwelly towards the wretched Greenwood that there was 
a delighted demonstration in Court on hearing the verdict, 
and several people present clapped their hands. 

In the meantime an almost unprecedented event had 
occurred. Shortly after the coroner had commenced his 
summing-up, by the orders of the chief constable, Police- 
Sergeant Hodge Lewis and Police-Constable W. J. Thomas 
left the Court, changed their uniforms for ordinary clothes, 
and went to Rumsey House. They asked for Greenwood, and 
directly he appeared seized him, and charged him on suspi- 
cion of having caused his wife’s death by the administration 
of poison. He was taken at once to a cell in the local police 
station. Subsequent to the inquest verdict Greenwood was 
seen there by Inspector Haigh, who had first been sent down 
by Scotland Yard to make inquiries into the case at the 
beginning of June. On his arrival the C.I1.D. man found 
immense local excitement and bad feeling, while everywhere 
the impression prevailed that Greenwood had poisoned his 
wife. The inspector interviewed all the persons whose state- 
ments had previously been taken by the local police, the 
great plurality of Joneses concerned proving exceedingly con- 
fusing to the stranger in the strange land. Inspector Haigh 
informed Greenwood that the coroner’s jury had returned a 
verdict against him, and that he would be charged with the 
wilful murder of his wife by the administration of arsenic. 
Greenwood, who seemed ‘‘ concerned, but not agitated,’’ 
asked the inspector what the precise wording of the jury’s 
finding had been, and, on hearing it repeated, ejaculated, 
‘“‘ Oh, dear! ’’ His removal to the police station had been 
accomplished comparatively unobserved, at a time when the 


streets were practically deserted owing to Kidwelly’s atten- 
D 33 


Harold Greenwood. 


tion being focussed on the proceedings going on in the Town 
Hall. Directly news of Greenwood’s arrest was known an 
immense crowd collected in the vicinity of the police station 
to watch the accused man’s removal to Llanelly. Amid hisses 
and cheers—a horrible commentary on our so-called civilisa- 
tion and British notions of justice and fairplay—Greenwood 
was bustled into a waiting motor and driven off. 

At Llanelly police station the charge was read over to him, 
he was cautioned by Superintendent Jones, and replied that 
he understood. The following morning he was brought before 
the magistrates at Llanelly, formally charged with the wilful 
murder of his wife, and remanded for a week. There was 
another remand on 25th June, and, commencing on Ist July, 
a hearing before the magistrates, which lasted for three 
days. A full account of these proceedings will be found in 
the Appendix. The upshot was Greenwood’s committal to 
the next Carmarthen Assizes to stand his trial on the above 
charge. He pleaded ‘‘ Not guilty,’’ and reserved his defence. 
The large crowd assembled outside Llanelly Town Hall to 
watch his departure booed him vigorously. 


VY. 


From the outset the prosecution admittedly had a weak 
case. The strictest investigations into the relations of Harold 
Greenwood and Gladys Jones during the lifetime of Mabel 
Greenwood failed to discover the smallest tittle of admissible 
evidence to prove that there had been anything but an 
ordinary friendship between them. Mrs. Groves, the care- 
taker of Greenwood’s office, alleged that Miss Jones was in 
the habit of visiting him there frequently. Asked at the 
inquest whether she had ever witnessed any familiarities 
between Greenwood and Miss Jones, Mrs. Groves replied that 
she had seen him kissing her, and that Miss Jones did not 
appear to object. A smart cross-examination by Mr. Lud- 
ford elicited the fact that this was after the death of Mrs. 
Greenwood, and never before. 

The caretaker told another story at the inquest of a visit 
by Mrs. Greenwood to her husband’s office on the Wednesday 


prior to her death. Mrs. Groves knew that Miss Jones was 
34 


Introduction. 


with Greenwood, and accordingly informed Mrs. Greenwood 
that he was out. When she spoke of the episode to Green- 
wood afterwards, and regretted having uttered an untruth, 
Greenwood said that it was quite all right. The incident 
was alleged to have happened on the same day, and much 
about the same time, that Greenwood took his wife for her 
first and only drive in the car, an event testified to by the 
between-maid, Powell, and Ben Williams, who worked in the 
garden. 

The real reason for the indecent haste of Greenwood’s 
second marriage, apart from the theory of the prosecution 
that it was due to passion for Gladys Jones, has never been 
explained. He did not deny that he and she had been 
extremely friendly over a period of many years, but 
asseverated that he was on equally intimate terms (employing 
the word in a harmless sense) with the other members of her 
family. He had never taken her for a drive without some 
of her relations accompanying them. Miss Jones worked in 
the Mercury office, and he was accustomed to see her when 
he lunched there. At the time of his proposal to her, which 
he alleged was due to his suddenly realising that he was 
sufficiently fond of her to wish to marry her, Miss Jones was 
engaged to be married to an army man named Frank Russell. 
During the trial this unknown warrior was referred to as “‘ a 
lieutenant in India,’’ but as a matter of fact he had just 
arrived in London from Bombay about the time of Green- 
wood’s second marriage. At Bombay he had received his 
fiancée’s letter, asking him to release her from their engage- 
ment, which had been entered into so far back as 1915, 
and wrote her a reproachful reply from a London hospital, 
upbraiding her for her faithlessness, and reiterating his 
own loyalty. Miss Jones replied that she was to be married 
‘* very early next week,’’ and heard nothing further from 
her discarded lover. 

The day of Greenwood’s arrest Rumsey House was 
thoroughly searched, as well as the adjoining stables and 
outhouses. With the exception of three small bottles of lini- 
ment, labelled ‘‘ Poison,’’? nothing else of this nature was 
discovered, or anything suspicious or incriminating. There 


were numerous letters, but none of these had any bearing 
35 


Harold Greenwood. 


on the case. In short, no purchase of poison was at any time 
traced to Greenwood, with the exception of weed-killer. This 
he had bought openly, had had delivered without any secrecy, 
and in fact never attempted to conceal the transaction. Mali- 
cious gossip and tattling spread and exaggerated small inci- 
dents such as the week-end visit of the Jones sisters, magni- 
fying and misrepresenting them. 

Greenwood was four and a half months in prison awaiting 
his trial at Carmarthen Assizes. Sir Edward Marshall Hall 
stressed this as a proof of the accused’s innocence. A guilty 
man, counsel contended, would have moved to be tried earlier 
and elsewhere, afraid of local opinion prejudicing a local 
jury. During this time, while the slow machinery of the Law 
moved towards its appointed purpose, when the most unim- 
portant people were being interviewed and examined by the 
police, no attempt was made on the part of the Crown 
authorities to approach Irene Greenwood. She had not been 
present at the inquest on her mother’s body, either voluntarily 
or to give evidence. She was not asked to give evidence, or 
volunteered to do so, in spite of admitting in cross-examina- 
tion at her father’s trial that she knew that he might 
become involved in criminal proceedings. No statement of 
any kind was taken from her, with the exception of the one 
made to Mr. Ludford.* After her father’s second marriage 
she had stayed away from Rumsey House until the following 
Christmas. She remained at Kidwelly with her father and 
' stepmother until the end of May, 1920, and then took a post 
as governess at Rendell. Not until after the inquest had 
she to consider what she drank at meals on the day of her 
mother’s death, and she acknowledged having discussed the 
matter freely with her father when investigations into the 
first Mrs. Greenwood’s death were pending. The Crown’s 
failure to call her was the defence’s opportunity, a trump- 
card kept until almost the last stages of the trial. 

The Guildhall at Carmarthen, where the trial was to take 
place, proved to be totally inadequate accommodation for 


* At the trial Irene was asked, in cross-examination by Sir E. 
Marlay Samson, whether it was as a result of Mr. Ludford’s advice 
that she did not attend the inquest and state what she knew about 
her mother’s death. Sir Edward Marshall Hall objected to the 
question, and the judge ruled that it had better not be put. 


36 


Introduction. 


the large number of persons having no connection with the 
case who were wishful to hear it. The Court was packed to 
suffocation each day, and those who found themselves unable 
to obtain admission to the hearing swelled the excited groups 
congregated outside. Among certain who were sent empty 
away was a large number of so-called ladies, who occupied 
a prominent position in the best circles in London, and had 
applied for tickets of admission to the trial. Not since the 
Maybrick case had any poisoning mystery so stirred and 
captured the morbid imagination of the public, sated, it might 
have been thought, by four years’ ghastly horrors and 
incessant deaths. Special and stringent arrangements were 
made to cope with the crowds, and facilitate the arrival and 
departure of those whose presence was essential. Carmarthen 
itself had all its available accommodation booked up for 
weeks ahead. Sir Edward Marshall Hall only managed to 
secure a room in the principal hotel after some difficulty, 
and others concerned in the case, whose evidence at the trial 
was necessary, were obliged to seek quarters as far afield as 
Ferryside or Llanelly, seven and twenty odd miles away 
respectively. 

The trial opened on Tuesday, 2nd November. The calendar 
included three cases of alleged murder, and one of alleged 
manslaughter, but interest in the fate of Harold Greenwood 
overshadowed everything else. Even the American press 
desired to be represented. The utmost strictness was observed 
in the guarding of the jury. Each day they were marched 
to and from their lodgings in the Central Hotel, as straitly 
policed as the prisoner himself. They sent in a unanimous 
request to be allowed to attend church on the Sunday which 
intervened during the seven days of the trial, but, after 
consideration, the petition was refused on the ground that 
some reference to the trial, or allusion to the case, might 
be made from the pulpit. It was probably regarded as 
adding insult to injury by these devotional and deeply con- 
scientious Welshmen to be offered a charabanc drive instead— 
in mid-November! Mr. Justice Shearman, the presiding 
judge, arrived at Carmarthen on the previous Friday. He 
was accompanied by Lady Shearman, who occupied a seat on 
the bench, and by his son, Mr. Montague Shearman, who acted 


as judge’s marshal. The prisoner was brought very early 
37 


Harold Cheonood, 


each morning from Carmarthen gaol, the scene of his 
eighteen weeks’ incarceration, to the Guildhall, a few yards 
up a steep hill, but eager crowds assembled daily in the 
hope of catching a glimpse of him. His carriage, escorted 
by mounted police, was practically mobbed, and on more 
than one occasion there was a hostile demonstration and some 
booing. 

Sir Edward Marlay Samson, K.C., and Mr. Wilfrid Lewis 
(instructed by the Director of Public Prosecutions) appeared 
for the Crown. Sir Edward Marshall Hall, K.C., and Mr. 
Trevor Hunter (instructed by Mr. T. R. Ludford) defended 
Greenwood.* Mr. Clark Williams (instructed by Mr. Mervyn 
Paton) held a watching brief on behalf of an interested party, 
a firm of weed-killer manufacturers. On being asked whether 
he had any objection to any of the jurymen, after these had 
taken their seats in the jury box and answered to their 
names, Greenwood, after consultation with his solicitor, Mr. 
Ludford, imstanced three, two of whom belonged to 
Llanelly and the third to Llandilo. Messrs. Thomas Morgan, 
David Knoyle, and Charles Simpson were accordingly in- 
formed that their services would not be required, and three 
substitutes were called into the box to take the oath. 
Strangely enough, there was not a single juror from 
Kidwelly. ’ 

In answer to the charge against him, Greenwood pleaded 
“Not guilty.’? Throughout the whole proceedings he sat 
cool and collected, smiling, and even laughing, on occasion, 
only very rarely displaying emotion, and at other times 
appearing thoroughly bored. When he moved from the dock 
to the witness-box, and his examination commenced, at first 
he spoke hardly above a whisper, but, according to one 
who was present in Court, became quite bold before his 
ordeal at Sir Edward Marlay Samson’s hands was over. 
Greenwood’s own legal advisers were reluctant to put him in 
the box. They anticipated that, voluble and irresponsible, he 
would make a bad witness in his own defence, but he did not 
damage his case in any way. The whole time that he was in 


* In order to avoid any poe confusion when both the prose- 
cuting and defending counsel were alike styled ‘‘ Sir Edward,” the 
former was throughout the trial and in the press reports addressed, 
and referred to, by the title of ‘Sir Marlay Samson.”’ I have 
adhered to this, 


38 


Introduction. 


the witness-box he remained comparatively cool and unruffled. 
He declined the judge’s suggestion of a seat, and continued 
calm, serene, alert under the prosecuting counsel’s searching 
fire of questions. His examination by the defence only lasted 
for a few minutes. To the vital question: ‘‘ Did you directly 
or indirectly administer or cause to be administered to your 
wife any arsenic at any time in your life? ’’ Greenwood 
replied with a quiet but emphatic: ‘‘I have not.’? In 
answer to a further question: ‘‘ Had you anything to do 
with your wife’s death? ’’ he rejoined promptly: ‘‘ Nothing 
whatever.’’ His own explanations of certain episodes—the 
purchases of the dressing-bag and diamond ring, and the 
letter to Miss Griffiths—were credible enough. As the judge 
hinted, some of his actions might not have been wholly admir- 
able, but that did not necessarily make him his wife’s 
destroyer. 


VI. 


Before commencing his opening speech for the Crown, which 
occupied some two hours in its delivery, Sir Edward Marlay 
Samson requested that all the witnesses, including those 
liable to be called for the defence, should leave the Court, 
excepting the two experts, Dr. Willcox and Mr. Webster. 
When this had been done, counsel addressed the jury, and 
first outlined the three main points on which they must make 
up their minds. First, did Mabel Greenwood die of arsenical 
poisoning? If they agreed that she did, they must ask: 
Was the poison taken by herself, either voluntarily or acci- 
dentally, or was it wilfully administered? If they decided 
that this last was the case, they must ask: Did the prisoner 
give it to her? The Crown alleged that he had done so. 
They must ask what means, opportunities, and motives he 
had, and consider minutely his conduct before, during, and 
after his wife’s fatal attack of illness. Counsel then sketched 
in outline the events centring round those sinister dates— 
15th and 16th June, 1919—and particularly stressed Green- 
wood’s purchases of Eureka weed-killer in February and 
April, 1919. It contained 60 per cent. of arsenic, was 
easily dissolved in water, and, if in red wine, its similar 


colour, likewise any taste, would be unnoticed. Thirty-six 
39 


Harold Greenwood. 


grains of the weed-killer amounted to half a teaspoonful, 
sufficient to cause death in one glass of wine. 

As ig inevitably the case in a trial for murder by alleged 
poisoning, the medical evidence was of paramount import- 
ance. The Crown alleged and sought to prove that Mabel 
Greenwood died from arsenical poisoning. The defence con- 
tended that she died from morphia poisoning, through an 
error on the part of Dr. Griffiths, who administered pills 
containing a dose of the latter drug sufficient to cause death. 
Dr. Griffiths, at the outset of his evidence, threw the defence 
off its prepared lines by acknowledging that the pills in ques- 
tion, which he had hitherto admitted contained half a grain 
of morphia, a dangerous dose, had contained instead half 
a grain of opium. There was 1-40th of a grain of morphia 
in each pill. Sir Edward Marshall Hall, on hearing this 
belated admission, which must of necessity entirely change 
the character of the defence, started the first of the famous 
** scenes ’’ for which the trial became notorious, and which 
called forth repeated rebukes from the bench. 

Dr. Griffiths’s evidence was throughout hesitating and con- 
tradictory. The defence did not fail to use him as a scape- 
goat. Sir Edward Marshall Hall went so far as to suggest 
openly that the doctor had by what the judge characterised 
as ‘fa colossal blunder ’’ administered Fowler’s solution of 
arsenic instead of bismuth to Mrs. Greenwood, as bottles 
containing both stood side by side in his surgery. Mr. 
Justice Shearman objected to this insinuation, tantamount, 
he pointed out, to an accusation of criminal negligence. Dr. 
Griffiths had retired from practice before the trial, and a 
further point against him was his inability to produce his 
prescription book. 

To prove their contention—that Mabel Greenwood died 
from arsenical poisoning—the Crown called the two experts 
who had examined the organs taken from the body. Mr. 
Webster, who used the Reinsch test, and afterwards the modi- 
fied Marsh test, in examining for traces of arsenic, stated 
that the amount found in milligrams in the organs submitted 
to him was—Stomach, .58 of a milligram, or .009 of a grain; 
small intestine, omentum, and mesentery, 4.33 milligrams, 
or .067 of a grain; large intestine, .55 of a milligram, or 


008 of a grain; liver, 8.508 milligrams, or .131 of a grain; 
40 


Introduction. 


spleen, .40 of a milligram, or .006 of a grain; two kidneys, 
1.21 milligrams, or .019 of a grain; uterus, .75 of a milli- 
gram, or .012 of a grain; rectum, .39 of a milligram, or 
-005 of a grain; heart, .27 of a milligram, or .004 of a 
grain; lungs, .79 of a milligram, or .012 of a grain; 
cesophagus, .21 of a milligram, or .003 of a grain; brain, 
-09 of a milligram, or .001 of a grain. The total amount 
was 18.07 milligrams, or .278 of a grain, approximately a 
little over a quarter of a grain. 

The witness tested for morphia among other alkaloids, but 
found none. He was asked to examine the organs for traces 
of poisoning generally, not arsenic in particular. By a pro- 
cess of elimination he arrived at the presence of arsenic. 
Results were negative as far as other poisons were concerned. 
Another method, by precipitation, and weighing the amount 
precipitated, gave exactly the same results as the two pre- 
vious tests. The minimum fatal dose was 2 grains. It was 
possible that ten months after death no traces of morphia 
would be found. 

Mr. Webster examined Eureka week-killer, and estimated 
that it contained 55.6 per cent. of arsenic. Four grains of 
weed-killer would correspond to 2} grains of arsenic. When, 
in the course of witness’s experiments, weed-killer had been 
added to port wine, the colour of the wine was only slightly 
altered, and no difference in taste could be detected. Four 
grains of weed-killer added to an ordinary cup of tea pro- 
duced the same results as to colour and taste as in the experi- 
ment with port wine. 

Dr. Willcox, who had given evidence for the Crown in 
the Seddons trial, when the cause of the victim’s death was 
arsenical poisoning, and the same test—the Marsh—had been 
employed to ascertain the quantity of poison found in Miss 
Barrow’s body,* was of opinion that Mabel Greenwood died 
from heart failure. The heart failure was caused by pro- 
longed vomiting and diarrhoea, due to the effects of arsenic. 


*In comparison with the Seddons case the amounts of absorbed 
arsenic in the liver, spleen, and kidneys, the most important organs 
to consider, showed that the quantities of absorbed arsenic in the 
case of Mrs. Greenwood corresponded to about three-quarters of 
those in the case of Miss Barrow. Thus: Mrs. Greenwood—liver, 
8.5 milligrams; Miss Barrow, 11.13 milligrams. Mrs. Greenwood— 
spleen, .4 milligrams; Miss Barrow, .44 milligrams. Mrs. Green- 
wood—kidneys, 1.21 milligrams; Miss Barrow, 1.9 milligrams. 

41 


Harold Greenwood. 


He thought that the fatal dose must have been taken by the 
mouth at least nine hours before death, e.g., if death occurred 
at 3.30 a.m. on 16th June, the arsenic would have been 
taken before 6.30 p.m. on 15th June. Had the arsenic been 
taken in a solid form some solid particles would have adhered 
to the mucous membrane of the stomach and intestine and 
have been visible (which was not the case), thus causing a 
higher amount to have been found on analysis. The arsenic, 
in Dr. Willcox’s opinion, was taken in soluble form, probably 
between 1.30 p.m. (the time of lunch) and 6 p.m. The pain 
round the heart of which Mrs. Greenwood complained, accord- 
ing to her husband’s statement, was probably stomach pain 
arising from the effects of arsenic. The muscles were not 
examined, but witness stated that these must have contained 
a considerable amount of arsenic. The vomiting and 
diarrhoea would account for the disappearance of a certain 
quantity of the poison from the system. Using the Seddons 
case as a basis of calculation, the amount present in the 
muscles would have been, taking three-quarters as the factor 
for absorbed arsenic, 50 milligrams. This would bring the total 
amount of arsenic present at 68.07 milligrams, ¢.e., just over 
1 grain, and in addition arsenic would have been present 
in certain other organs which were not examined, such as 
the pancreas, skin, &. Dr. Willcox was convinced that a 
dose of at least 2 grains must have been swallowed by Mrs. 
Greenwood within twenty-four hours of her death, which 
would have been a possible fatal dose for a woman. If her 
heart were weak, and her general state of health indifferent, 
she would have less resistance to poison, and a small dose 
would operate more rapidly and fatally in her case than in 
that of a robust person.* 

For the defence Lieutenant-Colonel Toogood, toxicologist to 
the London County Council, gave as his opinion that Mrs. 
Greenwood’s death was due to morphia poisoning, following 
an acute attack of gastro-enteritis, set up by swallowing 


* Tt is a well-known characteristic of poisoners to ‘‘ mak’ siccar ”’ 
by giving their victims an extravagantly large dose, as witness the 
cases of Mrs. Armstrong, Mrs. Crippen, and Miss Barrow. The 
Crown never attempted to explain how Greenwood, who was no 
toxicologist, poisoned the bottle of burgundy with an accuracy and 
skill that would have been required by an expert in order to ensure 
that each glass of wine should contain two grains of arsenic, the 
minimum fatal dose. 


42 


Introduction. 


gooseberry skins. Diarrhea would be the earliest symptom, 
whereas in a case of arsenical poisoning vomiting was more 
likely to commence first. Under the circumstances witness 
would not have expected to find traces of morphia in the 
intestines so long after death as ten months. A lengthy, 
persistent, and thorough cross-examination of this witness by 
Sir Edward Marlay Samson elicited a good many facts which 
tended to weaken the effect of Dr. Toogood’s evidence on the 
jury’s minds. He admitted that the suggestion of arsenic 
being accidentally absorbed by inhalation was only made by 
him a day or two previously, that he was not an analytical 
chemist, had had no experience in calculating amounts by the 
Marsh test, and therefore was in no position to challenge 
the figures given by the Crown experts. 

Dr. William Griffiths, of Swansea, contended for the de- 
fence that the finding of a quarter of a grain of arsenic in the 
viscera of a dead body was not conclusive evidence that it had 
been the cause of death. A living body could, and often did, 
contain 24 grains of arsenic without any injurious effect to 
the person’s health. The witness was of opinion that Mrs. 
Greenwood died from morphia poisoning, her death from this 
cause being contributed to by the state of her heart and 
generally impaired health. 

Eleventh-hour theories on the part of the defence to account 
for the small quantity of arsenic found in the body were— 


That it had been absorbed by inhalation when Mrs. 
Greenwood was walking in a part of the garden where 
weed-killer had been sprayed on the paths. 

That it had been taken in glucose. 

That Dr. Griffiths had accidentally administered 
Fowler’s solution of arsenic, instead of bismuth. 

- That during gardening operations the gooseberry skins 
had been sprayed with weed-killer containing arsenic.* 


Wil 


No definite conclusion was ever arrived at as to what this 
unfortunate woman really died of. The question of whether 
her husband had poisoned her was settled by the jury’s 

* This theory was quite untenable owing to the fact of the goose- 


berry tart having been eaten by other people in the house who 
experienced no ill-effects afterwards. é 


Harold Greenwood. 


verdict, but the actual cause of her death remains in dis- 
pute to this hour. She was admittedly, as proved by the 
evidence of several independent witnesses, in failing health for 
some time. She had eaten an indigestible meal on a hot day, 
after over-exerting herself the previous afternoon. Her heart 
may have ceased quietly to perform its functions owing to the 
strain put upon it through a gastric attack. The defence’s 
theory of morphia poisoning was more or less upset by Dr. 
Griffiths’s unexpected admission that he had not given her 
morphia. On the other hand, it was never cleared up exactly 
what he did give her. She relapsed into coma, followed by 
death, shortly after taking the pills. For the Crown theory of 
death by arsenical poisoning, while her symptoms were those 
associated with the taking of arsenic, they were also the 
ordinary symptoms of internal disorder caused by unsuit- 
able food. She suffered from vomiting and purging, but not 
to an extent to alarm either the doctor, her husband, her 
friend, or her daughter. The nurse confessed to feeling 
concerned about these symptoms—but on account of the state 
of the patient’s heart.* She was a devotee of patent 
medicines, and the question of what she was in the habit of 
taking, apart from Dr. Griffiths’s prescriptions, was scarcely 
touched upon by the authorities who were inquiring into her 
death. 

A great crime is sometimes easier to condone and under- 
stand than an error of taste. Harold Greenwood would in 
all probability never have found himself in the dock on the 
capital charge had it not been for the haste attending his 
second marriage. The inference was that he had not loved 
his first wife when he replaced her so speedily. From not 
loving her it was only a step to the suggestion that he was 
tired of being tied to an invalidish woman, and had sought 
his freedom. Kidwelly gossip tried and condemned him 
months before that long ordeal at Carmarthen. As chorus to 
the main tragedy, village cackle, the exchange of theories and 
ideas, growing wilder and more inaccurate at each repeti- 


* Nurse Jones stated : ‘‘ I would have treated the case much more 
seriously if the doctor had not said that she had been like that many 
times before.”’ Dr. Griffiths stated that he was accustomed to treat Mrs. 
Greenwood for bilious and gastric attacks, to which she was very 
subject, and that her fatal illness commenced in precisely the same 
way as these. 


44 


Introduction. 


tion, the misdating of letters, conversations, and confidences, 
played their dangerous parts. It is ironical that a woman 
whom every one liked should have been the centre of so 
much that was ugly and distressing and untrue. 

The evidence of one of the chief witnesses for the Crown— 
the parlourmaid, Hannah Maggie Williams—was well summed 
up by The Times in its leading article on the case as 
“hesitating and indefinite.’? It should, however, be re- 
membered that the girl was more accustomed to Welsh than 
English, that Sir Edward Marshall Hall’s manner in cross- 
examining the Crown witnesses was such as to call down 
repeated requests from the judge that he would refrain from 
““ shouting at,’’ ‘‘ bullying,’’ and “‘ pitching into ”’ them, 
that she was being questioned as to events which had taken 
place nearly eighteen months previously. Her own admission, 
**T cannot remember everything,’’ when she was taxed with 
inaccuracy or contradiction of previous statements, was 
probably the stark truth. She left Rumsey House on the 
Tuesday following Mrs. Greenwood’s funeral, on the morning 
of which several people in the house maintained that they 
saw her under the influence of drink. Mrs. Greenwood told 
the cook that she had given Hannah Williams notice for 
coming in late at night. The servant denied this, saying 
that her aunt required her for haymaking, and she had 
given notice for her niece to Mrs. Greenwood. On the other 
hand, Benjamin Williams, the odd-job gardener, stated that 
the girl had asked him to request Mrs. Greenwood to keep 
her, as she was one of a large family and did not want to lose 
a good place. Since her departure from Rumsey House, 
either voluntarily or because Greenwood, after his wife’s 
death, did not retain her services, she had been employed as 
general servant and nurse by a Mrs. Morris, to whose house 
in Alstread Street, Kidwelly, she went on 3rd July, 1919. 
Sir Edward Marshall Hall, alluding to her appearance in the 
witness-box, referred to her as ‘‘ poor, little, frightened 
thing,’’ charmingly oblivious of the fact that his own method 
of cross-examination was enough to alarm the stoutest- 
hearted. To the end she adhered with stubborn persistence 
to her story that Greenwood had spent at least half an hour 


in the china pantry, before lunch on the fatal Sunday, and 
45 


Harold Greenwood. 


that she had not known of his going there to wash his hands 
as a regular practice. 

Last of all, from the tangle of lies, misrepresentations, 
gossip, evil speaking, and the frantic twisting of the truth 
by jealous or ignorant women, we come to the figure of Irene 
Greenwood. Her position was singular and pathetic. Her 
mother’s death and the speedy advent of a stepmother 
deprived her of a home. Her father was responsible for the 
latter event, if not for the former, so that her feelings towards 
him were hardly likely to make her anxious to perjure herself 
on his account. As regards her relations with both her 
parents, Hannah Williams stated: ‘‘ So far as I could judge, 
Miss Irene was on equally as good terms with her mother as 
she was with her father.’’ Miss Phillips was questioned by 
both counsel for the Crown and for the defence on this point. 
In answer to Sir Edward Marlay Samson’s query: ‘* Did you 
form any opinion as to Irene’s attitude towards her 
mother? ’’ the witness replied: ‘‘I do not know what to 
say. I do not think there was quite as much affection as 
between some mothers and daughters. I do not think she 
was specially fond of her mother.’’ In reply to Sir Edward 
Marshall Hall, Miss Phillips said that Irene did not show 
much affection to her mother, but on the night of Mrs. 
Greenwood’s death she was ‘‘ very good to her.’’ Irene’s rela- 
tions with her father are best described in her own words, 
deeply pathetic in the light of after-events. ‘‘ Daddy was: 
always good to us. We were always together.”’ 

As Sir Edward Marshall Hall pointed out grimly to the 
jury, Greenwood, whether condemned or acquitted, was a 
ruined man. Counsel sought to play upon the feelings of the 
twelve arbiters in his client’s fate by a moving reference to 
Greenwood’s children. Should he be found guilty and hanged 
for the murder of their mother, their fate was to be over- 
shadowed all their lives by his crime. Irene Greenwood 
brought the case to an end by her declaration upon oath 
that she drank twice of wine on the fatal Sunday from the 
bottle alleged to have contained the poison. Sir Edward 
Marlay Samson, after her evidence, if accepted as true, 
had shattered the Crown theory as to how the poison was 
administered, made a further suggestion that wine was not 


the only liquid drunk by Mrs. Greenwood within twelve hours 
46 


Introduction, 


of her death. She had taken tea, brandy, and medicine, any 
one of which might have been the vehicle that contained the 
poisonous weed-killer. 

Miss Greenwood was the last witness called for the defence. 
At the conclusion of her evidence the judge said that he hoped 
the case might finish on Monday, and the Court accordingly 
adjourned until 10 o’clock on that morning. The chief points 
for the jury to consider, Mr. Justice Shearman added, were: 
Was there arsenic in the body? Was the accused intentionally 
responsible for introducing it there? If the jury thought that 
he was not, there was an end of the case. If they did think 
it, the next question to be asked was: Did the arsenic produce 
death? If it did, it was murder; if not, it was attempted 
murder. The judge did not know if the prosecution had 
considered that. Sir Edward Marshall Hall replied that the 
defence contended that Greenwood never administered arsenic 
at all. 

Public interest in the case had increased rather than 
diminished as the trial proceeded. On Monday, 8th 
November, the crowds both outside and inside the Guildhall 
were greater than on any of the preceding days. The con- 
trast which all along had been marked between the prose- 
cuting and defending counsel appeared even more significant 
in the concluding speech of each. Sir Edward Marlay 
Samson had remained calm, confident, speaking in a cool, 
dignified, unruffled way every time, whether he addressed a 
witness, the jury, or the bench. Only once throughout the 
hearing did he betray the smallest trace of irritability at 
the repeated interruptions from the other side. The judge 
administered the mildest of oblique rebukes by reminding 
the learned counsel that his lordship had already told every- 
body in the case not to get excited. This was a liberal inclu- 
sion of the white sheep with the black, the only person who 
had required and received the admonition incessantly being 
Sir Edward Marshall Hall. Sir Edward Marlay Samson 
rejoined solemnly, ‘‘1 don’t think I ever get excited, my 
lord.’’ 

Sir Edward Marshall Hall, on the other hand, played to 
the gallery for all the case was worth. His dramatic appeals 
to the jury, his constant reminder in cross-examining the 


unhappy Crown witnesses that ‘‘ Mr. Greenwood is here for 
47 


Harold Greenwood. 


his life,’ ‘‘ I am defending a man on trial for his life,”’ 
his encounters, frequent and heated, with the judge, his 
violent manner, excitable and intimidating, at every con- 
tested point or contrary opinion, were all bound to have 
their effect on any towards whom they were directed. His 
final speech to the jury lasted for three hours and a quarter, 
He was alternately passionate and pleading, his utterance 
rapid, but his matter concise, logical, and closely reasoned. 
The speech was delivered in circumstances of physical dis- 
comfort and distress, which prevented Greenwood’s advocate 
remaining in Court to hear Sir Edward Marlay Samson. 
The latter spoke with a low-toned quiet that was strikingly 
different from the fiery oratory of his opponent. His last 
address to the jury occupied over three hours. It was con- 
cluded in almost complete darkness, the November night 
brooding outside, two gas-jets flickering inside, affording 
inadequate illumination, the whole effect adding to the 
tension of the circumstances. 

A vast amount was made afterwards of the defending 
counsel’s state of health, his immense effort to do justice to 
his client—a member of his own profession—while suffering 
great physical pain. It was not generally known at the 
time, but the burden on the shoulders of Sir Edward Marlay 
Samson was even heavier. Though the fact only crept into 
a few of the local newspapers, he was far from well, and, 
in addition to this handicap, found himself placed in the very 
unusual position of having to open the case for the Crown in 
another murder trial, the ‘‘ Cross Hands *’ tragedy, while the 
jury in the Greenwood one were still out deliberating on their 
verdict. Sir Edward’s handling of the Crown case in the 
latter, scrupulously fair, moderate, and impartial, was in 
keeping with the great traditions of the English Bar, and 
added largely to his reputation. He was out to find the 
truth, not to hunt down Greenwood. In these trying and 
tangled circumstances it is scarcely surprising that so eminent 
a counsel forgot the provisions of the Criminal Evidence 
Act, and in his last address to the jury commented on the 
defence’s not having placed Gladys Greenwood in the witness- 
box in order to substantiate her husband’s statement as to 
their relations prior to the marriage. Sir Edward desired to 
withdraw the observation next day, although, curiously 

48 


“ATJPMply ‘esnoyzy Assuny 


Introduction. 
enough, it had escaped the notice of the learned judge 
and counsel present at the time.* 

Mr. Justice Shearman was commendably fair throughout. 
At the close of Crown counsel’s address he spoke a few words 
to the jury before the Court adjourned until the next morn- 
ing. They must avoid side-issues, and concentrate wholly 
upon the guilt or innocence of the prisoner. They must not 
allow any personal dislike of him to bias their judgment. 
They must not let their verdict be influenced by popular 
opinion or what people would like. These few grave sen- 
tences, delivered in the unlighted Court, with the November 
dusk thickening, were deeply impressive. Afterwards an 
adjournment was made in complete darkness. The summing- 
up the following morning was in the direction of an acquittal, 
though his lordship scrupulously refrained from biassing the 
jury. They retired to consider their verdict at twenty 
minutes past 1 on Tuesday, 9th November. At seven minutes 
to 4 they returned, bringing a verdict of ‘‘ Not guilty.’ 
Greenwood was formally discharged, the jury’s decision 
having been received in Court with some cheering, instantly 
suppressed. A mistaken impression prevailed, and found its 
way into several of the newspapers, that Mr. Justice Shear- 


* During the trial of John Alexander Dickman at Newcastle 
Assizes in July, 1910, Mr. Tindal Atkinson, K.C., who led for the 
Crown, in his final address to the jury commented upon the prisoner’s 
failure to call his wife as a witness with reference to certain stains 
on a garment which Dickman alleged she had _ cleaned. Lord 
Coleridge, the presiding judge, in his summing-up alluded to counsel’s 
slip, and desired the jury to banish it from their minds, and not to 
allow it in any way to influence their verdict. The foreman replied 
that, so far from this being the case, the matter referred to had not 
been mentioned during their deliberations. The Lord Chief Justice 
in the Court of Criminal Appeal stated : ‘‘ With regard to the point 
based on the comment made as to the not calling Mrs. Dickman to 
speak to the stains on the coat, it must be remembered that it 
had been withdrawn from the jury, and they indeed stated that 
they had not even spoken about it, so that it was impossible for 
the Court to support the contention that there was a mistrial. It 
was an accidental slip, such as must often occur, and its effect, 
if any, was removed before the verdict was given.’’—(Trial of John 
Alexander Dickman. Edited by 8. O. Rowan-Hamilton, Notable 
British Trials Series. ] 


+ Mr. Greenwood’s nervous system seems to have been nearly 
as unimpaired as that of the late Miss Madeleine Smith after 
passing through a similar ordeal. The day following his acquittal 
he entertained the representative of a local newspaper to lunch at 
Rumsey House, and joked about the absence of burgundy from the 
table ! 

E 49 


Harold Greenwood. 


man stated that he agreed with the jury’s finding. The 
learned judge said nothing of the kind, and was merely 
replying to a question by a juryman as to whether he and 
his colleagues could be exempted from further service for a 
period of years. 

Next morning the leading London and provincial dailies, 
as well as a host of lesser journals, devoted long articles to 
the Greenwood case. The note of most of the newspapers 
was satisfaction at the outcome of the trial, congratulations 
upon the vindication of an innocent and much-maligned 
individual, coupled with sharp and, in some instances, unfair 
criticism of the Crown’s handling of the case. One influential 
organ openly wondered that the acquitted man had ever been 
put on his trial with such flimsy grounds for the accusation. 
This universal outburst of journalistic jubilation would have 
been considerably modified had a certain fact then been made 
public. This was the weighty addition to the jury’s finding 
of ‘‘ Not guilty ’’ of a supplementary and written verdict. 
It had been the intention of their foreman, Mr. E. Willis 
Jones, to read this out when asked by the Clerk of the Court 
to state whether or not the jury found the prisoner guilty 
of the crime with which he stood charged. The foreman hav- 
ing replied to the question, ‘* Not guilty,’”’ did not amplify 
the spoken verdict, but a paper containing a fuller statement 
was handed by him up to the judge. It ran as follows :— 


“* We are satisfied on the evidence in this case that a 
dangerous dose of arsenic was administered to Mabel Green- 
wood on Sunday, 15th June, 1919, but we are not satisfied 
that this was the immediate cause of death. 

‘* The evidence before us is insufficient, and does not 
conclusively satisfy us as to how, and by whom, the arsenic 
was administered. We therefore return a verdict of ‘ Not 
guilty.’.’"* 


Upon close examination, the verdict will be seen to be 
just and impartial. Undoubtedly arsenic was found in Mrs. 
Greenwood’s body, but whether she had come to her death 


* An almost identical verdict was returned at the trial of Adelaide 
Bartlett in 1886 on a charge of poisoning her husband with liquid 
chloroform, with the addition that the jury considered that grave 
suspicion attached to the prisoner. (Trial of Adelaide Bartlett. 
Edited by Sir John Hall, Notable British Trials Series.) 

50 


Introduction. 


exclusively through its agency must always remain a matter 
for controversy. That somebody inside Rumsey House cer- 
tainly administered a dose of arsenic to her, probably within 
twelve hours of her end, is an undisputed fact, but the 
precise means by which she was induced to swallow the poison 
continues in doubt, as well as whether she actually died 
through its sole operation. So much contradictory evidence 
was brought forward in connection with the pills alleged to 
have been given by Dr. Griffiths, and the charge that they 
were harmful to a person in Mrs. Greenwood’s state was to 
some extent substantiated by the medical experts for the 
defence. The appalling possibility of the accidental substi- 
tution by the same hand of Fowler’s solution of arsenic instead 
of bismuth could not be overlooked. Nevertheless, the above 
verdict very considerably takes away the satisfaction of a 
complete and thorough acquittal. In effect it implies that 
Mrs. Greenwood was poisoned by an unnamed person—her 
husband purposely, Dr. Griffiths accidentally, being the only 
individuals possible—through means impossible to locate, and 
that, though her actual death may have been occasioned other- 
wise (2.e., by the morphia pills), she would undoubtedly have 
died through arsenical poisoning, but definite proof was lack- 
ing that she actually did. 

Mr. Justice Shearman did not disclose the written verdict, 
although it was manifestly the intention of the jury that it 
should be made public. Its existence came to the knowledge 
of counsel for the Crown, and the following morning an 
application was made in private to the judge that this might 
be done. The judge declined to accede to the request, and 
the matter being subsequently brought to the notice of Sir 
Archibald Bodkin, he communicated with Mr. Justice Shear- 
man with a view to the publication of this written verdict, 
but the judge again refused his consent. It is now made 
public for the first time in accordance with the original 
intention of the jury in the case, and with the permission 
and approval of their foreman, Sir Edward Marlay Samson, 
and Sir Archibald Bodkin. 


Leecens pe) mente see mma 


f: fi 


ae 


RAY W Ve ‘Se 


\e | 


Harold Greenwood. 


Vill. 


In the Armstrong case Sir Henry Curtis Bennett, who de- 
fended Armstrong, was so confident of an acquittal for his 
client that he left the Court during the closing scenes, and 
returned, fully expecting to meet Armstrong, a free man. 
Instead, he was greeted by the cries of the newsboys calling 
the verdict in the Hereford streets. Sir Edward Marshall 
Hall, who had been in a state of health that to some extent 
excuses his irritability throughout the Greenwood trial, was. 
not present at the conclusion, and heard the verdict from 
a porter when he was awaiting the London train at 
Cardiff Station. In connection with Sir Edward’s absence 
from Court on the last day of Greenwood’s trial, a story has 
been circulated that his client refused to pay a ‘‘ refresher ”’ 
for this on the ground that the counsel had omitted to attend. 
The tale has recently been published in the lately issued 
Life of Sir Hdward Marshall Hall, by Edward Marjoribanks, 
with the addition that Greenwood was the one individual de- 
fended by Marshall Hall who never wrote to express any 
gratitude after his acquittal. This must rest unchallenged * 
and uncontradicted, as both counsel and client are dead, but 
the facts about the unpaid ‘‘ refresher’’ are briefly as 
follows, stated on the authority of Mr. Ludford, Greenwood’s 
solicitor :— 

Sir Edward Marshall Hall undertook the defence of Green- 
wood on the undermentioned terms: Brief, 200 guineas, plus 
100 special and 50 guineas a day refresher. The trial com- 
menced on Tuesday, 2nd November, 1920, and terminated on 
the following Tuesday, six refreshers therefore being due. 
The total fees, including six refreshers, with consultations 
came to £759 15s., and were promptly paid. A special visit 
to Carmarthen by Sir Edward Marshall Hall, who considered 
that a personal consultation with his client before the trial 
was vitally necessary, cost £67 10s., and is included in the 
above figure. 


After the acquittal of Greenwood, a suggestion was made 


* Since the above was first written I am informed by Mr. Lud- 
ford that Mr. Majoribanks has examined the fee books of the late 
Sir Edward Marshall Hall, and admits that there is not a word of 
truth in the story, and he is prepared to delete it from any future 
editions of his book. 


52 


Introduction. 


by Marshall Hall’s clerk that, in view of the way Greenwood 
had been met over the brief fee, the strain on Sir Edward, 
and that he had to refuse all briefs during the trial, an 
additional sum might be paid as a Sunday refresher and 
amended refreshers. The matter subsequently dropped, but 
may possibly have been the foundation for the story of the 
unpaid refresher. Greenwood, not unnaturally, thought it 
unfair and unheard-of for counsel to ask for extra or addi- 
tional fees after the verdict. He was, in any case, hardly 
in a position to supply these. His solicitor’s practice was 
gone, and his financial circumstances precarious, despite the 
sum * offered him by an enterprising journal if, in the event 
of his acquittal, he would write the story of his life for this 


paper. 
IX. 


Some seventeen months after the conclusion of the Green- 
wood trial the British public’s appetite for sensationalism 
was agreeably whetted by another case which presented extra- 
ordinarily similar features. Herbert Rowse Armstrong,t like 
Greenwood, was a country solicitor, practising in a South 
Wales county, adjacent to Carmarthenshire. The position in 
life of each was very much akin. Armstrong was tried for 
an identical crime by exactly the same means—the murder 
of his wife by arsenical poisoning, the poison being obtained 
from weed-killer. The setting of the Armstrong tragedy was 
almost parallel with the Greenwood mystery, both taking 
place in a small village where everybody’s affairs were known 
to his neighbour. Armstrong, whose guilt was clearly brought 
home to him, owed it to Greenwood’s acquittal that in his 
own case the sword of justice so long delayed its fall. The 
Home Office, whose attention had been directed by a sharp- 
witted doctor to certain suspicious features in connection 
with Mrs. Armstrong’s death, hesitated to arrest her husband 
until every link in the chain of circumstantial evidence was 
firm between their fingers. The Crown authorities had been 
adversely criticised for their handling of the Greenwood case, 
notably for putting a man in the dock on the capital charge 


* £3600. 
+ Trial of Herbert Rowse Armstrong. Edited by Filson Young. 
Notable British Trials Series. pa 


Harold Greenwood. 


with such slender grounds for the accusation. They were 
not anxious to become a laughing-stock through a second 
ignominious blunder. Had it not been for Armstrong’s 
abortive attempt to poison a fellow-solicitor by the same 
means, thus arousing Dr. Hincks’s suspicions, his secret 
destruction of his unfortunate wife would probably never 
have been detected. 

The circumstances leading up to the two trials were almost 
identical, but the protagonists differed widely in their char- 
acters and conduct. Armstrong was cool, crafty, calculating, . 
and, up to a point, successful. The motive for the crime in 
his case was neither monetary nor sexual. There was some 
small financial benefit accruing to him through Mrs. Arm- 
strong’s death, but he had no entanglement with another 
woman beyond a vague friendship with a lady who gave 
evidence at his trial, and was meditating marrying him. 
Armstrong went smoothly on his way, a widower with young 
children, until his success with one crime overpersuaded him 
to essay a second on the same lines. Another curiously 
similar feature of his case to Greenwood’s was the important 
part played by a country practitioner in each. Dr. Hincks 
showed a courageous and commendable spirit in first suspect- 
ing and later bringing the criminal to justice. Dr. Griffiths 
had no suspicion that Mrs. Greenwood’s death was other 
than a natural one, and afforded a convenient scapegoat when 
the blame for it came to be discussed. 

The medical evidence at the two trials was the chief feature 
of both. In each the Crown sought to prove death by 
arsenical poisoning. The body of Mrs. Armstrong, exhumed 
ten months after death, was found to contain over 34 grains 
of arsenic, and evidence that she had swallowed at least 5 
grains of the poison within twenty-four hours of death. 
Mrs. Greenwood’s body, also buried ten months, only con- 
tained a little over a quarter of a grain of arsenic. Mrs. 
Armstrong, until her husband started his diabolical scheme of 
slowly poisoning her, was a comparatively healthy woman. 
Mrs. Greenwood, for months prior to her death, had been 
ailing and invalidish. Mrs. Armstrong had taken medicines 
that contained a small amount of arsenic. None of Dr. 
Griffith’s prescriptions for Mrs. Greenwood had at any time 


contained it. The defence in the Armstrong case was suicide. 
54 


Introduction. 


It was not attempted to deny, save by an eleventh-hour theory 
of the defence, speedily shown to be fantastic and valueless, 
that Mrs. Armstrong had died of arsenical poisoning, but 
the defence strove to prove that she had taken the poison 
intentionally herself. This was revealed as a physical impossi- 
bility, seeing that for several days prior to her death she could 
neither leave her bed nor feed herself. In Mrs. Greenwood’s 
case the more ingenious defence was urged that her death 
was due to morphia poisoning through the carelessness of 
Dr. Griffiths, who administered two pills containing the drug. 
When Dr. Griffiths exploded this theory by a_ belated 
admission in the witness-box that the pills under discussion 
had not been morphia pills, but opium, the defence still 
stuck to its guns. Medical experts called and examined swore 
that to the best of their belief and knowledge Mrs. Green- 
wood had died from morphia poisoning, notwithstanding 
the absence of any traces of the drug from the organs 
analysed. Mrs. Armstrong’s case was a comparatively 
straightforward one compared with Mrs. Greenwood’s. From 
the first the medical experts on both sides were in entire 
agreement as to the cause of death. It was arsenical poison- 
ing, without controversy or possibility of doubt. In Mrs. 
Greenwood’s case the presence of a minute quantity of arsenic 
in the organs was not denied by either side, but each battled 
fiercely over the question of its being sufficient or insufficient 
to have caused death. The Crown doctors contended that it 
was, and had in fact done so. The medical men called for 
the defence argued that a fatal dose had not been swallowed, 
and that Sir Edward Marshall Hall’s theories of absorption 
by inhaling or swallowing in glucose were not impossible or 
untenable to account for the presence of even so small an 
amount as a quarter of a grain. The conclusion of the 
Armstrong case left the public mind satisfied that justice had 
been done. The end of the Greenwood trial found most people 
puzzled, bewildered, disappointed, and annoyed.  Green- 
wood was condemned for marrying again with what looked 
like indecorous haste as much as for his first wife’s mysterious 
end. Each trial, interesting from a pathological, physio- 
logical, medical, and social point of view, showed more than 
one disquieting X-ray glimpse into the sordidness of our 


human nature. As usually happens with a murder, the 
55 


Harold Greenwood. 


victim in both cases was a shadowy figure around whose poor 
ghost hovered the ugly realities of her survivor’s and 
destroyer’s subsequent acts. Mrs. Armstrong was admittedly 
peculiar and trying. Mrs. Greenwood was much liked and 
universally regretted by her circle of friends. The martyr- 
dom of the one at her husband’s hands lasted for months in 
a manner reminiscent of the case of Mrs. Pritchard, and 
culminated in days and nights of agony only comparable 
to the sufferings of the wretched victim in the Seddons 
case. Mrs. Greenwood’s short illness was so far free from. 
dangerous or disquieting symptoms that four hours before 
she died her daughter went to bed at her mother’s suggestion, 
and her friend, apparently reassured, returned home. 

There is much in the Greenwood case that can never be 
brought to light here. Did Mrs. Greenwood die of arsenical 
poisoning, morphia poisoning, or from natural causes? Who 
was responsible for the first rumour that her easily-consoled 
husband’s had been the hand that dealt death? Which spoke 
the truth on oath—Irene Greenwood, who swore that she 
drank burgundy at lunch and supper, or Miss Phillips, who 
swore that there was no wine on the supper-table? Were 
the loss of over £600 a year, the companionship of a con- 
siderate and affectionate wife, the awful risk of the gallows, 
worth contemplating for the charms of a woman of past thirty, 
a lifelong acquaintance, without money or expectations? It 
was argued in the case of Dr. Pritchard that he had no 
motive for murdering his wife, yet murder may be committed 
without apparent motive, as instanced by Herbert Rowse 
Armstrong. 

It is possible that had the Greenwood case been tried in 
Scotland the verdict would have been ‘‘ Not proven.’’ Despite 
the jury’s finding, local believers in Harold Greenwood’s 
guilt remained, like the unconvinced lady in the rhyme, “ of 
the same opinion still.’’ Guilty or innocent, the mind shrinks 
from contemplating the fate which followed him. He suffered 
outlawry, ostracism, exile from everything that he had 
hitherto known and enjoyed. The words of his counsel touch- 
ing his social and professional ruin, whatever the outcome 
of the trial, became singularly true. The other figures of the 
story who had come under the fierce searchlight of publicity 


went back to obscurity, and stayed in obscurity. The chief 
56 


Introduction. 


actor in the brief drama vanished, following an abortive 
attempt to take up his old life. Twice after his acquittal 
the name of Harold Greenwood appeared again in the news- 
papers. In March, 1922, he was plaintiff in a successful 
libel action which he took against a firm of waxwork pro- 
prietors who exhibited him in effigy. Eight years and two 
months from his sensational trial a brief paragraph in a few 
daily journals announced the death on 17th January, 1929, 
at a little-known Herefordshire village, of a man of fifty- 
four who, dogged by poverty, notoriety, and ill-health, had 
lived there under the name of Pilkington. Harold Green- 
wood, whose fame was once on everybody’s lips, had made his 
last bow and exit from a world that had offered him little 
and deprived him of much. If innocent, his was a more than 
Greek fate. 


57 


1872 
1874 
1896 
1898 


1916 
1917 


1918 


1918 


1919 


58 


Leading Dates in the Greenwood Case. 


2 July 


November 
2 and 8 June 


13 December 
February-May 
5 June 
9 June 

12 June 


13 June 
14 June 


15 June 


16 June 


16 June 


16 June 
19 June 
24 June 


Birth of Mabel Bowater. 

Birth of Harold Greenwood. 

Harold Greenwood and Mabel Bowater married. 

Mr. and Mrs. Greenwood go to live at Broomhill, 
Kidwelly. 

Greenwood buys a solicitor’s practice at Llanelly and 
becomes acquainted with Mr. W. B. Jones and 
his family. 

The Greenwoods go to live at Rumsey House, Kidwelly. 

Greenwood buys Cooper’s Weedicide and signs the 
poison book. 

Gladys Jones spends a week-end (possibly two) at 
Rumsey House during Mrs. Greenwood’s absence 
from home. 

Greenwood and Gladys Jones purchase together a 
lady’s dressing bag. 

Greenwood makes two purchases of weed-killer on 
2lst February and 22nd April, and receives same 
on 2nd May. 

Greenwood writes to Miss David. 

Mrs. Greenwood and Miss Griffiths have tea together 
at an Histeddfod at the Castle. 

Mrs. Greenwood attends an antiquarian meeting at 
Kidwelly Town Hall. 

Mrs. Greenwood is fitted for a new dress. 

Mrs. Greenwood buys a bottle of burgundy at the 
Pheenix Stores, Kidwelly. In the afternoon she 
attends a tennis meeting at Ferryside with the 
Rey. Ambrose Jones. 

Mrs. Greenwood spends the morning in the garden. 
She is taken ill in the garden about 6 p.m. 

Mrs. Greenwood dies at 3.30 a.m. Her death is 
certified by Dr. Griffiths as due to valvular 
disease of the heart. 

Nurse Jones has an important conversation with the 
vicar about 8 a.m. 


Miss Bowater returns to Rumsey House. 
Mrs. Greenwood buried in Kidwelly Churchyard. 
Hannah Williams leaves Rumsey House. 


1919 


1920 


4 July 
12 July 
24 September 


26 September 
1 October 
October 
24 October 


31 October 


Christmas 
9 March 
22 March 


16 April 
17 April 


15 and 16 June 


17 June 


25 June 

1-3 July 
3 July 
2 November 
9 November 


16 November 


17 January 


Leading Dates—continued. 


Greenwood orders a diamond ring for £55. 

Greenwood proposes marriage to Gladys Jones. 

Greenwood intimates his intention of marrying Gladys 
Jones at the Bryn Chapel, Llanelly. 

Greenwood writes to Miss Griffiths. 

Marriage of Greenwood and Gladys Jones. 

Irene Greenwood leaves Rumsey House. 

Superintendent Jones visits Greenwood’s office and 
takes a statement from him. 

Further visit from Superintendent Jones and another 
statement taken. 

Irene Greenwood returns to Rumsey House. 

The Chief Constable reports to the Home Office. 

The Secretary of State, having consulted the Director 
of Public Prosecutions, advises an immediate 
report to the coroner of the facts concerning 
Mrs. Greenwood’s death. 

Mrs. Greenwood’s body exhumed. Inquest opened. 

Organs removed from Mrs. Greenwood’s body sub- 
mitted to the Home Office experts for analysis. 
Arsenic subsequently found by Mr. Webster and 
Dr. Willcox. 

Adjourned inquest held at Kidwelly Town Hall. Jury 
return a verdict of death from arsenical poisoning, 
the poison administered by Harold Greenwood. 
Greenwood arrested. 

Greenwood appears before the Llanelly magistrates 
and is remanded. 

Greenwood further remanded. 

Proceedings before the magistrates. 

Greenwood committed for trial. 

Greenwood’s trial opens at Carmarthen Assizes. 


Verdict of ‘*Not 


Greenwood’s trial concluded. 
guilty.” 

Mr. Justice Shearman declines the request that the 
jury’s written verdict should be made public. 

Death of Harold Greenwood at The Paddock, Walford, 


Ross-on-Wye, Herefordshire. 


59 


THE TRIAL 


WITHIN THE 
GUILDHALL, CARMARTHEN, 
CARMARTHEN ASSIZES, 


TUESDAY, 2np NOVEMBER, 1920. 


Judge— 
Mr. JUSTICE SHEARMAN. 


Counsel for the Crown— 


Sir Epwarp Mariay Samson, K.C., and 
Mr. WILFRID LEwiIs. 
(Instructed by the Director of Public Prosecutions.) 


Counsel for the Defence— ‘ 
Sir Epwarp MarsHaLtt HAtt, K.C., and 
Mr. TrREvoR HUNTER. 
(Instructed by Mr. T. R. Ludford.) 


Also in attendance— 


Mr. Clark Williams, who held a watching brief 
on behalf of an interested party. 


First Day—Tuesday, 2nd November, 1920. 


Haroup GreENWooD, forty-six, solicitor, of Llanelly and 
Kidwelly, was indicted for the wilful murder of Mabel 
Greenwood on 16th June, 1919. 

The accused pleaded ‘‘ Not guilty.”’ 


[Sir Martay Samson, before proceeding to address the 
jury,* asked that all the witnesses, except the two experts, 
Dr. Willcox and Mr. Webster, should leave the Court. 

Mr. Justice SHzarmMan—Do you also mean that Dr. Griffiths 
should leave the Court? 

Sir Mariay Samson—Yes, my lord. 

Mr. Justice SHeaRMan—It must be assumed that all 
witnesses who may be called for the defence should also 
leave the Court? 

Sir Martay Samson—Yes, my lord. 

All the witnesses then left the Court. ] 


Opening Speech for the Prosecution. 


Sir Maruay Samson—May it please your lordship— 
gentlemen of the jury, on 16th June, 1919, Mabel Green- 
wood, wife of the accused, died at Rumsey House, Kidwelly, 
at a quarter-past 3 in the morning. On 16th June, 1920, 
at half-past 3 in the afternoon, the accused, Harold 
Greenwood, was arrested and charged with wilfully murder- 
ing her by administering arsenic to her, and it is on that , 
charge he now stands before you. This case is one which 
will command the closest and most prolonged attention, not 
only because it is the gravest charge known to the law, but 
also because of the nature of the evidence on which you 
are asked to find the accused man guilty. The crime of 
administering poison is almost always a crime done in 
secret, and the evidence with regard to it is as a rule 
indirect evidence, and not the evidence of eye-witnesses. 
So it is in this case. 

The evidence which will be placed before you by the Crown 
is circumstantial, and not direct evidence incriminating 
the accused. Your attention will be directed to a series of 
events at the time of and after the fatal illness and death of 
Mabel Greenwood. From that series of events you will be 
asked by the Crown to say that the effect of them all on your 
minds is so convincing of the guilt of the accused as to lead 


* For list of jurymen see page 347. ce 


Harold Greenwood. 


Sir Marlay Samson 


you to the conclusion that he did, in fact, administer poison 
to his wife, from which she died. 

Before I deal with the facts of the case, it is my duty, 
as counsel for the Crown, to remind you that you must try 
the case on the evidence that you will hear in this Court. 
If there are any of you who have read or heard about the 
case before this day you must erase it from your minds. 
Let your minds from this moment be a blank as regards 
this case to all except what you hear in the box. It will 
be my duty to call before you all those witnesses who can 
help you to a just and true conclusion without regard to 
whether such evidence be for or against the prisoner. Whilst 
you will have to follow closely all the evidence, an inquiry 
such as this must necessarily depend on main points on 
which you will have to make up your minds. First of 
all, did Mabel Greenwood die of arsenic poisoning? If 
you say ‘‘ yes’’ to that question, you will have to ask 
yourselves, ‘‘ Was the poison taken by accident or by her 
voluntarily, or was it given to her by some person in 
order to encompass her death?’’ If you take the view 
that it was given by some person to encompass her death, 
you will have to ask yourselves this question, ‘‘ Did the 
accused give it to her?’’ The Crown allege that he did, 
and your attention will be particularly directed to the 
following considerations :— 


(1) What opportunities and means had the accused for 
administering the poison? 

(2) What motive had he for so doing? 

(3) What was his conduct before, during, and after the 
fatal illness and death of Mrs. Greenwood ? 


The accused, Harold Greenwood, is a solicitor, practising 
at Llanelly. For some years he has lived at Rumsey House, 
Kidwelly. He married Mabel Greenwood about twenty-three 
years ago. They had four children, of whom the eldest, a 
girl, twenty-two years of age, and a boy, fourteen years of 
age, were both at home at the time of the event that you will 
have to consider. The other children were away at that 
period. In addition to Mr. and Mrs. Greenwood and the 
four children, there was a member of the household, a Miss 
Bowater, a sister of the dead woman, who shared the house 
and contributed towards the expenses of the establishment. 
There were three women servants and a gardener outside. 
Mrs. Greenwood was forty-seven years old when she died. 
She was a delicate woman, and for some years before her 
death she had sought medical advice from Dr. Griffiths, of 
Kidwelly. She was liable to fainting fits owing to her weak- 
ness, and Dr. Griffiths will tell you that in the three months 

64 


Opening Speech for Prosecution. 


Sir Marlay Samson 


preceding her death she was consulting him somewhat more 
frequently than at the earlier period of her history. Six 
or seven weeks before her death Dr. Griffiths was treating 
her for some internal trouble and a weak heart. He pre- 
scribed tonics for her. The doctor will tell you that none 
of the medicine that he ever prescribed contained arsenic. 
Mrs. Greenwood during the six weeks was undoubtedly in 
a weak state of health, but was able to go about. The doctor 
no doubt described her condition accurately when he said 
she was failing in health, but that she did not realise it. It 
is worthy of observation that during the six weeks preced- 
ing her death, and when her condition became markedly 
worse, her sister, Miss Bowater, was away from Rumsey 
House. Mrs. Greenwood discharged all her household duties, 
and she had not, in fact, paid any visit to Dr. Griffiths for 
two or three days before the date of her death on the morning 
of 16th June. 

Let us follow closely the events of those last two days. 
I will give you a clear story. On Saturday, 14th June, 
Mrs. Greenwood attended the tennis club at Ferryside, of 
which she was a member. She went there from Kidwelly 
with the vicar, the Rev. Ambrose Jones. She was with 
him for a considerable part of the afternoon, and she came 
back with him, and he will tell you that she was cheerful, 
that she took part in a business discussion at the club, 
and showed the greatest interest in the affairs of the club. 
She was seen on that evening by Miss Phillips, who was 
perhaps her most intimate friend, at Kidwelly, and Miss 
Phillips will tell you that on the Saturday she looked well 
and seemed to be in good spirits. On the Sunday morning 
Mabel Greenwood was not so well. No doubt, like 
many other persons who were in indifferent health, she 
had her good days and she had her bad days. She saw 
Miss Phillips, who will say that she looked ill and spoke in 
a low tone of voice. She did not notice anything else with 
regard to Mrs. Greenwood. Mrs. Greenwood asked Miss 
Phillips to come back to supper on that Sunday night, and, 
therefore, you may infer that on the Sunday morning Mrs. 
Greenwood had every expectation of being able to entertain 
her friend in the evening. Luncheon was served at Rumsey 
House on the Sunday about 1.30. The accused was there, 
Mrs. Greenwood was there, and Irene and Kenneth Green- 
wood, their children, were there. Those were the four people. 
The lunch consisted of roast beef, gooseberry tart, and 
custard, and it was laid by the parlourmaid, Hannah 
Williams. When it was necessary for her to lay the luncheon, 
she required the silver basket in order to put out spoons 
and forks, &c. To get the silver basket she had to go to what 
was called the china cupboard, which was at the other end 

F 65 


Harold Greenwood. 


Sir Marlay Samson 


of the passage, away from the dining-room. When she got 
to the china cupboard she saw that the accused was there. 
He remained there for about a quarter of an hour, and 
during that time she waited. She saw him go from the 
china cupboard into the dining-room. Mrs. Greenwood, 
according to the evidence, usually drank burgundy, and it 
is an undoubted fact that on the day before, Saturday, the 
14th, she bought a bottle of burgundy from the Phoenix 
Stores, Kidwelly. It was not ordinary burgundy, but it was 
wine supplied by Messrs. Gilbey, which was called ‘‘ Real Pure 
Wine,”’ and it had a red label. When Hannah Williams 
went to the cupboard in the dining-room she found what she 
thought was a bottle of wine with a red label on it. She 
noticed in particular that it was not a full bottle, but that 
some wine had been taken out, and, therefore, presumably 
somebody had drunk some of the wine or had emptied some 
of it out. She placed the bottle of wine before Mrs. Green- 
wood’s seat at the dining-table. She was present in the 
dining-room during the luncheon up to the time the sweets 
were eaten, and she will tell you that she, in fact, poured 
the wine from the bottle into Mrs. Greenwood’s glass, and 
that Mrs. Greenwood drank it. She will also tell you that 
the accused himself drank whisky and soda, and that Miss 
Irene Greenwood drank water. Hannah Williams cleared the 
luncheon away some time in the afternoon, and, having done 
that, she laid the table for supper, and put out the whisky 
and the same wine bottle as she had put out for the luncheon. 
At supper time the wine bottle had gone. Miss Phillips had 
been asked to supper by Mrs. Greenwood at Rumsey House 
that evening, and she will tell you that when she was there 
she saw no wine on the table, but she saw whisky at the 
end where Greenwood sat. She will say emphatically there 
was no bottle of wine there. Hannah Williams did not clear 
away the supper on the Sunday night; it was her evening 
out, and it is not known, in fact, who cleared the supper 
away. On the Monday she looked for the bottle of wine in 
the cupboard, but it was not there. She hag never seen it 
since, and, as far as is known, it has not been seen since 
by any one after it was in use at the luncheon when Mrs. 
Greenwood drank wine from it. Undoubtedly there were 
burgundy and port wine bottles at Rumsey House. About 
twelve months afterwards about 75 dozen empty bottles were 
taken away from there by a man who bought empties, and, 
there were many port wine bottles amongst them, and, there- 
fore, that raises the fair presumption that both burgundy 
and port wine were consumed from time to time at Rumsey 
House. 

In the light of that evidence, and what occurred later 
during the day, it is alleged on behalf of the Crown that 

66 


Opening Speech for Prosecution. 


Sir Marlay Samson 


that was the opportunity that the accused took to administer 
arsenic in the wine. His presence in the china cupboard, 
his presence in the dining-room, and the subsequent dis- 
appearance of the bottle of wine are all material facts for 
you to consider as evidence of the opportunities that he had 
to administer poison to his wife. 

After the luncheon on that Sunday Mrs. Greenwood went 
to le down, and the accused went to attend to the motor 
car. There was a man named Foy there that day, and he 
had arranged to give Miss Greenwood a lesson in driving 
a motor car. About 2.30 he saw Mrs. Greenwood sitting 
on the lawn, when he went out with the car, and, as far 
as he could say, she was well. He returned with Miss Green- 
wood about 4 o’clock. Somewhere about 3.30 Mrs. Green- 
wood came to the accused and complained that she was 
suffering from diarrhoea. She sat down on the lawn, and 
you will hear from the medical men that the onset of 
diarrhcea at about that time is one of the symptoms of 
arsenic poisoning. The accused told her that she ought 
not to have eaten gooseberry tart at luncheon, and it is a 
matter to notice that the suggestion that the diarrhoea from 
which she was suffering was due to the gooseberry tart came 
from the accused. 

About 4.30 tea was served in the drawing-room. I believe 
several members of the family were present, and, according 
to the account of that afternoon’s movements given by the 
accused afterwards to Superintendent Jones, Mrs. Green- 
wood hardly took any tea. [At this stage Sir E. Marshall 
Hall rose and said that he was going to challenge the 
accuracy of that statement which had been put in by the 
police, but as long as Sir Marlay Samson referred to it as 
an alleved statement he would not object. | 

Sir Marutay Samson—I shall be relying a good deal on 
that statement as presented by Superintendent Jones.* It is 
a fact that from 1.30 until 6.30 that night no evidence will 
be called as to happenings in the house, because the only 
people in the house were the Greenwood family and servants. 
The Crown is, therefore, relying on the statement that 
accused made to Superintendent Jones some time later, and 
in that statement Greenwood himself said that he had 
suggested that it was the gooseberry tart was the cause of 
the diarrhea. The Crown is dependent upon the statement 
made by Greenwood to the police officer. According to that 
statement Mrs. Greenwood had hardly any tea, and went to 
lie down. At 5.30 she was walking slowly up the garden 
with her daughter, and sat on the lawn. At 6 o’clock she 
was walking to the house with the accused, and, according 
to the accused’s account to the police officer, she then com- 


* See page 76. 67 


7 


Harold Greenwood. 


Sir Marlay Samson 


plained of suffocating pains in the heart. She was in great 
pain for some time, and, according to his account, the 
accused went to the house and brought her out some brandy. 
That was about 6 o’clock. Intense pains inside are also 
symptoms of arsenic poisoning. When the accused brought 
the brandy and gave it to her she was sick, and sickness 
on the taking of anything to eat or drink is again a symptom 
of arsenical poisoning. 

At=6.30, again according to the accused’s statement, she 
appeared to be feeling better, and about a quarter to 7 the 
accused went across the road to Dr. Griffiths, who was Mrs. 
Greenwood’s regular medical man. Dr. Griffiths’s house 
was about ten yards from Mr. Greenwood’s house, practi- 
cally opposite. When he got there he said to Dr. Griffiths, 
‘* My wife is not very well,’’ and so Dr. Griffiths went over 
at once. He found Mrs. Greenwood on a couch. She was 
feeling sick and had some pains in her stomach, and her 
heart was weak. She told the doctor that the gooseberry 
tart had upset her, thereby apparently accepting the sug- 
gestion the accused had made as to what was the cause of 
her illness. The doctor gave her sips of brandy and soda- 
water. Mrs. Greenwood had then got into bed. The accused 
did not tell Dr. Griffiths at that time that Mrs. Greenwood 
had suffered from diarrhoea in the afternoon, and it is for 
you to consider whether it was important that the doctor 
should have been told. It is the first symptom of arsenical 
poisoning. 

The doctor went downstairs with the accused, and both 
went into the garden, where the accused detained the doctor, 
and they played clock-golf on the lawn. The accused said 
he was anxious about his wife’s condition, and that he de- 
tained Dr. Griffiths for that reason. You will have to con- 
sider whether the course of his conduct during the evening 
was consistent with his alleged anxiety at 6.30. As a result 
of that detention in the garden, the doctor did not then 
return to his house, and it is an indisputable fact that 
no medicine was sent over to Mrs. Greenwood until later, 
when the doctor returned to his house at 7.30. In the light 
of later events you will have to consider whether Greenwood’s 
anxiety for his wife was really the cause of his detaining 
the doctor. The doctor, according to his evidence, did not 
then know of the diarrhoea. Greenwood did know. You 
will have to consider whether, in fact, the detention did 
result in no medicine reaching Mrs. Greenwood up to 7.30, 
and whether it would have been given at an earlier time 
if the doctor had not been detained. I submit that it is 
true to say that the obstruction of her receiving the medical 
aid which she might have had before 7.30 did take place. The 
doctor went up from the garden and saw her again. He 

68 


Opening Speech for Prosecution. 


Sir Marlay Samson 


thought she was easier, and went back to his house and sent 
over a bottle of bismuth mixture, which was intended to 
alleviate the sickness and gastric disturbance, and I suggest 
that it was important that Mrs. Greenwood should have 
had that bismuth mixture at the earliest possible moment. 
Into whose hands that mixture came at that moment I do 
not know. There is no question that the prisoner could have 
had access to it. 

At 7.15 that evening Miss Florence Phillips, who had been 
invited to supper, arrived at the house. The accused told 
her that his wife was ill, and told her to go upstairs. She 
went upstairs and saw Miss Irene Greenwood, and, in con- 
sequence of a statement made by Miss Irene, Miss Phillips 
went on her own account for District Nurse Jones. Miss 
Phillips will tell you that no one suggested that to her, and 
she did it of her own accord. This is important, because 
the accused, in a statement he afterwards made to the police 
superintendent, claimed the credit for having sent for the nurse. 

About 7.45 Miss Phillips and Nurse Jones had both got 
to Rumsey House. There was medicine there then, bismuth 
mixture, which had come over from Dr. Griffiths. The nurse 
found Mrs. Greenwood in a very serious condition. She 
was in a state of collapse, and she was feeling very cold. 
The vomiting continued, there were frequent periods, and 
this condition of things continued up to midnight. She 
complained of pains in the stomach. The medical men will 
tell you that that condition of things which the nurse found 
is precisely the form of illness and class of symptom that 
one might expect to find in any one who has been poisoned 
with arsenic. The nurse continued to give the patient sips 
of brandy. She put hot-water bottles wherever she could 
put them in order to maintain the heart action, and she 
gave Mrs. Greenwood some medicine. 

At 9 o’clock the nurse went home to put her little boy 
to bed. At 10 o’clock she was back at the house. Miss 
Phillips was still there, and Miss Irene Greenwood 
was also still there. She asked the accused to go for 
the doctor, and he went. You have to bear in mind that 
from 7.30 till 10 o’clock the doctor had not been there, and 
one would have thought that if Mrs. Greenwood had become 
so much worse the accused would have gone across to fetch 
the doctor before that. He went across and saw Miss 
Griffiths, the doctor’s sister, and a very remarkable con- 
versation took place. The accused told her that his wife 
was very ill and might not get over it. He said it was 
worse than one of her fainting fits, and he added that a 
fortune-teller had told him that he would be going for a 
honeymoon trip. Miss Griffiths will tell you that he was in 
his usual light spirits. How long exactly he stayed with 

69 


Harold Greenwood. 


Sir Marlay Samson 


Miss Griffiths is in dispute. Miss Griffiths says it was ten 
to fifteen minutes, and that he and the doctor went over at 
that time. 

It is very evident that the accused did not go back to 
the house until Miss Irene Greenwood had come from Rumsey 
House to fetch him. There were anxious watchers in the 
house. There were a nurse and Miss Florence Phillips, who 
was Mrs. Greenwood’s great friend, and she will tell you that 
they were very seriously concerned at the length of time 
the accused was away. They thought he was away nearly 
an hour, and that it was in consequence of that that Miss 
Irene Greenwood was sent to fetch him. There is undoubtedly 
a considerable discrepancy among the witnesses as to the 
particular time at which the accused went over to the 
doctor’s house and the time the doctor came back with 
him. Miss Phillips thinks it was about 9 o’clock. Miss 
Griffiths and Dr. Griffiths say it was 10 o’clock, and 
the nurse says it was nearly 11. I wish to make an observa- 
tion here in reference to the time on that night. It was 
very usual when a person was ill and might be dying that 
those persons present would have nothing in their minds 
except a concern for the patient, and it is very difficult 
to fix time and points of any particular event on such a 
night. If there were a discrepancy about the time, you will 
realise the difficulty when I point out that it was some months 
after that these particular witnesses had to direct their 
attention to this question, and had to speak to any particular 
times on the night in question. Even although there may be 
this difference about the time, there is one thing that they are 
all agreed upon—Dr. Griffiths, Miss Griffiths, the nurse, 
and Miss Phillips—that Miss Greenwood was sent over to the 
house to fetch him. Greenwood was telling Miss Griffiths 
that he thought his wife might not get over it. If he thought 
that, was it not very remarkable that he left her from 10 
to 10.30 without going over to the doctor’s house to fetch 
him? He had only ten yards to go. He chats with Miss 
Griffiths, and there was a very remarkable conversation. I 
suggest to you that, if you look at the whole of the facts, 
it is true to say that at 10 o’clock that night, as a result 
of Greenwood’s action, there was obstruction to Mrs. Green- 
wood receiving medical aid with the speed with which she 
should have had it, and at a time when it was vital she 
should receive it as soon as possible. That was the second 
obstruction. 

After the conversation with Miss Griffiths, the accused saw 
Dr. Griffiths. He had been telling Miss Griffiths a short time 
before that his wife might not get over it; but when he saw 
the doctor he simply stated that she was not very well, 
and that made the doctor think she was not in great pain. 

70 


Opening Speech for Prosecution. 


Sir Marlay Samson 


Somewhere about 10.30 to 11 o’clock the doctor went over. 
There is a dispute amongst the witnesses as to the particular 
time, and it is only fair to say that the visit was between 
10 and 11 o’clock. According to the doctor’s account, he 
was not even told of the diarrhoea. The nurse says that the 
doctor was told. You will find that, as the case proceeds, 
the doctor and the nurse disagree on very material points. 
The doctor says he then prescribed two morphia pills, which 
he says he gave to the accused to give to the patient. 

At 11 o’clock that night Miss Phillips went home, and 
Miss Irene Greenwood, at her mother’s request, went to 
bed. As Miss Phillips was leaving, Dr. Griffiths was taking 
what he called his evening stroll outside his gate. He saw 
the accused at the gate. The doctor said, ‘‘ How is she? ”’ 
and the accused replied, ‘‘ Easier.’’ I suggest that that was 
not true. You will hear from the nurse how grave the con- 
dition of the patient was, and Dr. Griffiths will tell you that 
on account of the accused telling him that the patient was 
easier he did not go into the house and pay another visit, 
as he might have done. I suggest that that was the third 
obstruction for which the accused was responsible in pre- 
venting the patient receiving the attention which was vital. 

It is midnight. Irene Greenwood has gone to bed, and 
Miss Phillips has gone home. The nurse and Greenwood 
are present in the bedroom. The nurse will tell you that 
by that time the vomit and diarrhcea had stopped. 

We come again to a remarkable difference of opinion about 
what took place at midnight. I will first of all deal with 
what the nurse says. The nurse says it was | o’clock, and 
that she told the accused to go for the doctor, and that he 
came back in ten minutes’ time and said, ‘‘I could not 
get him.’’ The nurse says that she thereupon went out and 
told Dr. Griffiths to come over to Rumsey House at once. 
The doctor says he does not recollect this 1 o’clock visit, 
and it is his opinion that the pills were given earlier— 
between 10 and 11 o’clock. At 3 o’clock, Nurse Jones will 
tell you, Mrs. Greenwood had become very much worse, and 
she again sent the accused over for Dr. Griffiths. Dr. 
Griffiths says that he was sent for at 3 o’clock, and that 
he believes that it was Nurse Jones who called for him. 
The statement that the accused subsequently made to the 
police superintendent to some extent clears up the time of 
this particular event, and to some extent it increases the 
difficulty of the time. He says that there were two calls 
after midnight. He put one at 3 o’clock and one at 4 
o’clock. It was possible that in the statement made to the 
police he confirmed the nurse, but whether it was 1 o’clock 
or whether 3 o’clock that Greenwood went he did not bring 
the doctor back, but the nurse went and did. Is it true 

71 


Harold Greenwood. 


Sir Marlay Samson 


that he could not rouse the doctor? There were a bell and 
a knocker at the doctor’s house. The bell rang in his 
sister’s room, and the doctor relied on the knocker. The 
accused says that he knocked, and, therefore, used a method 
most likely to rouse the doctor. The nurse had no difficulty 
in rousing the doctor, and you will have to consider that 
most carefully. The Crown will allege that the accused 
deliberately abstained on that occasion from rousing the 
doctor and from bringing him over to Mrs. Greenwood. 

At 3 o’clock the doctor came. Mrs. Greenwood was at 
death’s door, and died about twenty minutes past 3 o’clock. 
Irene Greenwood had been sent for from her bedroom. Dr. 
Griffiths certified that death was due to valvular disease af 
the heart, and Mrs. Greenwood was buried in the church- 
yard at Kidwelly. 

I shall sum up the points directly suggesting the guilt of 
the accused man. There will be evidence suggesting that 
poison had been put in the wine; there is the disappearance 
after supper of the bottle of wine; there is evidence of the 
first symptoms of diarrhcea and the first symptoms of 
arsenical poisoning; there is the brandy given to her by 
Greenwood; and there is also the remarkable statement he 
made to Miss Griffiths, and I suggest that there was deliberate 
obstruction against medical aid being given to the dying 
woman at the earliest possible moment. 

Although outwardly the accused’s relationship with his 
wife appeared to be happy, there can be no doubt that there 
were quarrels between them on account of the accused’s 
attentions to other women. Miss Phillips, who is an intimate 
friend of Miss Greenwood, will tell you that Mr. and Mrs. 
Greenwood had quarrels. These attentions to other women 
are an important consideration. The accused had an office 
in Frederick Street, and was visited there by Miss Gladys 
Jones, and, as far back as December, 1918, he had paid 
£15 for a dressing-case for her. Miss Jones used to ring up 
Greenwood on the telephone at Dr. Griffiths’s house at Kid- 
welly. Greenwood also used to ring up a relative at the 
Mercury office at Llanelly, and we know that Miss Gladys 
Jones was employed at the Mercury office. There is abun- 
dant evidence of Miss Jones being on intimate terms with 
the accused during Mrs. Greenwood’s lifetime. I mean 
“‘ intimate’? in the sense that the accused was on friendly 
terms with Miss Jones. 

On 4th July, nineteen days after Mrs. Greenwood’s death, 
the accused ordered a diamond ring from a firm of jewellers 
in London. He paid £55 for it, and received a receipt on 
15th July. On Monday, 16th June, the morning of Mrs. 
Greenwood’s death, Mrs. Groves, the caretaker of the 
accused’s office, saw a letter which she believed to be in Miss 

72 


Opening Speech for Prosecution. 


Sir Marlay Samson 


Gladys Jones’s handwriting. [Sir E. Marshall Hall 
rose to make an objection, but Sir Marlay Samson replied 
that his learned friend had made his objection too soon. 
Had he waited he would have known that the handwriting 
had been identified.] In the letter were the words, ‘ It 
will be nice when I am your wife.’? Mrs. Groves also 
saw the receipt for the diamond ring. This letter was 
posted on the Saturday night. It must have been 
before Mrs. Greenwood’s death. It will be a matter of great 
importance whether Mrs. Groves saw that letter on the 
Monday or later. I suggest that that letter is very import- 
ant, and when you come to consider that Mrs. Groves saw 
it on 16th June saying, ‘‘ It will be nice when I am your 
wife,’’ Greenwood had led Miss Jones to believe that he 
expected to marry her, and that expectation was soon 
realised. 

There is one piece of evidence from which it is quite clear 
that as far back as 5th June the accused was resenting any 
one suggesting to the Jones family that Mrs. Greenwood was 
not ill. On Ist June Miss Gwyneth David had a conversa- 
tion with Miss Gladys Jones, and told her she had a letter 
from Miss Irene Greenwood, and also that she had a con- 
versation with Miss Alice Jones, who was Miss Gladys Jones’s 
sister. There is a letter addressed from 1 Frederick Street, 
Llanelly, dated 5th June, 1919, which is as follows :— 


Dear Miss David,—I am indeed very much surprised to hear that 
you told Miss Alice Jones yesterday that Mrs. (eecniicod was not 
ill, and that her brother had not been to see her. Why and what is your 
object in telling her these deliberate lies? Your only object, that I can 
see, is that you, for some unknown desire, wish to attempt to break my 
friendship with the Jones family, which, I feel happy to say, is more than 
your flippant tongue can achieve. I must ask you in future to please let 
me and mine alone, unless you can speak the truth concerning them. But 
I must call for an explanation of the innuendo you suggest by making the 
false statements you have.—Yours truly, H. GREENWOOD. 


Why was Greenwood so anxious that it should not be said 
to Miss Jones that Mrs. Greenwood was not ill? Why should 
he write to this lady in that way? One could understand 
if he had been leading Miss Gladys Jones to believe that 
she was ill, and that her death might be expected. 

On 24th September Greenwood gave notice to the registrar 
of marriages in Llanelly of his intention to marry Miss 
Gladys Jones at the Bryn Chapel on Ist October. Then a 
very strange event happened. Two days after the notice of 
marriage had been given, he wrote a letter to Miss Mary 
Griffiths, who was a sister of Dr. Griffiths, and it was with 
her that Greenwood was closeted for a time on the night 

73 


Harold Greenwood. 


Sir Marlay Samson 


Mrs. Greenwood died. The letter was dated 26th September, 
from Rumsey House, and was in these words :— 


My dearest May,—I have been trying hard to get to you this 
last fortnight, but no luck; always some one going in or you were 
out. Now, I want you to read this letter very carefully and to 
think very carefully, and to send me over a reply to-night. There 
are very many rumours about, but between you and I this letter 
reveals the true position. Well, it is only right that you should 
know that Miss Bowater and Miss Phillips between them have 
turned my children against you very bitterly—why, I don’t know. It 
is only right that you should know this, as you are the one I 
love most in this world, and I would be the last one to make you 
unhappy. Under these circumstances, are you prepared to face the 
music? I am going to do something quickly, as I must get rid of Miss 
Bowater at once, as I am simply fed up. Let me have something: 
from you to-night.—Yours as ever, HAROLD. 


You have to consider whether this was an offer of marriage. 
I suggest that it was not, and that the accused knew per- 
fectly well that Miss Mary Griffiths would not have accepted 
him. Two days before writing that letter he had given 
notice of his intention to marry Miss Gladys Jones on Ist 
October, and on that date he did marry her. 

The letter is very important. Greenwood said, ‘‘ There 
are many rumours about.’’ You can all judge what he 
meant when he said such a thing to Miss Griffiths. He 
had formed an intimacy with a much younger woman. 
Within nineteen days of his wife’s death he bought a diamond 
ring for £55. Within three-and-a-half months he had 
married Miss Gladys Jones, and Miss Bowater was got rid 
of from the house. 

That seems to be the end, but it is not the end of the 
story. On 16th April, 1920, Mrs. Greenwood’s body was 
exhumed in the churchyard where it had been laid to rest. A 
post-mortem examination was held by Dr. Dick. He took 
out all the internal organs from the body. He sealed them 
up in jars and sent them to the Home Office analyst, Mr. 
Webster, who found arsenic present in all of the organs. Mr. 
Webster will tell you that in his opinion the amount present 
in the organs was 18.07 milligrams, or a little more than a 
quarter of a grain. On 23rd April the organs were sub- 
mitted to Dr. Willcox, who found no traces of advanced 
disease. There was no disease of the valves of the heart, 
in respect of which the certificate had been signed by Dr. 
Griffiths. Dr. Willcox, who is one of the greatest living 
authorities on those particular matters, will tell you that, in 
his opinion, death was due to arsenical poisoning. 

I do not propose to deal with the technical details of the 
medical evidence on that point, but you will get these 
details from these two gentlemen, who are the greatest 
authorities that could have been called upon the subject. 

74 


Opening Speech for Prosecution. 


Sir Marlay Samson 


It may, however, help you if I make a few observations 
on the medical aspects of the case. You are all probably 
aware that arsenic is a deadly mineral poison. A dose of 
2 grammes will cause death, especially if the person poisoned 
were delicate. It causes death in two ways—first by 
exhaustion, following on sickness and diarrhoea, when they 
are constant, and it causes death also by the arsenic which 
is absorbed into the vital organs, causing them to cease 
to work. If arsenic is administered by the mouth, it causes 
sickness and diarrhea. The result of the sickness and 
diarrhcea would be that much of the poison that had been 
taken is expelled, and, after death, analysis of the organs 
would only show a relative part of the fatal dose as being 
left in the organs. I hope that that is clear? The medical 
witnesses will tell you that the presence of a quarter of a 
grain in those organs is a clear indication of at least 2 
grains having been taken, and that 2 grains are a fatal 
dose. 

The exact time when the fatal dose was taken cannot be 
proved in evidence; for reasons which will appear in the 
course of the expert evidence, the fatal dose must have been 
given some time between 1.30 and 6 p.m. In this case 
you will find most of the characteristic symptoms of arsenical 
poisoning were present on 15th June. There were pains in 
the stomach, diarrhcea, collapse, death. No other cause of 
death could be found in the body. 

On examination, sufficient arsenic was found to account for 
death, and on that evidence the Crown will ask you to say 
that. Mabel Greenwood died of arsenical poisoning. If that 
is so, and if that is established to your satisfaction, it 
still remains to be proved that the accused had arsenic 
in his possession on 15th June, 1919. On 21st February, 
1919, the accused received from a firm in Edinburgh a 
quantity of Eureka weed-killer. He had purchased some of 
this weed-killer from the same firm in 1917. There appears 
to have been no order from him in 1918, but on 22nd April, 
1919, a 10-gallon tin was supplied. It was a pink powder 
easily soluble in water, and when dissolved it was ruby red 
in colour. It contained 60 per cent. of arsenic. That is to 
say, 3 grains of the weed-killer contained 2 grains of arsenic. 
If it is dissolved in a red wine it does not affect the colour 
or the taste. Thirty-six grains of the weed-killer amount to 
half a teaspoonful, and if that half-teaspoonful is put into 
a bottle of wine that would make each glass of wine a fatal 
dose; that is to say, a fatal dose containing 2 grains of 
arsenic. The Crown alleges that that was the form of arsenic 
used by the prisoner, that he had the weed-killer in his 
possession, and that it was administered to Mrs. Greenwood 

75 


Harold Greenwood. 


Sir Marlay Samson 


in one or the other of the things she drank between 1.30 
and 6 o’clock of that day. 

I have demonstrated to you how the evidence will show, 
first of all, the cause of death; secondly, the means whereby 
the death was caused; thirdly, the opportunities of causing 
the death by administering poison; fourthly, the motive of 
the prisoner in so doing; and, fifthly, the circumstances 
of his conduct before, during, and after the fatal day. 

It now only remains for me to call attention to a statement 
made by the accused that has a bearing on the case. The 
police were making certain inquiries regarding the death of 
Mrs. Greenwood, and in the course of those inquiries Super- 
intendent Jones saw the accused at his (the accused’s) office 
and took a statement from him. I do not know whether 
my learned friend is going to object to that statement. 

Sir E. Marsnatt Hatit—I cannot object to it being read 
now. 

Mr. Justice SHzarman—You are submitting that it is its 
accuracy that is challenged, and not its admissibility ? 

Sir E. Marsnatn Hatt—That is so, my lord, and if my 
friend will refer to it as an alleged statement I shall not 
object now. 

Sir Maruay Samson—Superintendent Jones will say that 
the statement referred to was made to him by Greenwood. 
It was made on 24th October, and you will readily under- 
stand that it was the duty of the police to take every step 
that they could to ascertain the true facts of the matter. 
One of the first steps it was their duty to take was to go 
to the dead woman’s husband and to ask him to give an 
account of the matter. I shall read that statement to you. 

Sir E. Marspwatt Hautu—I would appeal to my learned 
friend not to read the statement now, but to do so when 
Superintendent Jones is put into the witness-box. The state- 
ment purports to bear the accused’s signature, but I submit 
it is not his signature. 

Mr. Justice SHzarman—There is nothing for me to decide 
if its admissibility is not questioned. It is a voluntary 
statement, and, if the witness is going to give evidence that 
this voluntary statement was made, it is admissible, subject 
to cross-examination. I shall leave Sir Marlay to open his 
case in his own way. 

Sir Martay Samson—Superintendent Jones will say that 
the statement I refer to was made to him by the accused on 
24th October, and was as follows :— 

““There was a no more united family at Kidwelly than 
the wife and I. On 15th June, 1919, myself, wife, boy, 
daughter, and one maid were present at lunch. We had 
gooseberry tart. I told my wife not to have any, as she had 

76 


Opening Speech for Prosecution. 


Sir Marlay Samson 


had diarrhcea on the Saturday previous, and she had it on 
that Sunday afternoon also. I would probably have had a 
whisky and soda, and she may have had the same, as far as 
I can remember. 

“J afterwards went to my car, as it was not in good order 
at the time. I do not think the car was out that day with 
Foy. I feel quite sure that it was not out. My daughter 
and Foy were out on the 8th, and the only other day she 
was out with Foy was some weeks previous. 

““On the morning of 15th June my wife was sitting on the 
lawn reading while I was in the car. She did not sit there in 
the afternoon after lunch. She went to lie down, and came 
to me about 3 to 3.30, while I was still at the car, and she 
said that she had had another attack of diarrhea. I told 
her that she had no business to eat that gooseberry tart, and 
I took a chair from another part of the lawn and placed 
it in the sun for her to sit there. 

** Soon afterwards I finished the car, and I went to have a 
shave and change. The gong for tea went when I was 
changing. I came down. The tea was laid in the drawing- 
room, and they were half through it. She hardly had any 
tea. She said that she was going to lie down, and I went 
to feed the fowls. 

‘* About 5.30 p.m. my wife and daughter came walking 
slowly up the garden, just past the stables, and she sat down, 
and I sat with her. The little boy was there. We sat there 
for about half an hour. It was then getting cold. She 
went into the house for a cloak. I met her on the steps. 
She took my arm and we walked up the garden as far as 
the stable. She told me that she had a suffocating pain in 
her heart, and that she could not go any further, so I 
brought her back to the same chair on the lawn as she had 
sat on before. She sat there about four or five minutes, and 
said she felt much better and would try again; so we started 
again the same way, as she said she felt all right. 

‘* J don’t think we had gone 30 yards when she fell against 
me and said, ‘ Oh, I can’t go another yard!’ so I took 
her back again to the chair. She complained of a frightful 
pain in her heart, and said she was fainting. I put her 
on the chair, and Irene, my daughter, came down. I told 
her to look after her until I brought some brandy. She 
did so, and I brought a bottle and a glass, and I gave her 
a wineglassful neat. That made her a little sick, and then 
she said she felt a bit better, and I said, ‘ Come to the sofa 
and lie down.’ She wanted to stay, and said she would be 
all right in a minute. She said she felt bad again and 
very faint, so Irene and I took her by the arm. I felt her 
pulse and could not find it, so I said to Irene, ‘ We shall 

77 


Harold Greenwood. 


Sir Marlay Samson 


take her to the sitting-room,’ and that I would fetch the 
doctor. 

‘‘We got her to her room, and she said she felt very 
faint indeed, so I said to Irene, ‘ We shall take her to her 
bedroom,’ and when we took her to her room she said, ‘ I 
do feel frightfully faint and have awful pains in my head, 
as I always get.’ Irene helped to put her to bed, and I 
went for the doctor. He was there in the sitting-room, and 
he came at once. There was no one present, and I can’t say 
who opened the door for me. That would be about 6.45 to 
7 p.m. 

te The doctor came immediately. He examined her and 
said the heart was very bad. She had some more brandy— 
I can’t say whether it was at the doctor’s orders or not— 
and after taking the brandy she became very sick. The 
brandy was given to her neat and not diluted. I think it 
was Irene who gave her the brandy. The doctor told me 
that we ought not to have given it to her neat. He examined 
her and said it was bile. I asked her if she liked Nurse 
Jones, and she said ‘ Yes,’ so I went for her. The doctor 
said that if she was kept quiet she would soon come all right. 

**T said to the doctor, ‘I think you had better stay a 
bit,’ and he said, ‘ Oh! she will be all right now that she 
has had more bile up.’ I did not feel so sure in my own 
mind, so I asked the doctor to come round the garden. We 
went round, and when we came to the clock-golf at the other 
end of the garden I suggested to the doctor to come and have 
a game. We had two or three games. I did that to keep 
him, and in the meantime Nurse Jones had come. I had 
asked Miss Phillips to go for her. She had come in for 
supper. I met her coming in as I was going to the doctor’s. 
The doctor stayed for about an hour, and before he went 
I asked him to come up again to see my wife, and he did, 
and he said, ‘ I will send a bottle of medicine.’ He said she 
was much better then, and had absolutely no pain, but was 
very weak. I was with the doctor and saw him out. I then 
stayed in her bedroom all the time with Nurse Jones, Irene, 
and Miss Phillips. 

“About twenty minutes after, Nurse Jones said that 
she (Mrs. Greenwood) was so very much better she would run 
home and put her little boy to bed, but that she would not 
be away more than an hour. Nurse Jones went, and I 
said to Miss Phillips would she mind sitting alone with her 
while Irene and I had supper. After supper Irene and I 
went back again, and she said that her hands were very, 
very cold, and that she had no feeling. Nurse Jones came 
back just then. This would be in about an hour and a 
quarter. Mrs. Greenwood’s arms looked quite white, and 
the fingers of both hands quite blue. I pointed this out to 

78 


Opening Speech for Prosecution. 


Sir Marlay Samson 


Nurse Jones. Of course, I rubbed them to see if she had 
any feeling in them. She was quite rational, and told us 
all what she felt. We were giving her brandy in sips all 
this time, and Nurse Jones told me it was her heart—that 
she had a diseased heart. 

“At about 3 o’clock we lost her pulse absolutely. She 
was quite conscious, and Nurse Jones asked me to go for 
the doctor. I ran for the doctor and knocked for him, but 
failed to have an answer. I went back to the house and told 
the nurse that I had failed to wake him. My wife then 
got a little better again, and I got Irene to her. She sent 
Irene to bed. Soon after that we lost her pulse absolutely. 
Nurse Jones said she would go for the doctor. She did, and 
the doctor came in after her. I went down to meet him, and 
he said she was much better in herself, but her heart was 
very, very weak, and to keep on with the brandy, and if 
I went with him he would give me two pills to give to her. 
She was quite rational all the time, and complained of no 
pains, but once—that she had some pains in the stomach. 

“‘ That was about 3.30 a.m., and only a slight pain. We 
had mustard leaves over the heart and mustard plasters all 
the time. Her chest was perfectly raw and the skin red. 
When taking the two pills she said, ‘ Put them on my tongue. 
I will swallow them.’ She talked for about five minutes, 
and then went to sleep. About 4 o’clock she began to breathe 
very heavily, so I felt her pulse, and said to the nurse, ‘I 
cannot feel it a bit.’ The nurse felt it, and she said, ‘ No, 
it has stopped! Run for the doctor at once!’ I went 
for the doctor and told him that since she had those pills 
her pulse had stopped, and said, ‘ Come over at once! ’ 
He did come, and tested her and said, ‘ There is not much 
hope now.’ I called Irene and she came in. Her mother 
died about a quarter of an hour after Irene came in. 

‘‘T think if she had not had the two pills she would be 
all right to-day. They were too strong for her. She was 
so rational all the time, and after taking the pills she went 
off to sleep, and never woke up from the sleep. Her life 
was not insured at all either by herself or by me, and all 
her property was hers for life, and afterwards for her chil- 
dren. The death was registered. The certificate I gave 
to Irene with a guinea to take to the vicar. It was Irene 
who registered the death, and she had two certificates from 
Mr. Evans. The yellow one she was to give to the vicar, 
and the white one was for us. I had the two certificates 
from Irene when she came back. Miss Bowater saw me give 
it to her.”’ ; 

I told him that the vicar had not received the certificate, 
and he said, ‘‘I gave it to Irene, but I will look in the 
safe now.’’? He made a search in the safe. Failing to find 

79 


Harold Greenwood. 


Sir Marlay Samson 


it he said, ‘“‘1I will have a search at home again.’’ He 
further stated: ‘‘ The doctor had been attending her for the 
last few months for her heart. She had been unwell all 
the week with her heart. She felt better on 14th June, and 
she went to Ferryside.’’ 

On 31st October I again called at his office, when the 
accused produced to me two certificates with respect to the 
death of his wife. He said he had found them in Irene’s 
desk at home. One was a certificate of the registry of death, 
and the other a certified copy of the register. Both were 
dated 20th June, 1919, and signed by William Evans, 
registrar, Burry Port. Accused then said, ‘‘I had not 
asked for a certified copy. The registrar gave it to. my 
daughter, and she paid for it.’’ 


That is the statement made by the accused on 24th 
October. I do not want at this stage to deal with it at 
any length, but I submit that there are certain conclusions 
that must be drawn from it. First of all, I suggest to you 
that the statement was inaccurate as to many details with 
regard to 15th June. In particular you will recollect that 
Greenwood stated that he himself had a whisky and soda, 
and that his wife might have had the same, so that at that 
time he was of opinion that his wife had drunk whisky and 
soda, and not wine. _Greenwood suggested also that Foy 
was not there on the Sunday. Greenwood impressed on the 
superintendent in that statement that the condition of her 
heart was the cause of the symptoms. Greenwood said that 
it was he who sent for the nurse, but. Miss Phillips will say 
that that was not true, and that it was she who went for the 
nurse. Greenwood said in his statement that he went for 
Dr. Griffiths at 3 o’clock in the morning, but Dr. Griffiths 
will say that that was not true. 

Greenwood said that the morphia pills caused his wife’s 
death, and that if she had not had them she would apparently 
have been alive to-day. That was important in the light 
of what happened afterwards. On the 16th of April 
the exhumation of the body took place, and the accused had 
@ conversation with the vicar of Kidwelly. He said to the 
vicar, ‘‘ I wonder how the whole thing arose. I wonder if 
she took anything herself. She was often depressed and 
looked at water.’? You therefore find that when it is known 
as a fact that the body is to be exhumed, and that the cause 
of death would be ascertained, the accused at that moment 
was making the suggestion for the first time of the pos- 
sibility that she might have taken her own life. It does 
not seem at that stage that he relied on the morphia pills as 
being the cause of his wife’s death. His statement to the 
vicar is therefore significant, in view of the fact that there 

“80 


% 


y 
ye 
qy 


Sir Edward Marlay Samson, K.C. 


Opening Speech for Prosecution. 

: ep Sir Marlay Samson 
was arsenic found in her body. Did he know when he made 
that statement that arsenic would be found in fact in her 
body? Was he suggesting suicide—this for the first time— 
as being the cause of her death? 

There was a further statenient made by Greenwood to 
Chief Inspector Haigh immediately after the evidence had 
been taken at the inquest. At 4.30 that day Chief Inspector 
Haigh saw Greenwood and said to him, ‘‘I am Chief 
Inspector Haigh. You know me. The coroner’s jury have 
just returned a verdict of ‘murder’ against you. It is 
my duty to arrest you and charge you with the murder of 
Mabel Greenwood on 16th June, 1919. You will be taken 
to Llanelly, where you will appear before a magistrate to- 
morrow.’’ Greenwood said, ‘‘ All right.’? A moment after 
he said to the chief inspector, ‘‘ What was the actual 
verdict? ’’? and the chief inspector said, ‘‘ The jury unani- 
mously found that your late wife died from acute arsenical 
poisoning, and that the poison was administered by you.”’ 
Greenwood then said, ‘‘ Oh, dear! ’’ Greenwood was charged 
before the magistrates of Llanelly on 2nd July, and in 
answer to the charge he said, ‘‘I am not guilty of this 
charge, and I reserve my defence.” 

After these full details of the facts, I shall, with the 
assistance of my learned friend, Mr. Wilfrid Lewis, call all 
the evidence to prove in the regular and proper way the 
facts as I have detailed them. Subject to any defence put 
forward by learned counsel on behalf of the accused, and 
to his lordship’s direction, you will have to determine at the 
end whether you are satisfied that the prisoner committed 
this crime. If, when you have considered the evidence in 
all its bearings, and heard all my learned friend has to say 
on behalf of the accused man—if the conviction is forced 
on your minds that the prisoner was responsible for 
administering the poison to Mabel Greenwood, then it will 
be your duty to say so. 

Your duty is to do justice in this case. If the case is 
not proved to your full satisfaction it will be your duty to 
acquit the accused, but if the facts, as proved, satisfy 
you, then your duty is clear, and you will find your verdict 
against the prisoner. 


Evidence for the Prosecution, 


Ex-Chief Detective Inspector Ernest Hatcu, examined by 
Mr. Witrrip Lewis—I am an ex-chief detective inspector of 
Scotland Yard. I first came on the scene on Ist June. I 
knew at that time that a statement had been made by the 
accused to Superintendent Samuel Jones. I was present at 

G 81 


Harold Greenwood. 


Ex-Chief Detective Inspector E. Haigh 


the inquest. I did not know that it was on the application 
of the coroner, Mr. J. W. Nicholas, that the Home Secretary 
gave the order for exhumation. 

Cross-examined by Sir E. MarsHaty Hati—lIt is a fact, is 
it not, that Greenwood was arrested, or rather detained, by 
the Kidwelly police before the verdict of the coroner’s jury 
was given ]—Yes. 

He was detained, as a matter of fact, when the jury were 
deliberating on their verdict ?—I believe so. 

Were you in the Coroner’s Court until the verdict, in fact, 
was given?!—I was. 

Did the jury retire to consider their verdict !—Yes. 

Did you see the coroner go into the jury room?—No, I 
did not. 

Now, then, Haigh, did you not see him go into the jury 
room !—I did not, sir. 

Are you prepared to say that the coroner did not go into 
the jury room when they were considering their verdict 1—I 
say I did not see him go into the jury room. 

Did you know by whose instructions Greenwood was de- 
tained before the verdict was given?—Yes; by the instruc- 
tions of the chief constable of Carmarthenshire. 

What is his name?—Mr. Picton Philipps. 

So that the verdict of the jury was evidently anticipated 
by the chief constable?—I do not know what he anticipated ; 
I know what he told me. 

You knew you had a warrant for Greenwood’s arrest ?—I 
did not. 

Therefore you went to arrest him in consequence of the 
verdict of the jury ?—Yes. 

In fact, you waited until after their verdict ?—Yes. 

Although you knew, as a matter of fact, that he was already 
detained ?—I did not know he was detained, and I want to 
make it quite clear that he was not detained on my direc- 
tion. He had been detained some little time before I knew 
he had been detained. 

He asked you what was the verdict and you told him, and 
he said, ‘‘ Oh, dear? ’’—Yes. 

Did he seem to be distressed?—No; he seemed concerned, 
but not agitated. 

Shall I say dazed ?—No. 

You had no feeling against him?—I never have any feel- 
ings in these matters. I say he appeared to be concerned. 
I should not call it ‘‘ distressed.’’ 

Re-examined by Sir Marutay Samson—Was Greenwood de- 
tained by the police after the whole of the evidence had been 
given at the inquest?—I believe so. 

And during that time nothing had occurred on the part 


, 82 


Evidence for Prosecution. 
Ex-Chief Detective Inspector E. Haigh 


of the police to prevent Greenwood from being present at 
the inquest himself?—Not as far as I know. 

In fact, the coroner called Greenwood to give evidence, 
and Greenwood failed to answer /—Yes. 

Do you know, in fact, whether any subpoena was served 
on him ?—Yes. 

And was it after he was called and failed to answer the 
subpeena that the police took the steps of detaining him ?— 
The chief constable took that step. 

And directly after the return of the verdict you took the 
opportunity of arresting him ?—Yes. 


Rev. D. Amprosz Jones, examined by Mr. Wiurrip Lewis 
—I am the vicar of Kidwelly. I knew Mrs. Mabel Green- 
wood very well. I had always found her quite cheerful, 
genial, kind-hearted, and thoroughly upright, with an ex- 
cellent character. She was most highly respected. On 
Saturday, 14th June, 1919, two days before her death, I saw 
her on the platform of Kidwelly Station, and we travelled 
together in the same compartment to Ferryside, a distance 
of five miles, to a meeting of the tennis club. Mrs. Green- 
wood took an active part in the discussion at the business 
meeting of the club. She was not looking well, but she 
made no remark to me about her health then. She had not 
been looking well for several months, but she was quite cheer- 
ful and active. We travelled back from Ferryside together, 
and I left her at Kidwelly Station. On the morning of 16th 
June, after the death of Mrs. Greenwood, I saw the accused. 
I went to see him to make arrangements for the funeral, and 
to sympathise with him. 

Did he say anything to you at that interview as to the cause 
of death?—He said it was heart failure. 

Did you see him on the day that Mrs. Greenwood’s body 
was exhumed?—I did, and I had a conversation with him 
on that day also. He had sent his daughter to the vicarage 
to ask me to go to see him at 6 o’clock that evening, and I 
went. Of course, he was very upset, and he asked me if I 
knew how the whole thing had arisen. Then he remarked 
that Mrs. Greenwood was often depressed, and that she had 
taken to staring at water, and that he wondered whether 
she had taken something herself. 

Between these two conversations on 16th June, 1919, and 
the day of the exhumation, had you any other conversation 
with Greenwood ?—yYes, we had conversation; but I do not 
think that any reference was made to the probable cause of 
death. 

Cross-examined by Sir E. MarsHatt Hati—I think that 
Mrs. Greenwood was unanimously beloved by everybody !—She 


was. 
83 


Harold Greenwood. 


Rev. D. Ambrose Jones 


She was much beloved by her children ?—She was. 

Did you know Irene (the eldest girl) very well, and was 
she devoted to her?—I should think so. 

She was a woman of comparatively large means, and 
generous towards charities /—Yes ; I think she gave her share. 


Mrs. Saran Epwarps, examined by Mr. Witrrip Lewis—I 
am the wife of William Edwards, wine and spirit dealer, of 
the Phoenix Stores, Kidwelly. I have known the Greenwood 
family for eight years, and Mr. and Mrs. Greenwood have 
been customers at my husband’s shop. They have been sup- 
plied with sundry wines during that time. Usually she only 
had one bottle at a time. ‘ 

Do you remember the Saturday before Mrs. Greenwood 
died ?—Yes. 

Did you supply her with anything?!—Yes, with a bottle of 
burgundy. 

[At this stage Mr. Wilfrid Lewis produced a black bottle 
and handed it to the witness, who said that the bottle 
supplied to Mrs. Greenwood was similar. It was one of 
Messrs. Gilbey’s bottles, and it bore on the label ‘‘ Reo red 
wine of a burgundy character.’’ The label on the bottle 
was white, yellow, and red. | 

Witness said that she also supplied the Greenwood family 
with flagon bottles of burgundy. The flagon bottles were 
Australian wine. It was more recently that Mrs. Greenwood 
had bought the red wine—usually she had bought others. 

Cross-examined by Sir E. Marsaatn Hautt—Anybody read- 
ing that label on that bottle could not possibly mistake it 
for port, could they /—No. 

I mean that no honest person could say that it was like 
port wine ?!—No. 

Who lived in Rumsey House before the Greenwoods !—Mr. 
Bowen. 

_ Was he the son of the people who built the house?—No, 
sir. 

Have you ever seen the summer-house in the garden by the 
river /—No, sir. 

Have you not seen the summer-house, where there are 
thousands of bottles!—I do not know it. 

The seventy-five dozen bottles spoken about didn’t come 
from the Greenwoods alone?—I do not know. 

Re-examined by Sir Maruay Samson—The shape of an 
ordinary port wine bottle is the same as that of a Reo 
red wine ?—Yes. 


Tuomas Foy, examined by Mr. Wiurrip Lewis—I am the 
manager of a cinema, and I sometimes do a bit of motor 
driving. On the Sunday of Mrs. Greenwood’s fatal illness 

84 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


Thomas Foy 


I went to Mr. Greenwood’s garage to put his car into work- 
ing order. After dinner I took Miss Irene Greenwood on the 
Burry Port Road to teach her to drive the car. I had made 
that arrangement about three weeks before. 

When you were leaving the house in the car with Miss Irene 
Greenwood, did you see any one?—I saw Mrs. Greenwood, 
and she spoke to me on the drive, but I cannot say what she 
said, as the noise of the car prevented my hearing. 

Cross-examined by Sir E. Marsuatn Hati—Have you 
heard it suggested that it was 8th June and not 15th June 
that you drove out Miss Greenwood in the car ?—Yes. 

If Miss Greenwood and the accused say it was 8th June, 
will you agree?—I will pledge my honour that it was the 
day before Mrs. Greenwood’s death. 

If Miss Greenwood goes into the witness-box and states 
it was 8th June, would you still stick to your recollection ?— 
I would have to contradict it. 

Re-examined by Sir Marutay Samson—When was the first 
time you were questioned about giving driving lessons to 
Miss Greenwood !—It was either at the end of last year or 
the beginning of this year. I am almost certain it was 
some time this year—about two or three months before the 
inquest. 

Further cross-examined by Sir E. Marsnaty Hatt—On 
this day you drove Miss Greenwood you say Mr. Greenwood 
was working on the motor car with you?—Yes, until the 
gong rang for dinner. 

By the Court—How long were you working on the Sunday 
morning ?—From about 11 to 11.30. 

Re-examined by Sir Martay Samson—Was Greenwood with 
you for the whole of the time that morning?—He was with 
me up to the time the gong rang for dinner, about 12 to 
12.30. 


Fiorence LORRAINE PHILLIPS, examined by Sir Marnay 
Samson—I live at The Cottage, Kidwelly. I have known the 
Greenwoods for ten or eleven years. I was very friendly 
with Mrs. Greenwood. In the month preceding her death 
the relations between Mr. and Mrs. Greenwood were much 
the same as usual. I do not know exactly how to describe 
them. Mr. Greenwood was very fond of making his wife 
jealous and irritating her, and that caused unpleasantness. 
A few weeks before Mrs. Greenwood’s death I was present 
on the occasion of such unpleasantness. I cannot recollect 
the incident which led to it. Mrs. Greenwood intended going 
for a holiday to Portishead about a week after the day on 
which she died. I saw Mrs. Greenwood on the evening of 
14th June, 1919. She seemed bright, but her voice was low, 
and she had some difficulty in speaking. On 15th June, the 

85 


Harold Greenwood. 


Florence Lorraine Phillips 


day before Mrs. Greenwood’s death, I went to the house after 
church at about 1 o’clock. The family were having lunch. 
Mrs. Greenwood came out and spoke to me. She looked very 
ill, and could hardly speak. She asked me to go to supper, 
and I went to the house again about a quarter-past 7 in the 
evening. Mr. Greenwood came to me and told me that his 
wife was ill, and asked me to go upstairs. I saw the daughter 
Irene come out of Mrs. Greenwood’s bedroom. Irene said 
something to me. I went to fetch the district nurse, Nurse 
Jones. 

Greenwood has said it was he who asked you to go for 
the nurse. Is that true?—No. No one suggested it to me. 
I returned to Rumsey House after I got the nurse. Dr. 
Griffiths was there. I went into the kitchen to get hot water. 
The accused came into the kitchen once or twice while I 
was there. I remained in the kitchen until supper time. 
At supper I noticed on the table a flask which I had not 
seen before, but I do not know what it contained. I pre- 
sume that it was wine. 

Cross-examined by Sir E. MarsHatt Hatt—Do you remem- 
ber seeing Nurse Jones and the accused in conversation on 
the Sunday evening, and did you hear Nurse Jones asking 
for the doctor /—Yes. 

And did the accused volunteer to go for Dr. Griffiths ?— 
Yes. 

What time would that be?—It was about 8 o’clock in the 
evening. 

And about an hour later did Miss Irene Greenwood go 
over for Dr. Griffiths, and did he come in a few minutes /— 
Yes. 

When Mrs. Greenwood was lying ill in her bedroom on 
the night before her death, did the nurse leave for about an 
hour to go home?—Yes. 

Did you stay with Mrs. Greenwood during the nurse’s 
absence /—Yes. 

And during that time was Mrs. Greenwood conscious or 
unconscious ?—She seemed to be unconscious. 

Was there any one else in the room?!—Miss Irene Green- 
wood was also in the room. 

How long did you remain there?—Until 11 o’clock, and 
I then went home. The accused saw me to the door and 
said that Mrs. Greenwood would be all right by the morning. 

At that time did the accused seem to be in very good 
spirits /—Yes. 

Did you hear the conversation between the accused and 
Dr. Griffiths?—Yes. I heard the doctor say it was a bilious 
attack, and that Mrs. Greenwood’s heart was weak. 

Did Mrs. Greenwood ever tell you that she suffered from 
her heart !—No. 

86 


Evidence for Prosecution. 
Florence Lorraine Phillips 


Did you know that Dr. Griffiths had been attending her 
for months for her heart?!—No. I knew that she had been 
to the doctor, and that he told her she was run down and 
ought to go for a change. 

Did she ever tell you that the doctor told her she was 
suffering from an internal growth 7—No. 

Are you quite positive that she never told you that she had 
any trouble with her heart?—I am quite positive. 

And when you are positive you are positive, and nothing 
could shake you?—No, not when I am telling the truth. 

When Nurse Jones came to Rumsey House were the accused 
and Dr. Griffiths playing clock-golf on the lawn at the back 
of the house ?—Yes. 

_ Did you know then whether the doctor had seen Mrs. 
Greenwood or not?—No. 

Was it in consequence of what Miss Greenwood said to 
you that you went for the nurse?—Yes. 

Did Greenwood know that you were going for her !—Yes. 
He said that he would like to have Nurse Jones. 

Was there any wine on the table the night you were there /— 
I know there was no wine on the table the night I was there. 
If there had been I should have had some. 

When was your mind first directed to a suspicion that 
Mrs. Greenwood had died of poisoning?—I do not know; I 
cannot say. 

Can you tell me when you were first asked to remember 
particularly whether there was a bottle of wine on the table 
or on the sideboard on that occasion?—I cannot really say. 

Certainly not before November !/—No, not before November ; 
but when I really cannot say. I am not sure. 

Did Mrs. Greenwood ever tell ‘you that she could not drink 
wine because she thought the maids were tampering with it? 
—Yes; she told me one night when I went in there. 

Did she ever tell you that she had given Hannah Maggie 
Williams notice ?—No. 

Did you see the accused in the bedroom, walking about 
and crying ?!—That was in the morning after she had died. 

You were sent back from your house and you saw him 
crying !—Yes ; it was about 3.30 or 4 o’clock in the morning. 

As far as you know, Irene was very fond of her mother 1—I 
suppose so. 

Have you any reason to doubt it?—I mean she did not 
show much affection. 

At any rate, she was very considerate to her mother on 
this night?—She was very good to her. 

Re-examined by Sir Maruay Samson—Did you form any 
opinion as to Irene’s attitude towards her mother ?—I do not 
know what to say. I do not think there was quite as much 

87 


e 


Harold Greenwood. 


Florence Lorraine Phillips 


affection as between some mothers and daughters. I do not 
think she was specially fond of her mother. 

Was it before or after Miss Bowater had left that Mrs. 
Greenwood said that the servants had been tampering with 
the wine?—I believe it was after Miss Bowater left. 

Did she say anything further as regards the wine ?—She 
said she had given it to her husband, and that he could not 
drink it either. They were both laughing about it. 

By the Court—What wine was it!—Burgundy. 


Exizaseta Lewis Jones, examined by Sir Maruay Samson 
—I am a certificated district nurse. I had known Mrs. 
Greenwood for some months. On Sunday, 15th June, 1919; 
Miss Phillips called at my house and asked me to go to Rumsey 
House at 7.45. I went immediately and found Mrs. Green- 
wood in bed in a serious state of collapse. I did not take 
her temperature with a thermometer, but it was very low. 

By the Courtr—Did you feel her hands when you got there? 
—Yes. 

Were they cold!—Yes. 

Examination continued—I saw a bottle of medicine 
in the bedroom; about a dose of it had been taken. The 
label stated that the medicine was to be taken every four 
hours, and it was in Dr. Griffiths’ handwriting. Mrs. 
Greenwood had had sickness and diarrhea. The latter ceased 
about 12 o’clock. The vomit was whitish, and the diarrhoea 
was whitish and flaky. I went home at about 9 o’clock and 
returned about 10. I had not seen the doctor there, so that 
he could not have been there between 8 and 9 o’clock. 

When you returned did you form an opinion whether 
her illness was of a serious character ?—I believed all through 
it was serious. 

When you returned at 10 o’clock was there still vomiting 
and diarrhcea?!—Yes. Very soon after I returned I told 
the accused that I would like him to send for the doctor, and 
he then went out of the bedroom. 

How long was he away before you saw him again ?—About 
three-quarters of an hour. 

And when he came back was anybody with him ?—Yes, 
Dr. Griffiths. 

During the three-quarters of an hour did the patient’s 
condition improve or get worse?—I gave her brandy, and 
she revived slightly. 

In what condition was she at the time ?—Very weak. 

Having regard to the length of time before Mr. Green- 
wood came back with the doctor, did you do anything !— 
I gave her brandy. 

Yes; but did you take any steps yourself about getting 
88 © 


Evidence for Prosecution. 
Elizabeth Lewis Jones 


the doctor there!—I said something to Miss Phillips that 
the doctor was a long time coming. 

When the doctor and Mr. Greenwood came back was Miss 
Irene with them?—I did not notice. 

What happened when the doctor came then?—Mrs. Green- 
wood said she had pains in the abdomen. As soon as I gave 
her something by the mouth she vomited. The doctor 
examined her heart and prescribed brandy. He remained 
there about ten minutes. 

If the accused told the doctor that Mrs. Greenwood was 
easier, was that true?—No. 

Did you hear the accused speak to his wife from time to 
time /—Yes. 

What did he ask her?—Mr. Greenwood asked his wife if 
she felt better, and she said no. 

Did Miss Phillips go home at 11, and Miss Irene go to 
bed, leaving you with Mrs, Greenwood !—Yes. 

About midnight did the patient get gradually worse ?— 
Yes. 

What is the next thing you did?!—I waited a little time 
to see if she would revive. 

Tell us what happened?—I sent for the doctor again 
about 12.30. 

Did the accused go for the doctor on that occasion !—Yes. 

And how long was he away?’—He was away for about ten 
minutes. 

Did he come back with the doctor?—No; he said he 
could not rouse him. 

What did you do then?—I told him I would go for the 
doctor and rouse him myself. 

And did you go?—Yes; I went and knocked at the door, 
and the doctor came to the window immediately, and then 
came over to the house. This was about 1 o’clock. 

What did he do?—He prescribed pills for the patient, and 
two were given to Mrs. Greenwood. 

Who brought them to the house?—Mr. Greenwood. He 
went back with the doctor for the pills. 

What happened after that?—After Mrs. Greenwood re- 
ceived the pills she gradually got drowsy and comatose, and 
I noticed a change in her condition. 

Did the accused go for the doctor again ?—Yes. 

How long after the doctor came back did Mrs. Greenwood 
live 7—About twenty minutes. 

In what condition of mind did the accused appear to be? 
—He did not seem to be put out in any way. 

At what time do you think Mrs. Greenwood actually died? 
—About 3.30 in the morning. 

89 


Harold Greenwood. 


Elizabeth Lewis Jones 


Cross-examined by Sir E. Marsuatn Hatu—Did you notice 
if there was any difference in his spirits earlier in the 
evening ?—No. 

Did you know that her heart was in a very bad state!— 
I knew after I examined her. 

[At this stage witness was referred to her deposition at 
the inquest, and reminded that she had said, ‘‘ I saw Mrs. 
Greenwood in a fainting fit once. I knew her heart was in 
a very bad state.’’ | 

Mr. Justice SazarMaN—But very often these depositions are 
something like this, ‘‘ Do you know that her heart was in 
a very bad state? ’’ And she said, ‘‘ Yes.”’ 

Sir E. MarsnaLtut Hatu—lIt means more than that here, my 
lord. (Zo Witness)—You were present when she had a faint- 
ing attack before, and she told you that her heart was in a 
very bad state?—Yes; she told me that she had painful 
fainting attacks. 

Did you know her heart was in a very bad state ?—No. 

Why did you say that to the coroner ? 

Mr. Justice SHzarmMan—But it was in the cross-examination 
by the coroner. 

Sir E. MarsHatu Hati—lIt was all in the cross-examina- 
tion by the coroner from beginning to end. 

The Witness, referring to the deposition quoted, said— 
Perhaps I made a mistake, and I did not grasp it at the 
time when the question was put. 

Cross-examination continued—What do you think she 
fainted from?—She thought it was her heart. 

She. told you it was her heart ?—Yes. 

What time did you get to the house?—Just before 8. 

Was the doctor there when you got there !—No. 

Did you know that the doctor had seen Mrs. Greenwood 
at 6.30, and again at 7.30?—Yes. 

Did you know that the doctor had been present whilst 
she was sick at 6.30?—I cannot say. 

When you got there at 8 o’clock had she got to bed then? 
I want you to be very careful over that.—No. 

When you left at 9 o’clock you were satisfied that she was 
not in a dangerous condition then? You would not have 
left her if you thought she was in a dangerous condition 1— 
I had to leave. 

Did you not say at the police court, ‘‘ I would not have 
left the patient had I known she was in a dangerous con- 
dition. I got back at 10 o’clock ’’? 

Mr. Justice Sazarman—That is in cross-examination again. 

Cross-examination continued—Did you not say at the police 
court, ‘I made the patient comfortable before I left at 9 
o’clock. I was obliged to go home ”’ ? 

90 


Evidence for Prosecution. 
Elizabeth Lewis Jones 


Mr. Justice SHmrarMAN—It was not a voluntary statement, 
and it is obviously in answer to a question. She has already 
said that if she knew the patient was in a dangerous con- 
dition she would not have gone. It is in answer to Mr. 
Ludford, who is appearing for Mr. Greenwood. You should 
not put too much upon her. 

Cross-examination continwed—Would you have left the 
patient if you had known?—I have an aged father and a 
child of five to look after also. 

Miss Irene was there and Miss Phillips was there. If you 
had thought Mrs. Greenwood was really dangerously ill would 
you have left?—I had to leave. 

Sir E. Marswatt Hatu—Well, I have to take your answer. 

[The witness said she poured out a second dose of medicine 
for Mrs. Greenwood. | 

Cross-examination continued—Did Mrs. Greenwood say 
that the medicine caught her at the back of the throat ?— 
Mr. Greenwood told me so. 

By the Court—Did Mr. Greenwood make a complaint to 
you 7—Mr. Greenwood said to me, ‘‘ Nurse, Mrs. Greenwood 
complains that the medicine caught her at the back of the 
throat.’’ 

Did you taste the medicine yourself?—Yes. It had no 
effect on me. 

Cross-examination continued—What quantity was the dose? 
—Two teaspoonfuls. It was soon after 10 o’clock that I 
gave Mrs. Greenwood the second dose. 

[Sir E. Marshall Hall pursued the point when the judge 
remarked, ‘‘ I don’t want to attribute to this witness what 
she did not say. She should not be driven too far on the 
point. It would not be fair.’’] M 

[Sir E. Marshall Hall was pressing the witness on another 
point when the judge intervened and said, ‘‘ You must not 
pitch into this witness because she won’t say exactly what 
you want her to say.”’ 

Sir E. Marspatyn Hatt—All I am thinking is that if I 
raise my voice, she will raise hers. I am not pitching into 
her, and I rather wish your lordship had not used those 
words. I am dealing with the witness in a perfectly fair way. 

Mr. Justice SazarMan—I am sure you are, but don’t pitch 
into me now. I can trust you, Sir Edward, and you can 
trust me. 

The witness then described how the doctor gave Mrs. Green- 
wood two morphia pills, which she took at about 1 o’clock 
in the morning. Soon afterwards she was violently sick, 
fell into a state of coma, and never recovered. | 

Oross-examination continued—When you saw her in that 
state did you say to Mr. Greenwood, ‘‘ Damn those pills? ’’— 


No, I did not. 
91 


Harold Greenwood. 
Elizabeth Lewis Jones 


Did Police Sergeant Lewis call upon you and ask you to 
give an account of Mrs. Greenwood’s death!—Yes. I signed 
a statement, and afterwards Superintendent Jones and the 
chief constable called upon me, and I made further state- 
ments to them. One of them was that the diarrhcea looked as 
if Mrs. Greenwood had been drinking a lot of milk. 

Did the chief constable suggest to you that a white, milky 
substance came away ?—He must have done. 

By the Court—Do you recollect whether this was before 
or after the body was exhumed ?—I am not quite certain. 

Cross-ecamination continued—Did Mr. Greenwood send for 
you when he knew the body was to be exhumed?—I don’t 
remember. : 

Did you go and see him on or about the time the body 
was to be exhumed ?—No, I did not. 

Did you see the notice of exhumation, and did you say 
to Greenwood, ‘‘I thought that had fallen through? ’’—I 
did not, sir. 

Did you say that Sergeant Lewis had called upon you ?— 
I might have done if we were talking other business. 

Did you tell him that Sergeant Lewis had accused you of 
taking Greenwood’s part !—No. 

Where did this take place?—Rumsey House. 

You did go to discuss business with him at Rumsey House? 
—Yes. 

At the interview did he say anything about pills ?—Yes; 
he told me he thought the pills that Dr. Griffiths had given 
for her had killed her. 

Did you then say, ‘‘ Don’t you say anything about those 
pills to any one?’’—I am not supposed to say anything 
about doctors’ prescriptions. 

No, no. Did you say, or did you not say, that he was not 
to say anything about the pills to any one?—No, I did not, 
sir. 

Did you go on to say what you have just said to me, 
** T have to work for doctors, and it will never do for me to 
say what I think ’’ ?—I said I was not going to say anything 
about doctors’ prescriptions. 

We now know that those two pills which you gave her con- 
tained a whole grain of morphia?—I was told to give them 
together at once. 

Sir Martay Samson—The doctor himself will say what 
they contained. 

Cross-examination continued—lIf you had known that the 
pills contained I grain of morphia, would you have given 
them to her ’—No, I would not. 
wee you present when Dr. Griffiths gave his evidence ?— 

O. 

92 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


Elizabeth Lewis Jones 

Have you ever read’in the newspapers what he said?—I 
suppose so. 

You have told us that if you had known that they con- 
tained a whole grain of morphia you would not have given 
them to her. You know from your experience that a whole 
grain of morphia is a serious thing? Tell me, if you had 
known that they contained a whole grain of morphia why 
you would not have given them to her !—I would have thought 
they were dangerous. 

Re-examined by Sir Marztay Samson—But you did not 
know then, and you don’t know now, what the contents of 
those pills were ?—No. 

You did not know whether there was half a grain of 
morphia or anything else in the pills!—No. 

The doctor told you, as I understand, that both were to 
be given at the same time ?—Yes. 

Did you carry out these orders without any regard to 
what the particular drug in the pills was ?—Yes. 

Did you see a pillbox at all?—No. 

In the ordinary course of things the pills are in a box, 
and the label on the box shows how they are to be taken ?— 
Yes. 

But Greenwood did not show any box to you?—No. 

At the moment when Greenwood came back from Dr. 
Griffiths did he bring a box back with him’?—He brought 
the pills in something. I cannot tell what it was. 

But did you see a box?—No. 

When he had them in his hand what did he do with them? 
—He gave them to me to give to Mrs. Greenwood. 

You understood then that they were both to be given at 
once !—Yes. 

Have you any recollection whether you saw them wrapped 
up in anything’?—No, sir. 

Do you remember what colour the pills were ?—Brownish. 

When they were put in your hand what did you do with 
them !—I put them on a spoon and gave them to Mrs. Green- 
wood, and she put them on her tongue. | 

What was her condition at that time!—She was very weak. 

Did you give any special treatment in regard to the pain 
she was complaining of?—I applied hot-water bottles to the 
abdomen. 

It has been suggested that the police officers who have been 
to you have threatened you. Is that true?—No. 

Did Mrs. Greenwood say earlier that she had pains in the 
abdomen ?—Yes. As soon as I gave her something by the 
mouth she vomited. 

Had you any cases similar to this before?—It differed. _ 

In what respect?—I was told it was a heart case. Miss 

93 


Harold Greenwood. 


Elizabeth Lewis Jones 


Phillips told me it was a heart case, and I had not had a 
heart case like this before. 

If the accused says that Mrs. Greenwood was much easier 
between 10.30 and 11 p.m., was that true?—No; there was 
no time between the time when I arrived and the time of her 
death when she was really better. 


Dr. Tuomas R. GRIFFITHS, examined by Sir Maruay 
Samson—I am a medical practitioner practising in Kidwelly. 
Mrs. Greenwood had been a patient of mine for sixteen years. 
I signed the necessary certificate stating that the cause of her 
death was valvular disease of the heart. During the two or 
three years preceding her death I attended her three or four 
times each year. I began to see her more frequently for the 
last four or five weeks before her death. I then noticed a 
marked change in her health, due to general weakness owing 
to a tumour, and I suspected that she had heart disease. 

During those last four or five weeks you prescribed dif- 
ferent medicines for her. Did any of these medicines con- 
tain arsenic!—None at all. 

Sir E. Marsnatu Hati—I object to the form of the last 
question. The proper form is, ‘‘ What did you prescribe? ”’ 
because there are so many things that contain arsenic. 

Examination continued—To the best of your belief, there 
was no arsenic in any of the prescriptions you gave—No 
arsenic. 

Do you make up your own prescriptions?—I do. 

What took place at first on the Sunday of Mrs. Green- 
wood’s fatal illness?—Greenwood came to my house about 
6.30 p.m., and said his wife was not very well. I went 
over to Rumsey House immediately. I found Mrs. Greenwood 
sitting on a couch in her bedroom, and she was vomiting. 
She told me she had been eating gooseberry pie and it had 
made her sick, as it always did. She was complaining of 
pain in the gastric region. 

Did you prescribe anything for her ?—Yes. Sips of brandy 
and water. 

What did you do then?—I went into the garden with 
Greenwood and spent about an hour there with him. 

At whose suggestion was that /—At Greenwood’s suggestion. 

What did you do there?—We had a game of clock-golf. 

Who suggested that you should play clock-golf?—Mr. 
Greenwood. 

Did you know at the time whether or not the patient suf- 
fered that afternoon from diarrhoea ?!—No, I did not. 

Had you had such knowledge would you have thought an 
immediate prescription necessary for the patient ?—No. 


When did you next see Mrs. Greenwood?—About 7.30 
p-m. 


94 - 


( 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


Dr Thomas R. Griffiths 


Did you as a result of that visit prescribe anything 1—I 
prescribed a mixture containing bismuth. 

What was the purpose of that mixture/—lIt is a sedative 
for the stomach. 

You mean it would allay sickness if there were any J—Yes. 

Assuming there had been diarrhea, would it have had 
any effect on that?—It might have had a little effect in 
respect of that. 

By the Court—Did you know at 7.30 that she was suffering 
from diarrhcea!—No, I did not know. 

Ezamimation continued—When did you next see Mrs. 
Greenwood ?—I next saw her about 10.30, when the accused 
again called for me and said that his wife was still unwell. 

What did you find her condition to be then?—She was 
then still vomiting and very weak, and I prescribed two 
pills, one to be given immediately and one in an hour. 

Did you make up those pills ?—No. 

How did you obtain them !—They were bought ready made. 

What are the contents of them ?—Each pill contains half a 
grain of opium. It is known as ‘‘ Pill Opium.’’ It means 
that there was one-fortieth of a grain of morphia in each pill. 

In your opinion, would it be correct to say that those pills 
were too strong to give to the patient /—No, not at all. 

The actual amount of morphia in each pill was one-fortieth 
of a grain ?—Yes. 

Opium is 10 per cent. of morphia, is it not ?—Yes. 

Sir E. Marsuatit Hatt—I protest, because the evidence the 
witness is now giving is entirely different from that which he 
gave at the previous hearing. Here is a doctor who has 
sworn on three previous occasions that the pills contained 
half a grain of morphia each, and Dr. Willcox has been 
examined from that point of view. I have got experts down 
from London to prove that 1 grain of morphia would be a 
dangerous dose, and now at this stage, without having given 
any notice, they have taken the evidence of the doctor, which 
is quite different. 

Mr. Justice Sazarman—Don’t get excited. 

Sir E. Marspatn Hatt—I don’t get excited, but here is 
an entire change of case. This doctor has sworn on three 
occasions that he had given her two pills that contained half a 
grain of morphia each. 

By the Court—How did you come to say there was half a 
grain of morphia?’—It was a mistake, my lord. 

Sir E. Marsnauty Haut—Morphia is an alkaloid of opium. 

Mr. Justice SHzarmMan—There might have been a mistake 
honestly made. 

Sir E. Marsuautit Hati—yYes; but it is an entire change of 
case; therefore I ought to have had notice of it. 

95 


Harold Greenwood. 
Dr Thomas R. Griffiths 


Mr. Justice SHzarmMan—When an important witness makes 
a mistake, that does not mean that I ought to say that the 
trial ought not to proceed. Because there has been a mis- 
understanding, it has not put an end to the defence; it only 
weakens, perhaps, what you might call one element in the 
case. 

Sir E. Marsuatt Hatu—yYes; but I am at this moment 
taken entirely by surprise, and I hope you will not ask me 
to cross-examine this witness to-night. 

Sir Marztay Samson—It is only right that I should say 
that Dr. Willcox was not asked anything bearing upon any 
result of the giving of these morphia pills. 

Mr. Justice SazarmMan—I am going to apply my mind only 
to the evidence given at the present hearing, and not to 
anything that has been said at the police court. 

Examination continued—Did the accused ever suggest at 
any time that the pills were too strong ?—No. 

On the occasion of your third visit, about 10 o’clock, what 
did you prescribe?—I prescribed two opium pills, and went 
back to my house. 

At 11 o’clock, in accordance with your usual custom at 
night, did you go for a walk?—Yes. 

And did you see the accused standing in the gateway of 
Rumsey House ?—Yes; I asked him how Mrs. Greenwood was. 
He replied that she was somewhat easier. 

You did not go into Rumsey House on that occasion /—No; 
I continued my walk. 

Why did you not go into the house?—I did not think it 
was necessary because the accused had told me she was easier. 

When did you pay your next visit?—Somewhere about 3 
o’clock. 

The nurse says you were there about 1 o’clock. Have you 
any recollection of the visit?—I have no recollection of the 
visit. I have no recollection whatever of that. 

Did you not make the visit !—I don’t say I did not make it. 

Tell us about your next visit, which you say you made 
at 3 o’clock?—At about 3 o’clock in the morning, while I 
was in bed, I heard a knock at the door, and I went to the 
window. Nurse Jones was there, and I spoke to her, and 
then went over to Rumsey House. When I got there the 
patient was in a moribund state, and she died some time 
about 3.30 a.m. 

By the Court—You were there when she died ?—Yes. 

Who else were in the room ?—Nurse Jones, the accused, and 
Miss Greenwood. 

_ Bxamination continued—Did you learn anything further 
in regard to the patient’s symptoms at this visit?—I did. I 
learned she was suffering from diarrhea. 

96 


Evidence for Prosecution. 
Dr Thomas R. Griffiths 


Did you attend the post-mortem examination held after 
the exhumation, and have you seen the report of Mr. Webster’s 
analysis of the organs ?—Yes. 

By the Courr—If that analysis is correct, it alters your 
opinion /—Yes. 

Examination continued—If that analysis is correct, what 
do you say was the cause of Mabel Greenwood’s death ?—I 
should say what was found in her body, namely, arsenic. 

By the Court—When you saw Mrs. Greenwood on the 
occasion of your first visit, is it correct that you said she 
was suffering from bile?—I said, my lord, that she was 
suffering from bile. 

Examination continued—lf Greenwood said that you said 
she was very much better at 7.30, would that be correct ?—I 
said she was much easier. 

Did you see her between 7.30 and 10 o’clock 2—No. 

Do you remember telling Greenwood after 7.30 that she 
was much better 7—No. 

Cross-examined by Sir E. Marsnatyt Hati—If you had 
given her two half-grains of morphia you would not be sur- 
prised that she died at 4 o’clock?—Yes, I would. 


The Court adjourned. 


97 


Second Day—Wednesday, 3rd November, 1920. 


Dr. Tuomas R. GRIFFITHS, cross-examination continued by 
Sir E. Marsaaty Hatt—How long have you been in attend- 
ance on the Greenwood family!—For sixteen years. 

And, so far as Mrs. Greenwood is concerned, was your 
attendance continuous !—Yes. 

Have you always found Mr. and Mrs. Greenwood on the 
most affectionate terms ?—Yes. 

Did Mrs. Greenwood suffer from a tumour which caused a 
discharge ?—Yes ; but I do not think she knew of the existence 
of this growth. 

Did you say that her heart was distinctly bad ?!—Yes. 

You said that at 6.30 on the Sunday evening Mr. Green- 
wood came for you ?—Yes. 

And when you arrived at the house did you find Mrs. 
Greenwood on a sofa attended by her daughter Irene?— 
Yes. 

Had she been sick /—Yes. 

And you formed the opinion that it was bile ?—Yes. 

After she had vomited was she undoubtedly easier !—Yes, 
at the time. 

Did you get from her then the statement that she had been 
eating gooseberry tart /—Yes. 

With regard to Mrs. Greenwood’s sickness and the possible 
effect of eating gooseberry tart, do you agree that some people 
are peculiarly susceptible to particular kinds of fruit ?— 
Yes. 

And had you any reason to doubt at the time that her sick- 
ness was due to the rough coating of the gooseberry skins ?!— 
No. 

And you thought it would be better to get her into bed ?— 
Yes. 

And while she was being put to bed by her daughter 
Irene you went out into the garden with Mr. Greenwood 
and played clock-golf?—Yes. 

Then you returned to the house about 7. 30, and you 
examined Mrs. Greenwood in bed %—Yes. 

Did you examine her abdomen ?—Yes. 

I believe the post-mortem showed that the walls of her 
heart were thin and weak?—That ig so. 

And you formed the opinion when she died that death 
was due to valvular disease of the heart 1—Yes. 

Would the drinking of burgundy increase the bad effect of 
eating gooseberries /—Possibly so. 

“ It would set up fermentation and consequent irritation 7— 
es. 

98 


Evidence for Prosecution. 
Dr Thomas R. Griffiths 


Is the result of fermentation in the stomach first of all to 
set up gas!—Yes. 

And if the gas has not passed away you get abnormal 
pressure on the stomach !—Yes. 

And if the wind does not go out you force the heart into a 
corner /—That is so. 

And the effect of that is collapse ?—Yes. 

And that is very commonplace !—Yes, especially among women. 

Supposing she had eaten gooseberry tart at 1.30, the process 
of fermentation would not begin for some little time ?—That 
is so. 

When it did begin it would take the line of least resistance 
and affect the thin, weak walls of the heart?—That is so.* 

Have you ever seen a case of poisoning before !—Yes, many 
years ago, in hospital. 

At 10.30 you went away feeling she was easier, and you 
went to get her a bismuth mixture?—Yes. It was a clear, 
reddish fluid. I dispensed it myself. 

What was the size of the bottle?—A 2-oz. bottle with 
sixteen doses in it. 

That is a very proper prescription for a person suffering 
from gastric distress/—Yes; and I gave her as small a dose 
as possible in order not to have too much fluid in the 
stomach. 

You have no doubt whatever that there were gooseberry 
skins in the vomit!—None whatever. 

Whatever caused the vomiting was also a danger to the 
heart 1—Yes. 

The danger to the heart, in your opinion, was a very grave 
danger of death!—A very grave danger. 

Her health was in a serious condition !—It was in a serious 
condition. 

With regard to the 1 a.m. visit, you still think you did not 
go there’—I did not go there at 1 o’clock. 

Which of the police came to see you first about the case 1— 
Superintendent Hodge Lewis, about October. I made a written 
statement to him, and I am quite certain that in that state- 
ment I did not say anything about a 1 o’clock visit. 

Is it your impression still that you never paid it?—I do 
not remember anything about it. 

Did Nurse Jones tell you anything about the diarrhoea 
before Mrs. Greenwood died !—No. 

Did anybody tell you about it before she died ?—No. 

By the Covurt—You had diagnosed this as acute indiges- 
tion /—Yes. 


* This is misleading. What is possibly suggested is that the 
inflated stomach would press against the heart and so hamper its 


action. 
99 


Harold Greenwood. 


Dr Thomas R. Griffiths 


Would your opinion have been altered if you had known 
there was diarrhoea !—I would not like to say that. 

Cross-examination continued—Would you expect some 
diarrhoea in a gastric condition like this!—It would be quite 
possible. 

When did you say you sent her the pills?—After the 10 
o’clock visit. 

Do you remember the occasion on which the accused came 
to your house for you, and you did not know he was in your 
house until your sister came to tell you ?—Yes. 

Can you fix the time of that !—That was the 10 o’clock visit. 

How long was he in the house before you knew he was 
there?—Ten or fifteen minutes. : 

The first you knew of it was when your sister told you he 
was there /—Yes. 

Is it suggested that your sister, Miss Griffiths, was a party 
to detaining the accused ?—I do not believe it for one moment. 

I ask you that in order to stem the question being made. 
As far as you know, was there any great friendship between 
the accused and your sister ?—Only a very ordinary friend- 
ship. 

You know of this letter that has been produced ?—I have 
never heard about such a letter. 

You have heard it read now?—No, I have not. 

Now, Dr. Griffiths, there is an enormous difference between 
morphia and opium?—I know that. 

No man who has had anything to do with drugs would use 
them as identical terms?—They are used; they are called 
morphia. 

An opium pill called a morphia pill?’—(No answer.) 

The quality of morphia in opium depends, does it not, on 
the quality of the opium and where it comes from?—That 
is so. 

By the Courtr—Morphia is ten times as strong as opium, 
is that it?—Yes. 

Cross-ezamination continued—A tenth to a third of a grain 
is a dose of pure morphia?—A dose is one-eighth to one-half. 
eat one-eighth to one-half of a grain is a dose ?— 

es. 

You said that, in your opinion, there would have been no 
danger in giving this woman two half-grains of morphia !—I 
meant two half-grains of pure opium. 

I asked you the question last night purposely before the 
Court rose. I asked you if it would have been safe to give 
this woman two half-grains of morphia, and you said it was 
perfectly safe. Did you think I meant opium then ?—Yes. 

Mr. Justice Suzarman—lt is entirely for the jury to say 
whether he is accurate or not in saying that he thought you 
meant opium. 

100 


Evidence for Prosecution. 
Dr Thomas R. Griffiths 


Sir E. Marsnann Hati—I give every allowance to every 
witness who says what I do not expect him to say. 

Cross-examination continued—Have you the smallest doubt 
whatever that if you, as a medical man, were accurate when 
you said you gave her two half-grains of morphia after 10 
o’clock she would have been dead before 4 o’clock ?—If I had 
given her morphia she would, but I did not give her morphia. 

Let me quite understand it. If you had been accurate 
in the evidence you gave to the coroner and to the magis- 
trates, that you had given her two half-grains of morphia, 
that would have killed her for certain?—That is so. 

Now, let me see what you did say. I want to do perfect 
justice to you, and justice also to the one who is instructing 
me. In cross-examination you said, ‘‘ In each pill there 
was half a grain of morphia. I have heard that the defendant 
states that both pills were given at the same time, according 
to the directions on the box. In her condition at 10.30 
it would be perfectly safe to give her a grain of morphia.’’ 
Now you mean to say that you understood that they were 
talking about opium!—[The witness did not reply. ] 

Did you think Mr. T. R. Ludford, the solicitor for the 
defence, was talking about opium ?—It was opium I gave. 

That is not an answer. I am very considerate with you. 
Do answer the question, please. Do you represent to the jury 
that you, a medical man of twenty-five years’ standing, when 
you were cross-examined by the representative of the accused, 
who asked you whether you did not give two half-grains of 
morphia, and you said yes—did you think that he was cross- 
examining you about opium?—[The witness did not reply. | 

Do you suggest that Mr. Ludford was under any misappre- 
hension when he was cross-examining you!—I do not. 

Did you mean to suggest that the pills had caused her 
death 1—No. 

What! You did not appreciate that!—No. 

I am so sorry to press you, but I am defending a man on 
trial for his life, you know. Did you not know that what 
Mr. Ludford was trying to do was to say that what had 
killed her was the fact that two half-grains of morphia had 
been given her?—I did. 

Then why not be fair?—I am trying to be. 

Dr. Griffiths, you know you said you did not know about 
this until yesterday morning. You know that the accused 
had told the police it was the pills that did it, and that 
after she took the pills she went to sleep and never woke 
again 1—Yes. ; 

Did you know this, that as a fact within a few minutes of 
taking these pills, she did go to sleep, and that she never 
woke ?—[The witness did not answer. | 


You know that, don’t you?—(No answer.) ii 


Harold Greenwood. 
Dr Thomas R. Griffiths 


Do you know Dr. Griffiths, of Swansea, a medical man of 
high reputation in this neighbourhood t—Yes. 

And did you get to know the day before yesterday that 
Dr. Griffiths was here }—Not until yesterday. 

As a matter of fact, what quantity of those pills had you 
in your surgery on 15th or 16th June?—I might have had 
about half a gross. 

How long had you had them !—They might have been there 
a few months. 

Did you keep what I may call raw drugs for making up 
medicine ?—Yes. 

In what form did you get arsenic !—In liquid form. It is 
one of the strongest solutions on the market. : 

What tonic did you give Mrs. Greenwood !—[The witness 
produced a paper containing a copy of the prescription and 
handed it to counsel.* It had been copied from the prescrip- 
tion book. | 

When did you copy this ?—Last night. 

Where did you get it from?—Out of my book. 

Where is the book ?—At home. 

Why did you not bring the book? Just be careful, doctor. 
Is there a book?—lIt is at home. 

By the Court—Why did you not bring it here this morn- 
ing? Perhaps you did not understand, but I told you, if 
I remember rightly, ‘“‘ Bring it on a sheet of paper, and 
bring the book as well.’’ Will you kindly bring it here 
to-morrow ?—I will. 

Cross-examination continwed—Are you prepared to swear 
that you never gave her anything excepting what is in this 
prescription?—I might have dropped one or two of the 
ingredients. 

Do you suggest that you write down in the book every 
individual prescription before making it out ?—Not always. 

Can you tell me the last time this prescription was used {— 
I should say it was some date in May or June. 

Are you a toxicologist }—No. 

Do you know anything of the Marsh test ’—Nothing. 

Mr. Justice SHEARMAN (fo counsel)—I suggest that when you 
finish with the doctor he should go home at once and get the 
book and give it to counsel for the Crown by this afternoon. 

Cross-examination continued—Do you remember reading 
something of a case in which people were poisoned by beer 
in the Manchester district ?—I remember it. 

There has been since 1914 a great shortage of sugar {—Yes. 

Do you know that glucose has been used largely to take 
the place of sugar? Probably as a substance for commercial 
use it was in much demand ?—Yes. 


*See Appendix IV. 
102 


Evidence for Prosecution. 
Dr Thomas R. Griffiths 


Mr. Justice SHzarman—You bring here any book or papers 
you have containing entries relating to prescriptions made 
out for Mrs. Greenwood. I suggest that you go home at 
once and bring it back after the adjournment. 

Sir Mariay Samson—I will reserve my re-examination 
until after the adjournment. 


Mary ADELINA GRIFFITHS, examined by Sir Maruay Samson 
—I reside with my brother, Dr. Griffiths, at Henblas, Kid- 
welly. Rumsey House, where Mrs. Greenwood lived, was just 
opposite our house. I remember the accused calling for the 
doctor on 15th June, 1919, between 9 and 10 p.m. Before 
taking him to the doctor I asked how Mrs. Greenwood was, 
and he said that she was very ill; he thought it was very 
serious, and that probably she would not get better. I asked 
him if it was one of her usual fainting attacks, and he replied 
that he thought it was worse than that. 

How would you describe Greenwood’s usual spirits !—They 
were light, as a rule. 

How did his spirits seem that night !—Light. 

Can you tell us anything else he said while in the drawing- 
room ?—I first of all mentioned something about Mrs. Green- 
wood going on her holidays, and then accused told me some- 
thing about a fortune-teller. I cannot remember all that he 
said, but I remember one thing that he said, that was that 
he was going for a honeymoon. 

By the Court—Do you mean that it was a fortune-teller 
who told that, or did he tell it himself?—He told me a 
fortune-teller had told him that he was going on his honey- 
moon. 

Examination continued—How long was the accused in the 
drawing-room with you before he went into the surgery ?— 
About ten minutes. 

Later did Miss Irene Greenwood call and wait until her 
father and the doctor returned to Rumsey House !—Yes. 

After Mrs. Greenwood had died, did Greenwood come over 
to your house to use the telephone ?—Yes. 

How soon after she had died?—The same week. 

Is there a telephone in Rumsey House 1—No. 

Before Mrs. Greenwood’s death, do you remember having a 
conversation with the accused about somebody ringing him 
up on your telephone?—Yes; he said it was the charwoman 
at his Llanelly office. I replied that I did not think it was 
the charwoman, but Miss Jones, of the Mercury office (the 
present Mrs. Greenwood). 

What did the accused say ?—He admitted that it was. 

Had you heard that particular voice on more than one 
occasion when Greenwood was rung up?—Oh, yes. 


How often did you hear it?—I cannot say. Ps 


Harold Greenwood. 
Mary Adelina Griffiths 


Was it a rare occurrence or a frequent occurrence !—Fairly 
frequent. 

Did your telephone ring, either on the Monday on which 
Mrs. Greenwood died or the following day, and did the same 
voice that you had heard frequently before ask for the 
accused ?—Yes. I sent for the accused, and he took the call. 

After that did the same person ring up the accused on your 
telephone frequently !—Yes ; I think once a day. 

After that, did the accused use your telephone again ?— 
Not very often after that. 

[Shown the letter beginning, ‘‘ My dearest May,’’ which 
was read in Court yesterday.*] Look at this letter, please. 
When did you receive it?—On Friday, 26th September. 

In whose handwriting is that letter }—It is in the accused’s 
handwriting. 

Cross-examined by Sir E. MarsHatn Hatt—You knew Mrs. 
Greenwood well ?—Yes. 

Did your brother, to your knowledge, take a serious view 
of the condition of her heart /—He never spoke to me about it. 

How soon after the death of Mrs. Greenwood were you 
asked to give an account of her death?—I don’t remember 
exactly, but it was before the inquest. 

How long before? I want particularly to know, or I 
would not press you?—About four or five months after the 
death. 

The accused’s marriage to Miss Jones created a good deal 
of gossip at Kidwelly?—Yes, at the time. 

When did you first hear a scintilla of the suggestion that 
Mrs. Greenwood may not have died a natural death ?—In the 
autumn some time. 

Would that be after his second marriage !—No; before the 
marriage. 

When did you hear the word ‘‘ poisoned ’’ mentioned in 
connection with Mrs. Greenwood’s death?—In the autumn. 

Is the vicar a friend of yours ?—Yes. 

You did not hear from him ?—No. 

Do you know Miss Phillips ?—Yes. 

She knows a good deal of what goes on in Kidwelly ?— 
I don’t know what she knows. 

Would it be untrue to suggest that she is quite well known 
as a gossip?—I should not like to say anything at all. 

Did you talk over the subject with her before the second 
marriage?—She mentioned it. 

Were you on friendly terms and nothing more with Green- 
wood !—I was a personal friend of the family. 

Do you remember on Friday, 26th September, the accused 
calling upon you?—Yes; I saw him in the evening. 


* See page 74. 
104 


Evidence for Prosecution. 
Mary Adelina Griffiths 


Did you see him before on that day ‘—No. 

Did the letter come after you had seen him !—No; the letter 
came in the morning, and I saw him in the evening. 

By the Court—Was that letter sent over by hand %—Yes. 

About what time?—About 11 o’clock in the morning. 

Cross-examination continued—I suggest that you saw the 
accused before the letter was written?—I did not see him 
for some time. 

Mr. Justice SazarMan—lIt says in the letter, ‘‘ I have been 
trying to get at you for the last fortnight.’’ 

Cross-examination continued—Was that letter written at 
your suggestion /—Certainly not. 

Did you ask him whether it was true he was going to 
marry Gladys Jones?—Yes, I did ask him. 

= the Cournt—Was that after you had received the letter ? 
—Yes. 

Cross-examination continued—lI suggest that it was before? 
—I say it was the same night. 

Did you tell him that people had coupled your name with 
that of Miss Gladys Jones!—No. 

Did people couple your name at all?—No; not at that time. 

When did your name come into it? When they got to 
know about the letter 1—No. 

How did they get to know about the letter ?—I do not know. 

You never told any one about the letter /—No. 

But it seemed to be known in Kidwelly?—I didn’t tell 
anybody. 

You did not tell Miss Phillips ?—No. 

Nothing was said about this letter at all?—No, not until 
the inquest. 

When was anything said about the letter first of all?—At 
the inquest. 

Were you asked for the letter /—Yes. 

By whom !—By Mr. Seward Pearce, the solicitor. 

How did he know about the letter?—I had told Super- 
intendent Jones about it. 

Therefore the interview with the police must have been 
after 26th September ?—Must have been. 

How long after?—I cannot be sure. 

About how long?—Some time after he had married. 

Would it be about the end of October ?—Yes. 

Who did Greenwood speak to about it?—Superintendent 
Jones. 

Mr. Justice SHzarman—He must have mentioned the letter 
to somebody, or the police would not have asked for it. 
Either the witness or Greenwood must have mentioned it. 
Did the servant who took it over speak about it? 

Cross-examination continued—You asked the accused if 


he was going to marry Gladys Jones ?!—Yes. : 
10 


Harold Greenwood. 
Mary Adelina Griffiths 


Did you say that you knew about the marriage licence ?—I 
said that I had heard about it. 

Did he say that that was merely a piece of paper, and it 
could be torn up ?—He did not say that to me. 

Is it true that you asked him, ‘‘ Are you going to be 
married next Wednesday? ’’—I believe I asked him if it was 
true. 

Did he not then tell you not to listen to gossip ?—Yes; 
something like that. 

Did he say that he was free enough to propose to you }— 
Yes; he mentioned that he was free if he liked. 

Did you say, ‘‘ I will dare you to do it *’*!—No. 

Did he say after you dared him, ‘‘I will write you a- 
letter of proposal ’’ {—No. 

Did he call for an answer to his letter on the Monday ?—No. 

Did he say to you, ‘‘ Well, May, what do you say?”’ 
And did you say ‘‘ No ’’ to him?—I did not say it as roughly 
as that. 

Did you say to him, ‘‘ I say ‘ No’ ’’?—I did not treat it 
seriously at all. I treated the matter all through as a joke. 

Did you think that the mention of a honeymoon was made 
in September or in June?—(The witness’s reply was 
inaudible.) 

Is there any foundation for the suggestion that you kept 
Greenwood from the doctor on the night of Mrs. Green- 
wood’s death ?—Certainly not. 

Mr. Justice SHearman—I do not understand that there 
is any such suggestion against the witness. 

Sir Marztay Samson—I have never made any such 
suggestion. 

Cross-examination continued—Did you know that Mrs. 
Greenwood was a little jealous of you?—No; and I should 
never have believed it, unless she told me herself, and she 
never did. 

Did you know that there was a difference between Mr. 
Greenwood and Mrs. Greenwood over you?—No. 

Did you know that Miss Phillips had turned the children 
against you !—-No. 

You thought that letter one of great importance?’—I did 
not think it was of any importance. 

Then why did you mention the letter to the police?— 
Because I was asked about it. . 

Did you not get the accused to write that letter to put you 
right in the sight of the world !—Certainly not. 

So that you would be able to say, ‘‘ All gossip. There is 
nothing between Mr. Greenwood and me. He asked me to 
marry him and I refused ’’ !—There is not a particle of truth 
in such a suggestion. 

You treated it as a joke ?—Yes. 

106 


Evidence for Prosecution. 
Mary Adelina Griffiths 


_ Then why did you not put it in the fire?—That is what I 
intended doing, but we do not always do what we intend 
doing. 

You gave it to Mr. Pearce, you say ?!—Yes, at the inquest. 

Do you know that the defence had applied on two 
occasions for a copy of that letter and could not get it?— 
I do not know anything about that. 

Were you asked privately by Mr. Pearce for it ?—Privately. 
ae Greenwood ever written to you before ?—Never in his 
ife. 

Can you suggest why he wrote this letter 7—I have no idea. 

It would be understandable if you had asked him?—I 
never thought of such a thing. 

Re-examined by Sir Martay Samson—When did you receive 
the letter?—About 11 o’clock in the morning. 

Had you seen Greenwood recently before that?—I had not 
seen him for a long time. 

On this occasion you saw him in your own house about 
9.30 at night ?—Night. 

What did you say to him?—I asked him what he meant 
by writing such a letter, and what he meant to convey. 

What did he say ?—‘‘ There is nothing in it.”’ 

It was suggested that you dared him to write that par- 
ticular letter. Is there any particular truth in the matter? 
—Not the slightest. 

Further cross-examined by Sir E. Marsuary Hati—lI 
understand you to say that you did mention a marriage 
licence. Did you know, as a matter of fact, that he had got 
a licence? 

By the Court—She could not know, you know. Did she 
hear ? 

Further cross-examination continued—Did you hear that 
he had got a licence? Somebody in the town had told you 
about the licence?—Yes; but I did not know at that time. 

Though now you know, in fact, that a licence was obtained 
on the 24th ?—Yes. 

Did you ever discuss the question of the licence with 
Nurse Jones!—I believe I did. 

Did Nurse Jones bring you a message from Mr. Green- 
wood saying that he had got a licence?—(No reply.) 

By the Court—Did Nurse Jones speak to you about a 
licence /—Yes. 

Further cross-examination continued—Did you say that a 
licence was only a piece of paper and could be torn up?— 
No. 


Marcaret Ann Morris, examined by Mr. Wiurrip Lewis— 
Were you the cook at Rumsey House on 15th June, 1919?!— 


Yes. 
107 


Harold Greenwood. 


Margaret Ann Morris 


Did the servants have the same food as the family ?—Yes, 
sir. 

Did you eat the same food ?—Yes. 

Did you suffer any ill-effects from eating the lunch ?— 
No, sir. 

Cross-examined by Sir E. MarsHatn Hatt—Was it lamb 
or beef ?—Lamb; a leg of lamb. 

How long had you been with the Greenwoods?—Two years. 

They were a very happy and affectionate family /—Yes. 

You were at Rumsey House before Hannah Williams ?!— 
Yes. 

You were there with her ?—Yes. 

And when you went there Mrs. Greenwood was not very 
well {—Yes. 

Did she get worse /—Yes. 

You cooked the dinner on this particular Sunday, and you 
did not go into the dining-room ?—No, sir. 

Hannah Williams would lay the cloth there ?—Yes. 

Did Mrs. Greenwood have burgundy with her lunch very 
often 1—Yes. 

And did Miss Irene have it!—Sometimes she did. 

Have you ever seen port wine in the house!—No, never. 

Did Hannah Williams ever tell you she had missed a 
bottle of port or a bottle of wine at all!—No, she never 
said anything. 

Did Mrs. Greenwood tell you anything about Hannah 
Williams—her drinking habits?—No, sir. 

Did she tell you that she had given her notice ?—Yes, sir. 

Why did she give her notice?—Because she stopped out 
late. 

Did Hannah Williams come in through the window one 
night !—Yes. 

As a matter of fact, had you ever seen Hannah Williams 
taking wine in the house?—No, sir. 

_Do you remember the occasion when she ran away ’—Yes, 
sir. 
Who brought her back?—Her auntie. 

I think Hannah Williams left a week after Mrs. Green- 
wood died ?—Yes. 

The night Mrs. Greenwood died you had a gathered finger, 
and it kept you awake ?—Yes. 

Who slept in the same room with you?—Hannah and 
another servant. 

It is suggested that there was groaning heard from Mrs. 
Greenwood’s bedroom that night?—I heard the groaning 
sometimes. 

Groaning or moaning !—Groaning. 

As if she were in pain ?—yYes. 

Was there a roller-towel in the china pantry ?7—Yes. 

108 


Evidence for Prosecution. 
Margaret Ann Morris 

Did Mr. Greenwood’ use that pantry sometimes ?—Yes, 
very often. 

Was the china pantry the usual place for him to go to 
wash his hands after he had been working in the garden ?— 
Yes, sir. 

Do you know that the roller-towel was put there for the 
express purpose for him to go to wash his hands there so 
that he need not trouble to go upstairs?—yYes, sir. 


Did other people besides Mr. Greenwood wash their hands 
there !—Sometimes. 


Lity GwyNEIRA PowELL, examined by Mr. Witrrip Lewis 
—I was housemaid at Rumsey House, and laid the table for 
luncheon on the Sunday that Mrs. Greenwood was taken ill. 
The dinner included roast beef, potatoes, and gooseberry 
tart. I partook of it, and was none the worse. 

Cross-examined by Sir E. Marsuarn Hatut—Did you see 
any quarrel between the accused and his wife?—No. 

Was everybody fond of Mrs. Greenwood ?—Yes. 

Did both Miss Irene Greenwood and Mrs. Greenwood take 
burgundy ?7—Yes. 

And did the accused constantly use the roller towel and 
basin in the china pantry 1—Yes. 

Re-examined by Sir Marutay Samson—Who prepared the 
tea and took it into the drawing-room?—Hannah Williams. 
She also waited in the dining-room. 

So that you would not be there when they were having 
lunch or dinner ?—No. 

By the Courr—You simply put the bottles of burgundy 
from the sideboard on to the table?—Yes. 

Re-examination continwed—Were they big bottles !—Yes. 

[A bottle was produced, and witness said she never saw a 
bottle like it. It was a little longer than that. ] 

Sir E. Marshall Hall made an objection, and the judge 
said—‘‘ The witness says these people were in the habit of 
taking burgundy, and she also says she never saw them 
doing so.”’ 


Hannan WILLIAMS, examined by Mr. Wiurrip Lewis—Last 
year I was employed at Rumsey House as a parlourmaid. On 
the Sunday when Mrs. Greenwood was taken ill I laid the 
table for the midday meal. I put on the table whisky for 
Mr. Greenwood and port wine for Mrs. Greenwood. [Shown 
bottle produced.] The bottle of wine I placed on the table 
was the same shape as that bottle. It had a red label with 
black print on it. I got the bottle from the sideboard cup- 
board where the wine was kept. It was only three parts full 
when I put it on the table. I waited at lunch that day, and 
gave wine to Mrs. Greenwood. Mr. Greenwood drank whisky, 

109 


Harold Greenwood. 
Hannah Williams i 


and Miss Irene and the boy drank water. After lunch I put 
the whisky and wine back in the sideboard. 

Was there any wine in the bottle when you put it back in 
the sideboard 1—Yes ; it was only one glass that was taken out 
for Mrs. Greenwood. 

Was there any other bottle in the cupboard except the wine 
bottle and the whisky bottle which you put back?—No. 

At what time did you go out that night ?—About 5.30 p.m. 

And before doing so did you lay the table for supper /—Yes. 

Did you put on the table some port wine for Mrs. Green- 
wood !—Yes. 

Did you clear away the supper things that evening /—Yes. 

Have you ever seen the bottle which you placed on the table 
since /—No. 

Did you have occasion to go to the sideboard cupboard on 
the following morning !—Yes. 

What did you find there?—Only the whisky. 

Did you see the accused in the house on the Sunday morn- 
ing ?—Yes; in the drawing-room. 

Where did he come from ?—From the garden. 

Where did he go?—He went into the china pantry, and 
remained there for a quarter of an hour. He also went into 
the dining-room, 

Cross-examined by Sir E. Marsmatt Hauti—After Mrs. 
Greenwood died, did Police Sergeant Lewis call on you?— 
Yes. 

Did he call many times ?—Yes. 

Did either Superintendent Jones or the chief constable come 
to see you!—No. 

Were you sent to Carmarthen to see Detective Inspector 
Haigh ?—Yes. 

How many separate statements have you made and signed 
to the police?—I cannot remember. 

Was it about half a dozen or more?—It may be. 

You cannot say how many exactly ?—No. 

Did you tell the police that it was a bottle of port wine 
you put on the table for dinner on 15th June, and that it had 
on it a red label and black print, and that you read on it the 
word ‘“‘ Port ’’ 1—Yes. 

That you swear ?—Yes. 

I suggest to you that it was labelled ‘‘ Beaune ’’ !—No; it 
was port wine. 

Do you suggest that Mrs. Greenwood was in the habit of 
drinking port wine?—Oh, no, sir. 

What did she drink?—Burgundy, but port wine was there 
on this Sunday. 

I know you have said so. Do you know that ‘‘ Beaune ”’ 
is burgundy !—No, sir. 

110 


Evidence for Prosecution. 
Hannah Williams 


What was the burgundy she was drinking—White label. 

What was written on the white label of the bottle of bur- 
gundy that Mrs. Greenwood used to drink?—I cannot re- 
member. : 

Had you seen Mrs. Greenwood drinking burgundy often !— 
Not to my knowledge. 

Did she not drink it always at dinner 7—Not always. 

Nearly always ?—Yes. 

Do you mean to say that you can’t state what sort of label 
was on the bottle from which Mrs. Greenwood drank bur- 
gundy !—It was a white label. 

Was there anything written on the white label ?—There was 
something printed on it. 

Tell me to the best of your recollection what it was !—There 
were three red letters on the white label. 

And you are quite certain that the bottle you put on the 
table on this Sunday was a black bottle with a red label with 
black letters, and the word ‘‘ Port ’’ on it?—It had ‘‘ Port 
Wine ”’ written on it. 

Do you swear that /—Yes, I do. 

Did Sergeant Lewis ask you about the wine !—Yes. 

Did he ask you whether you had seen Greenwood tampering 
with the wine on that Sunday ?/—No. 

Did you know why they wanted to inquire about the wine? 
—No. 

Did you know that there was any suspicion in any one’s 
mind in November last that Mrs. Greenwood had been 
poisoned /—No. 

And you did not know the object Sergeant Lewis had in 
asking you the question 7—No. 

When did you leave Rumsey House?—The week of Mrs. 
Greenwood’s death. 

Did you think anything about the matter until Sergeant 
Lewis came to see you in November /—No. 

Did he ask you a question, or did you make a statement !— 
He asked a question. 

What did he ask you?—I don’t remember. 

Did he ask you a question, and did you simply say ‘‘ Yes ”’ 
or ‘‘ No ’’4—I said ‘‘ Yes”’ or ‘‘ No.’’ The last thing he 
asked me was about the wine. 

You remember the last thing, but what was the first thing 
he asked you?—I can’t say. 

How long did the interview last?—About half an hour. 

By the Court—Did you sign something the first time he 
came?—Yes. The sergeant came to see me again in about a 
week, and the third time he came was some weeks afterwards. 
He came again about two months later. 

How many times did you sign statements /—About five times 
—four times to Sergeant Lewis and once to Mr. Haigh. 

111 


Harold Greenwood. 
Hannah Williams 


Cross-examination continued—What was the meat on the 
table on this particular Sunday?—lI could not say. 

That is very important. I want you to test your memory. 
What was the meat?—It might have been a joint of beef, 
or it might have been a leg of lamb. 

Did Mr. Haigh show you a bottle ?—Yes. 

What sort of bottle ?—Something similar to the one now in 
Court. 

Did you tell Mr. Haigh that the bottle on the table was 
similar to the one he showed you ?—Yes. 

How many wineglasses did you put on the table?—I put 
two. 

You put one for Miss Irene ?—I put one wineglass for Mrs. , 
Greenwood and one for Mr. Greenwood. 

Do you mean to say that you did not know that Miss Irene 
was in the habit of taking burgundy?—Not to my know- 
ledge. 

Had you never seen her taking burgundy /—Never. 

Will you swear that you never saw her taking burgundy ?— 
Yes, I will. 

Do you like Miss Irene?—I have never said anything 
against her. 

But do you like Miss Irene? 

Mr. Justice SHrarMan—That is a fair answer. She has 
said that she has not said anything against her. 

Cross-examination continued—Other witnesses say that she 
took burgundy sometimes?—I never saw her. 

What did you do after laying the table?—I sounded the 
gong and Mr. Greenwood came in. 

The dinner was on the table quite hot and you sounded the 
gong, and you say Greenwood was a quarter of an hour in 
the china pantry and five minutes in the drawing-room ?— 
He came into the dining-room while I was laying the table. 

Did Greenwood come in from the garden before you put 
the dinner on the table ?—He came in before I laid the table. 
I had to wait until he came out of the china pantry before 
going in to fetch the silver. I was not supposed to go 
into the room when he was there. 

Do you mean to say that you have never seen Greenwood 
in the china pantry before ?—I have never seen him. 

I put it to you that almost every Sunday when he was at 
home, or after each time he was in the garden, he did go in 
there to wash his hands at the sink !—No. 

Hundreds of times?—No, sir. He used to go upstairs to 
wash his hands. 

Do you mean to say that you never saw Mr. Greenwood 
wash his hands at the sink in the china pantry ?—No, sir. 

_ It was a long way to go right up to the bathroom, was 
it not ?—Not very long. 
112 ° 


Evidence for Prosecution. 
ae Hannah Williams 

Are you telling us the truth?—I have come here to tell 
the truth. 

Did you not know perfectly well that it was a customary 
thing for Mr. Greenwood and other members of the family to 
use that pantry to wash their hands?—I never saw them. 

Did the fact that he was in the pantry a quarter of an 
hour arouse your suspicion /—No, sir. 

Did his movements in the dining-room arouse your sus- 
picion !—No, sir. 

Did you volunteer to tell Sergeant Lewis that you had 
seen Mr. Greenwood in the china pantry?—No; I told him 
when he asked me. 

Did you ever make any alteration in the first statement 
you made?—No. 

What more did you tell the police? 

Mr. Justice SaearmMan—That is a very comprehensive 
question. You are asking her to give in one answer what 
she said on four occasions. 

Cross-exzamination continued—On what occasion did they 
ask you anything about the china pantry?’—On the second 
occasion. 

Did you tell any one about the china pantry !/—No. 

Mrs. Greenwood had given you notice ?!—No. 

Did you tell Benjamin Williams about the end of May, 
1919, that Mrs. Greenwood had given you notice, and you 
asked him to intercede for you, as your mother had a large 
family, and you did not want to lose your place ?!—No, sir; 
I didn’t say it. 

Will you swear it?—I will swear it. 

Did Mrs. Greenwood complain to you of your having taken 
the wine ?—No. 

Did you take the wine ?—No. 

Never touched it ?—No. 

There was no complaint by Mrs. Greenwood or any one 
else of your having taken the wine and put water in the 
bottle instead 1—No. 

Are you a teetotaller?—Yes, I am. I am having a name 
for having drunk it, but I am not drunk to-day. 

By the Courtr—Are you a teetotaller 7—Yes; I am always a 
teetotaller. 

Since when ?—I have never been drunk. 

Cross-ezamination continued—What do you mean by say- 
ing, ‘‘I am having the name for having drunk it, but I 
am not drunk to-day ’’? 

Mr. Justice SHzarman—She thought it was an imputation 
of drunkenness. 

[The witness explained that at the police court at Llanelly, 
Margaret Morris, the cook, and another, said they had seen 
her in a condition of having taken too much to drink. | 

: 113 


Harold Greenwood. 
Hannah Williams 


Cross-examination continued—Mr. Greenwood is here on his 
life. Do you swear it was an unusual thing for him to go to 
the china pantry !/—Yes. 

[Sir E. MarsHatL Hai was questioning the witness as to 
the time she said Greenwood came in from the garden when 
the judge interposed and said to him—‘‘ You were getting 
rather excited just now and shouted at the witness, and then 
I interposed. It was very difficult for the witness because 
of your emphasising. I have to see that the witnesses are 
not addressed in a vehement way.’ 

Sir E. Marsuaty Hatt—Why not? 

Mr. Justice SHearMan—Because it confuses them. 

Sir E. Marsuatt Hatt—Why, it is my duty to be 
vehement. The newspapers may take that if they wish, and 
will say that Marshall Hall was shouting at the judge. 

Mr. Justice SHzarmMaN—Have you finished speaking? Now 
let me have my say. I can trust you as you are trusting 
me. It is my duty to see that the witnesses are not upset. 

Sir E. Marswatyt Hatit—I will leave it at that. 

Mr. Justice Sunarman—lIf you suggest that I am making 
any imputation against you, all I have to say is that I am 
not. You can take that from me. | 

Cross-examination continued—li Mr. Greenwood were going 
from the garage into the china pantry, I suggest that the 
shortest way would be for him to go through the kitchen ?—It 
might be. 

It would be?—It might be, I said. 

Mr. Justice SHzarman—lIt is not the usual thing for people 
to go through the kitchen to the garden, or vice versa, when 
by going two or three yards further they would go through 
the hall to the garden. 

Sir E. Marsaatt Hati—lIt is not a question of two or 
three yards, and I suggest it would be untrue for her to 
say that it was not his habitual custom to go through the kitchen. 

[The Court then adjourned for lunch. On the resumption 
after the adjournment, Sir E. Marshall Hall, during a con- 
versation with the judge, said that if he raised his voice 
somewhat it was owing to the strain that he was under in 
such an important case. 

Mr. Justice SHmarmMan—I quite understand. The strain 
is obvious. | 

[Hannan Winiiams was recalled, but she was asked to 
stand down again until copies had been made for Court 
and counsel of all the statements she had made in relation 
to the case. | 


Dr. Tuos. R. Grirrirus (recalled), re-examined by Sir 
Maruay Samson—I have been home to Kidwelly since the 
morning sitting, and I now produce my prescription book. 

114 


Evidence for Prosecution. 
Dr Thomas R. Griffiths 


Further cross-examined by Sir E. Marsuatn Hatt—Will 
you point out the entry in the book which you referred to 
in the morning !—The entry is not in it. I kept it in an old 
prescription book, and the old book has been destroyed. I 
thought I had copied it into this book. 

-Of course you had kept morphia in the surgery ?—I had. 

Then you know that morphia in small doses is a very legiti- 
mate prescription for gastritis!—Yes, in small doses. 

By the Court—Does the book you have produced contain 
any reference to the pills?—No. 

Did you enter the prescription in any book?—yYes, I 
entered it, as stated at the time, in the book I described. 

Did you make a copy of it?—Yes, 

And is that the copy you put in?—Yes. 

Further re-examined by Sir Martay Samson—You told my 
learned friend that you got these prescriptions from an old 
book !—Yes; but I have destroyed the book. 

Now, look at that paper. Is it in your handwriting ?!— 
Yes. 

What is the date?—9th June, 1920. 

By the Court—On your oath, is that a copy of what was in 
the old book !—Yes. 

Re-examination continued—It was suggested to you by my 
learned friend that on Sunday night, 15th June, you sent 
over to Mrs. Greenwood two pills which contained a half- 
grain of morphia. Is that true?—No; it is quite untrue. 

What do you say they contained?—I say that each pill 
contained half a grain of powdered opium. 

It was put to you at the inquest, and, I think before the 
justices, that you had in fact given two pills of half a grain 
of morphia each !—Opium pills are very often called morphia 
pills. There is a close relationship between them. 

Had you in your surgery any half-grain pills?—I had, but 
not of morphia. 

When were you last called into Rumsey House to attend 
Mrs. Greenwood before the day of her fatal illness ’—Some 
considerable period before; several weeks before. 

Except in those cases, were you giving her any other treat- 
ment ?—I was giving her no other treatment. 

You have told my learned friend that you were never 
anxious about her condition?—That is so. 

Did you ever say that you concluded she had cancer !— 
Never. 

Had she ever led you to believe that she was anxious 
about her condition as to the tumour? Was that a serious 
matter 7—Well, it was a serious matter. 

When was the last occasion on which you had seen Mrs. 


Greenwood collapse!—Some weeks before. a 


Harold Greenwood. 
Dr Thomas R. Griffiths 


Had you seen her on any other occasion !—Yes, on one other 
occasion. 

Assuming that she had a fatal dose of arsenic, was there 
anything inconsistent with that in the symptoms she showed 
that night ? 

{Sir E. Marshall Hall was about to intervene when Mr. 
Justice Shearman ruled that the question could be dismissed, 
as Dr.-Griffiths had only seen one case of poisoning in his life, 
and they had experts in Court who would speak to that. ] 

Further cross-examined by Sir E. Marsnatn Hati—This 
blue paper document [shown] is in your writing, is it not !— 
Yes. 

That was prepared by you after Mrs. Greenwood had died? 
—Yes. 

And was it copied by you from a book which is now in 
existence !—The book is not in existence. 

Why, sir, have you destroyed that book since !—Yes. 

Why, sir, after you made that copy, was that book destroyed ? 
—It was destroyed at the same time as I destroyed other 
things. 

That is no answer. You retired from practice at the end of 
1919, and about June, 1920, you swore that you made this 
copy from that book. Therefore, if the book was in existence 
when this copy was made in June, and was destroyed and is 
not in existence now, it must have been destroyed since June, 
1920 2—-Yes, it must be. 

Why was it destroyed?—I don’t remember. 

Why was it destroyed? You were in a state of great 
agitation. You knew perfectly well at the inquest that the 
suggestion was made that this lady died from morphia, and 
you never corrected that mistake. May not you in your 
anxiety have made a mistake and given her morphia? 

Mr. Justice SazaRMAN—That has nothing to do with this 
document. 

Cross-examination continued—Why do you on this docu- 
ment put two teaspoonfuls when you said in evidence that the 
dose was one?—I must have made a mistake. 


Mrs. ANNIE GRovEs, examined by Sir Maruay Samson—I 
have been caretaker of the accused’s office in Frederick Street, 
Llanelly, for fifteen years, and that is about the length of 
time I have known him. There were three rooms upstairs, 
and the accused occupied one room on the left of the stairs. 
He kept no clerks. I have known the present Mrs. Greenwood 
for about two years. 

When did you first see her at the office in Frederick Street? 
—Two years last Saturday. 

Where did you see her in Mr. Greenwood’s office?—I used 

116 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


Mrs Annie Groves 


to see her going through the passage. She would go upstairs 
and knock at the door, and Greenwood would open it, and 
he and Miss Gladys Jones would then go to the back room 
together. 

Did this happen frequently or occasionally /—Occasionally. 
s Do you remember the day of Mrs. Greenwood’s death ?— 

es. 

How long before that did you see Miss Gladys Jones at the 
office ?—I do not remember quite. 

When did you last see Mrs. Greenwood before she died !— 
About three weeks before she died. 

Where was this!—In Mr. Greenwood’s office in Frederick 
Street. 

Who was in the office at the time?!—Miss Gladys Jones. 

Do you remember the day of Mrs. Greenwood’s death, and 
when you next saw Mr. Greenwood ?—Yes; I saw him on the 
same morning as Mrs. Greenwood died. 

Where was this ?—In the office, and I handed him the letter. 
It came that morning by post. 

What time was it!—About 10 o’clock. 

Have you ever seen Gladys Jones writing!—Yes, in the 
office. 

Would you know her writing !—No. 

Did you ever see any of the letters again that you handed 
to Mr. Greenwood !—No; only part of an envelope which con- 
tained one of the letters. 

Where did you see that?—In the grate. 

Did you ever see the contents of the envelope!—Yes; I 
saw them in the letter on the table. 

On what day ?—The same day. 

When you saw it on the table, were you able to read any 
of it then?—Yes; I saw a portion of it. 

What became of the letter afterwards!—It was burnt. 

How did you know ?—Because I saw it in the grate. 

Mr. Justice SHaarman—Has notice been given to produce 
the letter ? 

Sir Maruay Samson—No. 

Mr. Justice SHzarmMan—Then the law of evidence is quite 
clear on the point that notice must be given to have the letter 
produced, and, if it could not be produced, then evidence 
could be given that it had been destroyed. 

Examination continued—You saw the letter lying on the 
table. Did you see a portion of the same letter charred !— 
No. 

Mr. Justice SHzarmMan—Well, I cannot take it. I don’t 
want to stop any evidence from one or the other. If you 
want to have a letter produced you must give notice. 

117 


Harold Greenwood. 
Mrs Annie Groves 


Examination continued—Did you ever see that letter again? 
—Only the envelope. ‘ 

Do you remember on one occasion finding a document 
among the waste paper !—Yes. 

Just look at this [producing a piece of paper]?—Yes, I 
remember that. 

Is it a receipt for £55 for a diamond ring !—Yes. 

Where did you find it?—In the grate. 

And when was that?—In July, 1919, a month after Mrs. 
Greenwood’s death. 

Cross-examined by Sir E. Marsuatn Haru—Did you know 
if Mr. Greenwood was in the habit of having his lunch in the 
Llanelly Mercury office 1—Yes. ; 

By the Court—How do you know he had lunch there? 
You did not follow him through, did you?—No. 

Did he tell you he had lunch there 1—No; he never told me. 


Mary Morris, examined by Sir Mariay Samson—I live 
with my mother at the telephone exchange at Kidwelly. I 
know Mr. Greenwood. He used to come to the exchange 
frequently. He asked me once for the Llanelly Mercury 
office. 

When he got the number, whom did you hear at the other 
end ?—I do not know who it was, but it was a lady’s voice. 

Mr. Justice SHearMaN—The witness is not entitled to say 
who was at the other end, but she is entitled to say what 
she heard Greenwood say. 

Ezamination continued—Did you hear Greenwood say any- 
thing ?—I cannot remember what he said. 


GwynetH Davip, examined by Sir Mariay Samson—I 
reside at Tyrfran, Llanelly. I knew Miss Gladys Jones before 
she was married to Greenwood. I also knew Irene Green- 
wood. I remember having a conversation with Gladys 
Jones on Ist June, and I also remember receiving a letter 
from Irene Greenwood on the same date, following a con- 
versation which I had with Miss Alice Jones, sister of the 
present Mrs. Greenwood. I received the following letter 
from the accused :— 


Dear Miss David,—I am indeed very much surprised to hear that 
you told Miss Alice Jones yesterday that Mrs. Greenwood was not 
ill, and that her brother had not been to see her. Why and what is your 
object in telling her these deliberate lies. Your only object that I can see 
is that you, for some unknown desire, wish to attempt to break my 
friendship with the Jones family, which, I feel happy to say, is more than 
your flippant tongue can achieve. I must ask you in future to please let 
me and mine alone, unless you can speak the truth concerning them. But 
I must call for an explanation of the innuendo you suggest by making the 
false statements you have.—Yours truly, H. GREENWwooD. 


118 


Evidence for Prosecution. 
Gwyneth David 


Did you make any reply to that letter /—Yes. 

[Sir Marlay Samson called for the letter, but it was not 
produced. } 

Cross-examined by Sir E. Marsuatn Hatu—Did you tell 
the accused what Gladys Jones had told you ?—Yes. 

What was that?—That Mrs. Greenwood was as ill as she 
could be, and had been unconscious for a week. 

Did you also tell him that you had ascertained the next 
day, after making inquiries about Mrs. Greenwood’s health, 
that she was perfectly well and had been in church on the 
previous Sunday ?—Yes. 

Did you think it was rather strange?/—Yes; and I ex- 
pressed surprise at learning that Mrs. Greenwood was per- 
fectly well and not seriously ill. 

Did you also mention in your letter a conversation you 
had with Gladys Jones!—Yes, and I told the accused exactly 
what she had told me. 

Did the accused reply to your letter 7—No. 

When were you first asked about the contents of that letter ? 
—Now. 

Have you ever given the contents of the letter to anybody 
else ?—No. 

I suggest that you wrote apologising, and afterwards came 
to make a personal apology to Mr. Greenwood ?—No. 

Were you taken by your mother to apologise to Mr. Green- 
wood 1—_No;.it is quite untrue. 

Did you get a letter that Irene Greenwood wrote to you 1— 
Yes. 

[Witness at the same time produced a picture post card 
which had been sent to her by Miss Irene Greenwood from 
London, and which was written in a playful tone from girl 
to girl friend. On one side of the post card, which was 
passed over to Sir Edward Marshall Hall, was the picture 
of a little boy and girl who appeared to have had a tiff, 
and underneath the picture was the word ‘‘ False.’? On 
the other side Miss Irene Greenwood had written, ‘‘ Am 
having an O.K. time up here. How are you? I am just 
off to a matinee of ‘ Our Mr. Hepplewhite ’ at the Criterion. 
Am returning on Thursday next, worse luck. I had a 
letter from Cedric a few weeks ago, which I have mislaid. 
So do you mind sending me the address. Cheerio. Love 
to Yours to a beanpole, Inpyz.’’ | 

Sir E. Marsuaun Hati—This does not seem to throw an 
enormous flood of light on the case. (Z’o Witness)—Why did 
you bring this with you? 

Mr. Justice SHzarman—She must have intelligently anti- 
cipated that you would ask her for it. 

Sir E. Marsaatt Hatt—I hoped the witness would have 
had an opportunity of making that joke. 


119 


Harold Greenwood. 
Gwyneth David 


Cross-examination continued—Is it true that you spread 
malicious gossip about other people at Llanelly?—No; quite 
untrue. 

Were you stopped going into the town-clerk’s house because 
of that?—No, certainly not. The town-clerk is one of my 
greatest friends. It is quite untrue. 

Do you remember having called upon David John, a brewer 
of Llanelly 7—No. 

Do you remember something happening about the Morgan 
family ?—It was a childish quarrel when I was about ten 
years old. 

So gossip is pretty rife down in that district and in this 
case. It has maligned you?—Yes. 


Tuomas Evans, a Llanelly saddler, stated that on the 
13th December, 1918, the accused came to his shop with his 
present wife (then Miss Jones) and purchased a lady’s dress- 
ing case, for which he paid £15. The only conversation he 
remembered between them was the accused asked if she 
liked the case, and she said ‘‘ Yes.’’ They sent for it from 
the Mercury office. 


Henry Grorce Harrison, a partner in a firm of London 
jewellers, said that the accused bought a diamond cluster 
ring for £55 on 10th July. 


Joun Criirrorp Jones, of Kidwelly, assistant to his father, 
a chemist, said he sold two tins of ‘‘ Weedicide ”’ to the 
accused on 7th and 8th June, 1917. 

Cross-examined by Sir E. Marsnatt Hatu—Did the police 
come to you and inquire whether Mr. Greenwood had pur- 
chased the ‘‘ Weedicide? ’’—They came to look through the 
poison book. 

When was that?—I do not remember. 

You remember Greenwood’s second marriage?—No, I was 
not at home then. 

Was this ‘‘ Weedicide ”’ a liquid or a powder ?—A liquid. 


JAMES Bruce M‘Puexz, manager to Messrs. Dobbie & Co., a 
firm of Edinburgh seedsmen, said he received an order from 
the accused for weed-killer, which the firm were not able to 
supply. The order was for seed and weed-killer, and the seed 
was sent at once. 

Cross-examined by Sir E. Marsnary Hatu—Having paid 
£1 17s. for seed and weed-killer, and having only received 
seed, he wrote in the following April for the weed-killer ?— 
Yes; and then it was delivered. 

It is considered to be the most efficacious of all weed-killers ? 
—Well, I haven’t used it myself. 

120 


Evidence for Prosecution. 
James Bruce M‘Phee 


By the Court—Way that the first time the accused had 
ordered weed-killer }—No. 


Cuartes Dosson, foreman of Messrs. Tomlinson & Hay- 
ward, of Lincoln, said that on 23rd April, 1919, a ten- 
gallon tin of ‘‘ Eureka ’’ weed-killer was despatched to the 
accused at Rumsey House, Kidwelly. 

By the Courr—It was despatched in the form of powder, 
was it ?—Yes. 

Were there full directions on the tin for its use ?—Yes, full 
instructions. 


WiLu1aM Epwarp Betu, of Huddersfield, who was employed 
as a chemist in 1919 by Messrs. Tomlinson & Hayward, 
makers of the weed-killer, said there was about 60 per cent. 
of arsenic in the ‘‘ Eureka ’”’ weed-killer, which was in 
powdered form. Roughly, 3 grains of it contained 2 grains 
of arsenic. It was pink in colour. 

Cross-examined by Sir E. Marsuatt Hati—It is very 
soluble /—Yes, very soluble. 

Is there a prejudice against liquid weed-killer !—Yes. 

It is far better to have it in powder }—Yes. 

There are full directions as to how it should be made from 
the powder !/—Yes, that is so. 

Mr. Justice SHzaArman—lIt would be to the benefit of every 
one if the directions were read, seeing that it is suggested 
that weedicide was the poisonous agent that had been used. 

[The directions on the tin were then read by witness. They 
were very full and detailed. Amongst the words on the label 
were the following:—‘‘ Poison. A _ special preparation. 
Dissolve in cold water without sprinkling or boiling over. 
Empty the powder into a bucket, and fill the empty tin 
with water, and add two tinfuls to the powder.’’ | 

By the Court—That means you put out the whole of the 
powder, and then put three tinfuls of water on it—three 
times as much water as powder, and then it is dissolved ?— 
Yes. 

[ Witness (still reading) showed that the directions stated 
that the powder ‘‘ leaves no sediment. When dissolved, add 
25 gallons of water.’’ | 

By the Covurt—That is why this tin is called a 25-gallon 
tin ?—Yes. 


Joun Lurwetiyn WIp, a railway carman, produced rail- 
way sheets to show that a parcel was delivered by him at 
Rumsey House, and that according to the description on the 
sheet it contained 14 lbs. of weed-killer. 

Cross-examined by Sir E. MarsHaty Hati—It was clearly 

121 


Harold Greenwood. 
John Llewellyn Wild 


stated on the sheet that the parcel contained weed-killer /— 
Yes. 

So there was no intention of hiding the nature of the 
contents of the parcel ?—No, sir. 


Wituiam Govunp, examined by Sir Martay Samson—I was 
in the employ of Mr. Greenwood as gardener at Rumsey 
House. During the whole time I was there I never saw 
any weed-killer used there. The gardener who was there 
before might have done so, but I have never seen any signs 
of it. There is a man named Ben Williams, who came to 
do odd jobs there after I had finished of an evening, and 
he might have used it. I never saw signs of weed-killer there.. 

What would be the proper time of the year to use weed- 
killer ?—In dry weather, from March on. 

During that time you used no weed-killer there at all ?— 
None whatever. 

Of course you were to and fro on the paths?—I was every- 
where on the ground. 

By the Court—You were solely employed by Greenwood ? 
—Yes. 

Cross-examined by Sir E. MarsHatn Hatu—Between April 
and June, 1919, did you see any signs of weeds having 
been killed in any way on the path?—No way at all. 

By the Court—Have you ever used any artificial manure? 
—No. 

Cross-examination continued—Did you ever spray the fruit 
trees ?!—The fruit trees have never been sprayed since I have 
been there. 

By the Court—Did you ever see anywhere about the 
garden or in the shed any tins of this kind, or of about 
four times the size?—No, sir, never. 


Joun Suarrr, Albert Street, Llanelly, employed by Messrs. 
Charles Davies & Co., marine store dealers, Llanelly, 
examined by Mr. Wiurrip Lewis, said that he purchased a 
quantity of bottles from Mr. Greenwood. They were kept 
in the cellar at Rumsey House. 

Did you take away all the empty bottles in the house ?—Not 
exactly. I left some behind. 

How many did you take away ?—Seventy-five dozen. 

What kind of bottles were they 1—All kinds—wine bottles, 
champagne, port wine, and burgundy bottles. 

They were bottles of all shapes and sizes !—Yes, sir. 

By the Courr—What are C. Davies & Co. ?—Marine store 
dealers. 

And they sell these bottles again to people who want them ? 
—Yes. 

122 


duplicate in.) 
there any time limit in which parties must be married 1 
—Within three months. 


on let Octcher, 1919, at Bryn Chapel, Uanelly.] 
Wits THouss Moncsas, undertaker, tation Road, 
examines ij 


the arra the funeral of Mab Greenwood in 
June, 1919. J was present. st the ing of the body in 
the cofin, aud st 


Did you se the body when the coffin was eA 1—Yer, 

Are you able to say that it was the body of Green- 
wood 1—Vex. - 

Was the grave 4 bricked omel—Ve. 

So that no earth had come into contact with the body 1— 


Vea. 
By the Covxt—The ohiin had not rottedt—No, my lord. 
Dr. Atexasupnn Wien, Uaenelly, examined by Sir Maniax 
a post-mortem examination on the 


Tee. Ce ee re 
3 
i 
rua 
‘ 
i 
Fe 
; 
i 
. 
Dutch 


ia} 
examination Dr. Griffiths, of Kid- 
waly; Dr. Dizon Smith, of Viandly; and Dr. John Davies, 
A . | removed certain organs from the body, put. 
them into three jars which were thoroughly washed and 


sterilived betore any of the organs were in. I then 

sealed the three jars and handed them, wi contents, 

to Bergen Hodge Lewis. f 
Generally, what state of preservation was the body int— 


By the Covat—Was the tumour of such 2 sate a8 to cause 


1h, 00. Pie Lae eee 


‘ ’ - = 
: “\ AN AY 
PUN \ 
\ 
j . 
’ 
% x N 


i 


me war 


& VSG 
Wass Gare ange aire ait qremaar an dite Gia ae Tape 
Demet was, af Gi 


WRAL CES : 
Ee Were RAGE we Ane Ghee, 
R Te Wee a 
Se ae ee S ANNE Rak Lh he eae ma 
Se Kk Wanssana, Hape—D Gm ant want te ee die 


Vitis, cst athe deal biped 


rents, ' bawe wih wish tor the vervbawe, 


BA, 


tn Iithy lam Hid you have 


i EL 
Let, 
th hr. Groep 
to yout—-l watereand ke 4A 


tv, When 1 win the king when 


Useensizn, Heis—Opn the wra- 
has thee tubes wie wih a 


ee ee 
WE 


for Prosecution, 
tw 
i 


Grencesamtend Wy 


00n A the 


“faa, 
what he 0h 
es; 

A Chee 
Ve 
bth, 
your 
ah 
tits, 
hi 
My 
eee & 
tw f 
z 
Taps 
Cont, 
glade 


SHISHHE + 
ecstasy nell iy —. 


Evi 


ANOnRWHA 
the # 
SHEVA ei fy 


3 
SUTTON 


Third Day—Thursday, 4th November, 1920. 


Police Superintendent Jones, further cross-examined by Sir 
E. Marsuatt Hati—lIs it not the case that the statement in 
your note-book was not written at the actual interview with 
Greenwood, but was copied into it afterwards ?—No. 

Has the book had any leaves taken out of it?—None what- 
ever. 

Let me see it. Do you say that it was very dark when 
you came to the end of this writing?’—Yes, it was getting 
dark. 

Then I see you continue on the interview of the 3lst on the 
same page’—Yes; the 31st was the first occasion I had to 
write anything. 

Now, Jones, do yourself justice. Just look at the book as 
it is now, with the tiny little piece of paper standing up 
there. Has there been a sheet torn out there ?—No, sir. 

Don’t be in a hurry, Jones?—I am not in a hurry. Before 
I answer may I say that I noticed something different about 
the book last night as I handed it to Mr. Glascodine (the 
deputy clerk of arraigns); I noticed your right-hand fingers 
on it last night, and you were rubbing it hard as I was 
standing here. 

What’—I am saying the truth, sir. 

You look at that book. Has there not been a sheet torn 
out?—There is no leaf torn out by me, and I swear it was 
not in that state when I handed it in yesterday. 

What ?—I have answered you, sir. 

Do you know that I called the attention of Sir Marlay 
Samson to the condition of the book last night, and that I 
said to him, ‘‘ I don’t want this to go out of Court, because 
of its condition,’’? and that Sir Marlay kindly said that he 
would see that it was kept in this Court overnight? 

Sir Mariay Samson—That was after it had passed from 
Sir E. Marshall Hall into other hands. 

Mr. Justice Sozarman—It is for the jury to judge this. 

[The book was then handed to the jury, each of whom 
examined it minutely. | 

Sir E. Marsnann Hatt—I am not suggesting that this 
witness tore it out, but that a leaf has been removed from 
that book. The point of it is the little tiny speck of paper 
is standing up, and it suggests that a leaf has been taken 
out. 

Cross-examination continued—Where was that book bought ? 
—It was supplied by the chief constable to the Llanelly 
Division. 

126 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


Police Superintendent Jones 


Sir E. Marsuatnt Hati—lI should like to see one of that 
issue which has not been used. 

[The chief constable then gave orders for a constable to 
find a book. } 

Sir E. Marsnatn Hatut—After what has happened, my 
lord, I shall have to be allowed to go into the box myself. 
I have never had such an experience as this before. I tell 
your lordship here that as the book was being handed to me 
I saw the little piece standing up, and to make a suggestion 
that I tore it out 

Mr. Justice Sazanman—No one suggested that, Sir Edward. 
It never crossed any one’s mind that you did anything on 
purpose. What is said is, I understand, that in the loose 
handling of the book the piece got torn out. 

Sir E. Marsaatyt Hatt—I am going to ask you to look 
at it through a glass. 

Mr. Justice SHEARMAN 
from now on. 

[The book was again handed to Superintendent Jones. | 

Sir E. MarsHatt Hatit—I have never had a suggestion 
made against me in my life. 

Mr. Justice SHearmMan—Sir Edward Marshall Hall! 

Sir E. MarsHatt Hatt—The jury heard it, my lord. 

Mr. Justice SHEaRMAN—You are resenting a suggestion that 
was never made. 

Cross-examination continued—Will you count the pages, 
please, in that book? 

[The Hon. Stephen Coleridge, clerk of assize, offered to 
count the pages, and while he was doing so the cross-examina- 
tion proceeded. ] 

I want this quite clear. Do you suggest that that little 
piece of paper was not visible in that book until it was 
handed to me personally ?—I could not see from here before 
it was handed to you, but I noticed in particular when it 
was handed in here that the little piece was to be seen. It 
was not to be seen when I handed it in. 

I put it to you that it was in consequence of that little 
piece of paper standing up when you handed it to counsel 
that I took particular notice of it? 

Mr. Justice Sazarnman—lIf you say that, Sir Edward, every- 
body will accept it. 

Cross-examination continwed—At the hearing before the 
magistrates Mr. Ludford was representing Mr. Greenwood? 
—He was. 

Greenwood was in custody ?—Yes, in custody of two warders 
from the prison. 

Are you at Llanelly and Kidwelly?—I am superintendent 
at Llanelly. ; 

[At this moment the Hon. Stephen Coleridge informed the 

127 


I am taking charge of that book 


Harold Greenwood. 


Police Superintendent Jones 


Court that there were fifty ruled pages in the book handed in 
by Superintendent Jones. | 

Mr. Justice SHzarmMan—We will have Mr. Coleridge sworn 
later, if it is necessary. 

[In the meantime Chief Constable Philipps had found an 
unruled book, as used by the police, and Mr. Coleridge pro- 
ceeded to count its leaves. | 

Oross-examination continued—At the magisterial hearing 
when you produced this book was objection at once taken by 
Mr. Ludford that the statement in it was not the original 
statement as taken by you?—It was. 

In the interval did you go to have an interview with the 
accused in the presence of the warders?—I did. : 

What right had you as a witness in the witness-box to go 
and have an interview with the accused when he was in the 
custody of the two warders?—I merely gave the book to him 
to see for himself, as he would have a better opportunity of 
seeing it than in Court. 

By the Court—You showed him the book ?—Yes. 

Cross-examination continuwed—Did not the statement finish 
with the word ‘‘ Ferryside,’? and underneath the word 
‘* Ferryside ’’ was there a signature, ‘‘ Harold Greenwood ’’ ? 
—It is incorrect. 

And the only question asked you by Mr. Ludford, as 
appears in the depositions, was, ‘‘ Did Mr. Greenwood sign 
it?’’? and your answer was ‘‘ No ’’ ?—That is so. 

There does not purport to be anything in that book which 
is the signature of the accused ?—No. 

Mr. Justice SHearmMan—But there is. 

Sir E. Marspuatt Hatt—That is later on, my lord, and 
it is marked, ‘* Signed, Harold Greenwood.’’ 

Cross-ecamination continued—Mr. Coleridge is going to 
say that the book you had has fifty sheets and the new book 
has sixty sheets !—Yes. 

Do you suggest that these books when issued differ in 
their number of pages?—I don’t know anything about that. 
I only know about my own book. 

The statement of Mr. Greenwood which I am suggesting 
: a re-written statement is written on nine sheets!—It may 
e. 

Now, on your oath—a man is on trial for his life—have 
not ten pages been taken out in that book?!—Not a single 
one, sir. JI may say I am not used to such dirty tricks 
as to cut leaves of statements by prisoners. 

I say it is only a fair copy itself ?—I say it is the original 
statement. What I tell you is true. I can swear that the 
book when taken out by me was new, and that nothing has 
come out of it by any action of mine. 

Have you had the conduct of this case?—No, sir. 

128 


ee me 


Facsimile of Greenwood’s Signature. 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


Police Superintendent Jones 


Who has been responsible for collecting the evidence ?— 
Inspector Haigh has done it since the result of the analysis. 

You know that Haigh came on the scene on Ist June. Who 
was responsible for taking the statement in October and 
November, 1919?—I was responsible for what is in the book. 
j Do you recognise that it is the duty of police officers mak- 
ing investigations of this kind to take statements from all 
pees who might be able to throw light on the occurrence ? 
—I do. 

Quite regardless as to whether they should be hostile or 
favourable to the accused !—Quite so. 

Have you ever taken a statement by Miss Irene Greenwood ? 
—I have not. I left the Kidwelly people to Sergeant Lewis. 

You know that Irene Greenwood was there right up to 
the death?—I suppose so. 

You knew it?—No, I did not know it. 

But you were told so?—I was not told so. 

Has any one in the interests of justice ever been prepared 
to interview Miss Greenwood ?!—I did not. 

How many statements did you take?!—Five, I think. 

Who were they? 

Mr. Justice SHzarmManN—Give him time, Sir Edward. 

Sir E. Marsuatt Hattr—I will give him time. (Zo 
Witness)—Just name them, please?—Nurse Jones, the motor 
driver, Miss Phillips, Greenwood, and Miss David. 

So you have taken statements from five yourself ?!—I have 
-not taken full statements from the nurse, the motor driver, 
and Miss Phillips, because they went to Sergeant Lewis. 

Is Kidwelly in your district !—It is under my supervision. 

Did you give instructions to have a statement from Miss 
Greenwood?—I did not. 

Why ?—I left it to the sergeant and the chief constable. 

At the magisterial hearing the gardener, who had been at 
Rumsey House for a few weeks, was a witness !—Yes. 

Did you hear him say that a man named Benjamin Williams 
was the man who would know something about the weed- 
killer ?—I remember him saying that he might know some- 
thing about it. 

Have you taken steps to have Benjamin Williams inter- 
viewed 1—I believe Sergeant Lewis has, and has taken a state- 
ment from him. 

We have no notice that he is being called?—I do not know 
whether he is being called or not. 

Do you really mean that you do not know whether he is to 
be called ?—The list of witnesses is with Sergeant Helby, and 
I have not seen the list. 

I put it to you that the first thing in the interview with 
the accused was about the non-production of the death cer- 
tificate 7—That is not correct. 

K 129 


Harold Greenwood. 


Police Superintendent Jones 


Re-examined by Sir Martay Samson—With regard to the 
condition of your book, I noticed that a bit was torn off on 
the first day?—I think it was accidentally done in Nurse 
Jones’s house. : 

You say that after the book was produced in Court you 
showed it to the accused ?—Yes; in a room in the Town Hall, 
Llanelly. He said, ‘‘I didn’t make that statement. You 
have put the cart before the horse.’’? I said, e What do 
you mean by that? Which day are you referring to? 
Greenwood replied, ‘‘ I’m blowed if I know.’’ One of the 
warders was present, and he is there in the dock with Green- 
wood now. Greenwood said, ‘‘ I am satisfied that it is quite 
correct.’’? Greenwood then handed me back the book. Mr. 
Ludford then came into the room, and said, ‘‘ What about 
the book now?’’ Greenwood said, ‘‘ I am satisfied that it 
is quite correct.” 

Was there any further question put to you relating to the 
genuineness of the book ?—No, sir. 

Further cross-examined by Sir E. Marsuatn Hatu—[After 
examining the book again.| Will you look very carefully at 
the first blue page? Can you see a certain amount of 
roughening on both sides of the page?—Yes. 

Can you find any corresponding roughening on the other 
pieces?—There was no roughening on any page except that 
one you pointed to when it left my hands. 

{Mr. Coleridge was then sworn, and counted the number 
of pages in the two books. In the first book he counted fifty 
loose sheets, and in the second book sixty loose sheets. He 
also stated that in one book the pages were bound in numbers 
of seven, and that in the second book the number was six. | 


Police Inspector NicHonas, examined by Sir Maruay 
Samson—On 24th October, 1919, I accompanied Superin- 
tendent Samuel Jones to the accused’s office in Frederick 
Street, Llanelly. I was also present at a further interview 
which took place on 31st October. The first thing Superin- 
tendent Jones did when we went to Greenwood’s office was 
this: he told Greenwood what he wanted, and he sat down 
at a table, and Greenwood sat on the other side of the table, 
between us and the window. Then Superintendent Jones. 
took out a note-book similar to this one [produced], and 
a fountain pen from his pocket, and Mr. Greenwood started 
to relate the circumstances with regard to the illness of the 
late Mrs. Greenwood. 

Now, look at that book. Is that the bookin which the entries were 
made when you were present ’—Well, it is a similar book exactly. 

After the superintendent had written in it, did he say what 
he had written in it?—After he had written in it, and finished 
the interview, he put the book in his pocket. 

130 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


Police Inspector Nicholas 


Did he show it to you in any way !—No, sir; he put it in 
his pocket. 


Hannan WIAs (recalled)— 

[When the witness was recalled copies of separate state- 
ments made by her to Sergeant Lewis, and of one statement 
to Detective Inspector Haigh, were handed to the judge, and 
counsel said the one he was going to rely upon largely was 
that made to Sergeant Lewis on 24th October, 1919.] 

Further cross-examined by Sir E. Marsnatn Hati— 
You know the evidence you gave here yesterday and at the 
police court at Llanelly !—Yes, sir. 

Did you make any statement to any one else connected with 
the police or any one at all prior to the statement made to 
Sergeant Lewis !—No. 

With regard to the time Mr. Greenwood came into the 
house on that Sunday before dinner, do you remember the 
time you fixed yesterday 1—Yes. 

It was 12.301—Yes. 

You looked at the kitchen clock ?—Yes. 

You said he care in about 12.30 and went straight to 
the china pantry, and was there a quarter of an hour, and 
from the china pantry he went into the dining-room and 
stayed for five minutes, and then you sounded the gong at 
1 o’clock 7—Yes. 

And you said that the whisky was in a bottle, a black 
bottle 7—Yes, sir. 

How many times do you say the accused came into the house 
that morning?—I cannot remember any more. 

But how many times would it be?—Only that once. 

[Counsel read over the evidence given by the witness on 
the previous day—‘‘ Mrs. Greenwood helped herself to the 
wine.’’ | 

The Witness—That is a mistake. I poured it myself. 

[Quoting from statement.] ‘‘ I cannot say whether she was 
eating chocolates in the sitting-room, but she was eating 
chocolates every day.’’ Is that true ?—Yes. 

You said Mrs. Greenwood ate chocolates, and ate them 
every day /—Yes. 

‘‘ So far as I know, the master and mistress lived on good 
terms.’’ That is true, is it not ?—Yes. 

[Quoting from the statement.] ‘‘I remember Sunday, 
15th June, quite well. I laid the table for dinner, and I 
put thereon a decanter containing whisky and a bottle con- 
taining wine.’’ How did you come to say to Mr. Haigh that 
it was a decanter containing whisky!—Because I did not 
understand what he was speaking about. 

You draw a distinction between a decanter of whisky and 

131 


Harold Greenwood. 
Hannah Williams 


a bottle of wine. Yesterday I pressed you, and you swore that 
it was a bottle of whisky, a black bottle of whisky. 

Mr. Justice Suzarman—I do not think it is material 
whether she said it was black or not. The difference made 
is between calling it a decanter and a bottle. 

Sir E. Marsaatt Hatt—Quite. 

Cross-examination continued—As a matter of fact, was 
there a wineglass on the table at all? Were not the wine- 
glasses little tumblers !—Yes. 

Were they red?—They were more pink than red. [Counsel 
produced a wineglass, and witness said they were the same 
shape as that. | 

Yesterday I questioned you very hard whether Mrs. Green- 
wood had more than one glass, and you were positive she had 
only one glass !—Yes. 

Then what did you mean by saying to the detective that 
you could not remember whether she had more than one glass? 
—I cannot remember everything. 

Why did you not tell me yesterday?—I cannot remember 
everything. 

But why did you say so positively she had only one?— 
(No answer.) 

[Quoting from the statement.| ‘‘ After the meal was over 
I cleared the table. I placed the whisky and the wine 
decanter on the sideboard.’’ How much did you say there 
was in the bottle between lunch and supper? You said 
yesterday that the bottle was three-quarters full, and only 
one glass was drunk out of it?—Yes. 

Mr. Justice SHzaRMan—It is a wine decanter that is now 
mentioned. 

Cross-examination continued—You said yesterday that the 
bottle was three-quarters full, and only one glass was drunk 
out of it. You stated to the detective, ‘‘ At that time the 
wine bottle appeared to be about half-full.’? So a quarter 
of the bottle had been drunk. Did you tell the detective 
that the bottle then was about half-full!—(No answer.) 

Did you consider the importance of it? I asked you yes- 
terday whether Miss Irene took a glass of the wine, and you 
said she did not, and that only one glass was taken, which 
you poured out to Mrs. Greenwood. The bottle was three- 
quarters full?—I said three parts full. 

Yes, three parts full, and you said to the detective that it 
was half-full ?—Yes. 

[Sir E. Marshall Hall again quoted from the statement 
which said that during the morning of Sunday, 15th June, 
1919, Mr. Greenwood came from the garden on two separate 
occasions, and on each of these occasions entered the china 
pantry. | 

132 


Evidence for Prosecution. 
Hannah Williams 


Mr. Justice Sayarman—I have not got those words. 

Sir Martay Samson—The words in my copy of the state- 
ment are, ‘‘ On each occasion entered the dining-room.”’ 

Sir E. Marsnatt Haun [quoting from the original copy 
of the statement|—‘‘ Mr. Greenwood came from the garden 
on two separate occasions, and on each of those occasions 
entered the china pantry, and remained there about a 
quarter of an hour, and went straight from there on the 
last occasion to the dining-room, where he remained only 
a minute or two, and went back to the garden ’’?—I do 
not remember saying that. 

It was after the inquest when you knew that Greenwood 
was standing charged with the murder of his wife, and then 
you are reported in this statement to have said that he came 
into the pantry in the morning, and twice he stayed in that 
or for a quarter of an hour ?—I do not remember saying 
that. 

Mr. Justice SazearmMan—You had better read the rest of it. 

Cross-examination continued—The statement reads—‘“‘ I 
have never known him to go into the china cupboard before. 
I know he was there on this occasion, because I was waiting 
until he left the pantry so that I could proceed with the laying 
of the table. I did not go in while he was there because it 
would not be good manners on my part. So far as I 
could judge, Miss Irene was on equally as good terms with 
her mother as with her father. When the wine bottles were 
empty Mrs. Greenwood generally took them down to the 
cellar. For dinner and supper it was the usual thing for 
me to put a bottle of wine on the table for Mrs. Greenwood.”’ 
{Proceeding to quote from another statement.] ‘‘ The foods 
Mrs. Greenwood usually ate were bread and butter, rice 
pudding, and custard, and she was not ill after that. The 
Sunday Mrs. Greenwood was taken ill it was the first Sunday 
she had custard pie while I was at Rumsey House. She 
also took jam tart.’’ Is that true?—Yes. 

I am much obliged to you for that. Do you say that Mr. 
Haigh made a mistake when he took down that the accused 
had been twice in the china pantry on Sunday?—I do not 
remember saying it. 

It is not a little mistake. If you did say it, why did 
you come to say it? Do you know that when you made that 
statement the police were relying upon the alleged visit of 
the accused to the china pantry as an alleged opportunity 
he took for poisoning his wife ?—No. 

You were not struck with the importance of it!—No. 

Was the statement read over to you!—Yes. 

How often do you say that you saw Greenwood going into 
the china pantry /—Only once. 


What time was that?—About 12.30. is 
1 


Harold Greenwood. 


Hannah Williams 


How long did he stay there ?—Quarter of an hour. 

Where were you when he was in the china pantry ?!—In 
the kitchen. 

Did you go into the china pantry?’—No, I only went as 
far as the door. 

Could you see Greenwood ?!—He was inside. 

Could you see what he was doing?’—No, sir. 

When you saw him there what did you do?’—I went back 
to the kitchen. 

[A black bottle was then passed to the witness, and Sir 
Marlay Samson asked her to indicate to the jury how much 
of the wine had been taken out of the bottle she had placed 
on the dining table when she removed it after dinner. The 
witness indicated about an inch of difference, and said that 
about a wineglassful had been taken out of the bottle. She 
placed two wineglasses and two tumblers on the table. | 

Re-examined by Sir Martay Samson—Can you remember 
how many glasses had had wine in them?—There was wine 
in only one wineglass and whisky in the other. 

Do you usually speak in Welsh ?—Yes. 

Can you remember whether Sergeant Hodge Lewis spoke 
to you in Welsh or English ?—I can’t remember. 

Do you understand Welsh or English better ?—Welsh. 


Police Sergeant Hopcz Lewis, examined by Sir Maruay 
Samson—I am a police sergeant at Kidwelly. I supervised 
the exhumation of the body of Mrs. Greenwood, and the 
sealing of the jars containing the organs taken from the body. 

Cross-examined by Sir E. MarsnHatyt Haut—How long have 
you been in the force ?!—Twenty-two years. 

Are you taking your instructions in this case from Super- 
intendent Jones ?—At times. 

Whom did you interview!—I interviewed a number of 
people. 

Among others, Nurse Jones, Miss Phillips, and Miss 
Griffiths !—Yes. 

Did you realise that Miss Irene Greenwood had been present 
at her mother’s bedside during the critical period in this 
case !—Yes. 

Miss Irene was in the house to supper, and in attendance 
on her mother up to midnight?—Up to 11 o’clock. 

If the statements made were right, Miss Irene went to 
fetch the doctor /—Yes. 

And she was there practically all the time ?—Yes. 

Did you realise that it was at the lunch that the poisoned 
wine was said to have been given?—Not at that time. 

Did it occur to you that in the interest of justice you should 
take a statement from Miss Irene ?—She was not at Kidwelly. 

134 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


Police Sergeant Hodge Lewis 


There are trains. Did you know where she was !—I believe 
she was in London. 

Do you mean to convey the impression that you did not 
take her statement because she was in London ?—(No answer.) 

She was at Kidwelly later on !—Yes. 

Have you ever made the smallest attempt to interview 
Irene 7—No, sir. 

Did you interview on 10th August a man named Benjamin 
Williams !/—Yes. 

Was that in consequence of something said at the 
magisterial hearing—that the man who knew everything 
about the weed-killer was Williams ?—Yes. 

Mr. Justice SHzarmMan—The statement was that he might 
be asked about it. Your suggestion is that he knew about 
the weed-killer. There is a big difference. 

Cross-examination continued—Did he tell you he assisted 
the accused often in using the weed-killer ?—He did. 

And he said when it was in solution it was of a reddish 
colour ?—Yes. 

Did he tell you it was kept in bottles and he added the 
water to it?—Yes. 

And what was left in the tin was thrown over the wall 
into the river ?/—Yes. 

The last time it was used was in the summer of 1919 ?--I 
must refer to my book. 

[The witness read a long statement from his book, in which 
Williams said he assisted to sprinkle the weed-killer on the 
path in 1919. The weed-killer would be mixed in large tins, 
holding about four gallons, but Williams never saw the weed- 
killer being used by the accused or by any one else. He 
could not say whether it was in liquid form or in a powder 
before being diluted, and he could not say what became of 
the empty tins. He did not remember having seen a tin 
of weed-killer there either full or empty. The mixing took 
place near the stable, and he had poured out water into the 
tins many times. | 

Cross-examination continued—Has a copy of that state- 
ment ever been furnished to the public prosecutor ?—I can- 
not say. 

Benjamin Williams is still alive?—Yes, very much alive. 

And in Carmarthen ?—He was on Tuesday, but I haven’t 
seen him since. 

Did you think that statement was relevant to the inquiry 7— 
I don’t think so. I don’t think it could be of much use to any one. 

Did you see Nurse Jones?—Yes, sir. 

How many times?’—Half a dozen times. 

Have you got a note of what she said!—In my note-book. 

Was the first time you saw Nurse Jones on 24th October? 
—No, I believe it was 28th September. 

135 


Harold Greenwood. 
Police Sergeant Hodge Lewis 


It was a sort of visit made on information received !— 
Yes; just to obtain information whether there was anything 
in what I had heard. 


Witi1am Epwarp Bru, formerly chemist to the manufac- 
turers of ‘‘ Eureka ’’ weed-killer, was recalled, and was 
handed a 7-lb. tin of ‘‘ Eureka ’’ weed-killer. At the request 
of counsel, he read the directions, which ended with the words, 
** Wipe up any dead worms.”’ 

[Mr. Justice Shearman examined the tin and its label, 
and said that in the directions on the latter were the words, 
“‘ Care to prevent improper use—It should be kept in a safe 
place so that animals and chickens cannot get at it.’’ | 

Cross-examined by Sir E. MarsHatn Hatu—Obviously it is 
highly important that people selling a weed-killer of this 
character should claim safety for it. Is it not known that 
if worms come up, and that if chickens eat the worms, they 
are killed by the poison in the worms ?—That is so. 

Or if dogs get on the patch, and if they eat the grass that 
had been treated, they get poisoned ?—That is possible. 

Supposing this is used, and that soon afterwards the sun 
comes out, might you not get a rapid evaporation and the 
drying of the powder again ?—Well, it is possible, of course, 
It penetrates fairly well. 

In the case of all powders which remain in solution only as 
long as they remain dissolved, if you evaporate the water 
you restore the original dry powder ?—That is so. 

And the powder is restored in its pristine strength ’—Yes. 

By the Court—Weed-killer is coloured with an analine 
dye for safety to prevent it being taken in water. 

Cross-examination continued—A ‘7-lb. tin of this would 
practically settle the whole of Carmarthen if it was properly 
distributed /—Yes ; and more if it was properly administered. 

Re-examined ‘by Sir Marzuay Samson—lIt is said that 
chickens eating dead worms on the path would die. Would 
that be so if the weed-killer had been dissolved in the pro- 
portions the instructions give?—Yes; if they took sufficient. 

[Sir Marlay Samson (addressing the judge) then recalled 
the fact that on the previous day his lordship had ruled that 
unless he had given notice to the defence to produce a 
particular letter referred to by Mrs. Groves, the caretaker, 
it could not be put in evidence. The evidence was that the 
document had been destroyed, and he then made the state- 
ment that the memory of Mrs. Groves as to the contents of 
the letter was admissible. He had been told that he must 
give notice to produce, and, having given such notice since 
the preceding day, he now submitted that the matter was in 
order, and he asked that the letter should be produced. | 

136, 


Evidence for Prosecution. 


Mr. Justice SHzARMAN—The witness, Mrs. Groves, is able 
to prove that she saw the letter on the table and read it, 
and notice has now been given to produce it. If it be not 
produced, then we can have secondary evidence as to its 
contents. You have now got rid of what after all was a 
formal objection, because you have given the notice required, 
and you may recall Mrs. Groves. 

The witness having been recalled, and entered the witness- 
box, Sir Marlay Samson formally asked for the letter in 
question from Sir E. Marshall Hall. 

Sir E. Marsoatt Hatt—I have no such letter, and I 
cannot produce it. 

Mr. Justice SHzarMan—lIt has been sufficiently identified. 
I mean the particular letter which is required. 


Mrs. Anniz Groves (recalled), further examined by Sir 
MarLay Samson—You tell us that you were in Mr. Green- 
wood’s office on 16th June, the day of Mrs. Greenwood’s 
death ?—Yes. 

What time did Greenwood come to the office that morning? 
—About 10 o’clock. 

Did you hand him anything?—I handed him some letters. 

Did you see those letters again after you had handed 
them to him?—Yes. 

Where ?—On his table. 

Was your attention directed in particular to the hand- 
writing of one letter /—Yes. 

What was it that attracted your attention with regard to 
the envelope of that letter /—It was marked either ‘‘ Private ”’ 
or ‘‘ Important ’’; I am not sure which. 

Did you notice the handwriting on the envelope ?—Yes. 

Did you see the letter that belonged to the envelope on the 
table ?—I did. 

Are you able to say that the letter you saw was in the 
same handwriting as on the envelope!—Yes. 

Were you able at that time to read any of that letter 7— 
Yes; a portion of it on the back. 

What was it?—‘‘ It’s nice when I will be your wife,’”’ or 
words to that effect. 

Did you see part of that letter afterwards!—I saw part 
of the envelope burned in the grate. 

By Sir E. Marsaari Hati—lIt is stated that you saw the 
letter and the receipt about the same time ?—I did say so, sir. 

By Sir Marzuay Samson—Is that correct, then, because 
the receipt is dated a month later, 16th July? Please address: 
your thought to this. What do you say now?!—(No reply). 

Sir E. Marsuati Haut rose to object to the question. 

Sir Martay Samson—I am only trying to do justice to the 

137 


Harold Greenwood. 
Mrs Annie Groves ‘ 


witness and to every one in the case, but Sir Edward is 
constantly interrupting me. 

Mr. Justice SHmrarmMan—I have told every one not to get 
excited in this case. 

Sir Maruay Samson—I don’t think I ever get excited, my 
lord. 

Mr. Justice SHzarman—I know you don’t. You are en- 
titled to put your question. 

[Sir Marlay Samson said he would not press the matter, 
and the witness left the box. | 


Joun WesBSTER, examined by Sir Martay Samson—I am 
an analytical chemist of St. Mary’s Hospital, London, and 
expert adviser to the Home Office in respect of the investiga- 
tions required after a post-mortem examination. I analysed 
the organs contained in three jars, which I received from 
Police Sergeant Lewis last April. A preliminary examination 
was made for arsenic, and I found it present in all the 
organs. 

[The witness then explained at length the process by which 
he arrived at the amount of arsenic in each organ, and said 
that these amounts in milligrams were—Stomach, .58; small 
intestine, 4.33; large intestine, .55; liver, 8.508; spleen, 
.40; two kidneys, 1.21; uterus, .75; rectum, .39; heart, 
.27; lungs, .79; cesophagus, .21; brain, .09. The total 
amount of arsenic found in the organs submitted to him was 
18 milligrams, or rather more than a quarter of a grain. | 

Examination continued—In making your analysis did you 
find any trace of morphia present?—No. Before the com- 
pletion of my examination for poison I naturally tested for 
morphia, among other alkaloids, and I found none. 

What test did you use for arsenic!—Several tests. The 
first test I used was the Reinsch test, and I afterwards em- 
ployed the modified Marsh test. 

Which organ did you commence your investigation upon? 
—The stomach. 

I want you to make clear to my lord and the jury pre- 
cisely how you dealt with the stomach and arrived at the 
amount of arsenic in the stomach?!—Various portions of the 
stomach, taken from eight or ten different parts of it, were 
taken with the object of having a fair sample of the whole 
stomach, and from that known amount of parts of the stomach 
I made a mixture. This mixture of pieces weighed 25 
grammes. That was treated in order to dispose of the organic 
matter with sulphuric acid. What remained was made up 
into a suitable solution, which was then made up to a certain 
volume. In the case of the stomach, it was made up to a 
volume of 25 cubic centimetres. I then took 15 cubic centi- 
metres of the solution, and that was put into the Marsh test 

138 


Evidence for Prosecution. 
John Webster. 


apparatus, which had been carefully tested beforehand. From 
this hydrogen was evolyed, and that hydrogen was passed 
through a narrow glass tube, which was heated. If there was 
any trace of arsenic in the gas which was let off, the deposit 
of the metallic arsenic would be left on the tube. 

[The witness then produced a large number of tubes, each 
of which represented a particular organ. He also produced 
a case of what he referred to as ‘‘ standard mirrors,’’ these 
being tubes which he had prepared from known quantities 
of arsenic. Taking up one of the tubes, the witness said it 
was the mirror of the 15 cubic centimetres of solution which 
had been made up from the portion of the stomach, and it 
would be correct to refer to it as ‘‘ the stomach mirror ’’ in 
order to identify it. He explained that the deposit in the 
stomach mirror varied in colour from grey or greyish black 
to brown, but it all represented arsenic. | 

Examination continued—Having got your stomach mirror, 
and having got your grey and brown deposits in the mirror, 
how did you decide as to the amount of arsenic in the 
stomach ?—That mirror was compared with my series of 
standard mirrors—that is to say, mirrors that have been 
obtained from known quantities of arsenic—and the one that 
matched the stomach mirror in colour showed the amount of 
arsenic that was present. 

What is the range of your mirrors!—The first is one-fifth 
of a milligram, and they go down to one-five-hundredth of a 
milligram. 

So you are able to say, as a scientist, what any organ would 
contain between one-fifth and one-five-hundredth of a milli- 
gram after the solution has been passed through heated tubes? 
—Yes. 

How many standards of mirror have you there!—Tifteen. 

Having made that mirror now produced from the stomach 
solution, you are able to say it contained a solution of 
arsenic /—Yes. 

[At this stage all the mirrors were handed up to the judge, 
who examined them through a magnifying glass, after which 
he passed them down to the jury, and they also examined 
them in the same way. | 

[At this stage Mr. Webster also left the witness-box in 
order personally to indicate to the jury the varying colours 
in the tubes. The witness, in further evidence, said that 
he followed exactly the same procedure in regard to each 
organ. He took several pieces from different parts of each 
organ in order to have a clear sample of the whole organs, 
and he then made a solution from the mixture of pieces. | 

Examination continued—Did you arrive at the amount of 
arsenic in the organs by any other process!—Yes; it was 

139 


Harold Greenwood. 


John Webster 


arrived at by two different methods. One was the Marsh test, 
which I have already explained. The other method was by 
precipitation of the arsenic as sulphide of arsenic, and by 
weighing the amount precipitated. 

Did that give the same result as that obtained by you by 
the Marsh test?—It gave almost exactly the same result. 

Did you make an examination of the ‘‘ Eureka ’’ weed-killer 
submitted to you?—I did. 

What are the important parts of that ?—‘‘ Eureka ’’ weed- 
killer is a sodium arsenite—a pink powder. It is extremely 
soluble in water, and when dissolved the water turns pink. 
It is an alkaloid powder, and when in contact with acid the 
pink colour entirely disappears, leaving a slight yellow 
straw colour. ‘ 

By the Court—lIs it a clear solution or a turbid solution !— 
Almost an absolutely clear solution when it becomes entirely 
dissolved. 

Examination continued—How many grains of the weed- 
killer contained 2 grains of arsenic ?—In this particular weed- 
killer given to me I found that the amount of arsenic was 55.6 
per cent., or that 4 grains of it would represent 24 grains of 
arsenic. 

[The witness then produced a small bottle containing 4 
grains of the weed-killer, and another bottle of smaller size 
containing 24 grains of arsenic. At this stage Sir Marlay 
Samson remarked that it was highly important that great 
care should be taken of the delicate tubes that were being 
referred to as mirrors, and that the witness should place 
them back in his bag lest anything should happen to them. } 

Mr. Justice SHearmMan—Yes; they had better be put away. 
We don’t know what might happen to them in this Court! 

[ Witness then explained to the judge and jury the contents 
of the two bottles already referred to, and he afterwards 
also produced a small bottle containing 1 ounce (half a glass) 
of port wine, and another bottle containing a similar amount 
of port in which 4 grains of weed-killer had been dissolved. 
These were handed to the judge and jury in turn, and they 
all closely examined them towards the light in order to try 
to detect any difference in colour. The witness informed the 
judge that the weed-killer had been added to the port wine 
after having been dissolved in 10 drops of water. | 

Examination continued—Is there any difference of colour 
detectable between the contents of these two bottles of port 
wine!—Very slight indeed. 

Have you tasted the port wine that has had the weed- 
killer added to it?—I have. 

Is there any difference in the taste?—No; by sipping the 
port there is practically no difference to be detected. 

140 


Evidence for Prosecution. 
John Webster 


Have you made the same test in tea?—I have. In that 
ease also there was a very slight change in the colour, a 
slight darkening, but there again it would not be noticed at 
all unless actually compared. 

By the Court—What did the tea test consist of —I put 
4 grains of the weed-killer into an ordinary cupful of tea. 

Examination continued—How many wineglasses are there 
in an ordinary full bottle of wine!—Twelve. 

In order to get 2 grains of arsenic in each of the twelve 
glasses, how much weed-killer would it be necessary to add 
to the bottle?—About 40 grains of the weed-killer. 

How much of a teaspoonful would 40 grains of the weed- 
killer occupy !—About half a teaspoonful. 

Cross-examined by Sir E. Marswatn Hatt—You are a 
chemist, not a toxicologist?—That is so. 

Are you attached to the staff of St. Mary’s as an analytical 
chemist !—Yes. 

The calculation of the amount of arsenic in the portions 
of the human intestines in question is, as far as you are 
concerned, a matter of personal observation by comparison 
with mirrors!—In this particular case. 

It is perceptible to the minutest particle!—Very minute. 
I had special standard mirrors to make the comparisons in 
this case. 

Did you make quite certain that there was no arsenic on 
the glass of which the tube was made?’—The glass was 
thoroughly clear. 

What I want to get at is this: in the tube in which you 
are making the experiment, the heat which is made for the 
purpose of getting the gas you want to deposit on the side 
of the glass would probably cause arsenic to get free from 
the glass!—It is possible. 

Did you, in fact, examine the identical mirror to see that 
the mirror was arsenic-free?!—I did. 

Before you used it for the purpose of the arsenic test 1— 
Yes; it was done for about half an hour. 

That is done because you might have arsenic in the glass 
itself /—That is possible. 

Have you ever taken the trouble to see that the bore of 
your standard mirrors is identical with the bores of your 
testing mirrors?—Only by comparison. 

It can be gauged, of course/—Yes; but they were not 
gauged in this case. . 

What was the weight of the liver submitted in this case ?— 
The liver weighed nearly a pound. 

You took one-twenty-third part of the liver for the purposes 
of testing. Is it not recognised, especially by the American 
analysts, that in order to make a reliable test you should 

141 


Harold Greenwood. 
John Webster 


take half the liver?—The larger the portion the better the 
test. 

Take a poison like T.N.T. Is it not well known that the 
distribution of T.N.T. is not uniform?—It is not uniform. 

Have you any evidence whatever that the distribution of 
arsenic is uniform?—I have taken different parts of the 
liver—I do not mean in this case—and found no difference. 

Have you ever made a Marsh test on two-thirteenth parts 
of a liver, and arrived at the result, and then taken the 
whole liver and seen that your result is the same?—I have 
never done that, but, in regard to this two-thirteenth part, 
may I point out that it was not a two-thirteenth part of 
the liver I originally took. It is true that the mirror 
returned two-thirteenths, but I actually took one-twenty- 
third part of the liver. 

Do you suggest that there is no arsenic in the human 
body constantly ?—No, not detectable. 

Anyhow, from your experience, would you not find arsenic 
in almost every human body!?—In very minute quantities in 
some cases; in others none. 

You have heard of the case in the Manchester district 
where a number of people were poisoned as the result of 
drinking beer which, it was found, ccntained arsenic. 
During the sugar shortage in 1915 was the glucose in this 
country not very largely imported from America ?—Yes. 

It was obviously impossible to control this glucose during 
the war with the same care that it would have been con- 
trolled if it had been made by an English manufacturer ?—I 
do not know to what extent it was controlled. 

Have we not had a very considerable quantity of glucose 
put into our systems without our knowing it during the 
war 1—Yes. 

[Counsel obtained an admission from the witness that a 
large number of chemicals were contaminated by arsenic in 
minute form. The witness agreed that sulphate of magnesia 
and Epsom salts, two of the commonest forms of medicine 
used, had minute traces of arsenic. | 

[Sir E. Marsuaty Haut enumerated a long list of articles 
which contained certain quantities of arsenic, and these 
included morphia, malt, boric acid, and borax, and the 
witness agreed that they all contained arsenic. Witness 
also agreed with Sir E. Marshall Hall’s suggestion that 
arsenic taken in minute quantities was a very good tonic, 
and was used by beauty doctors for ladies’ complexions. 
The total amount found by observation was 1-112th part of 
a grain. 

Mr. Justice SHearman—The figures will have to be taken 
subject to subsequent correction by the witness. 

142 


Evidence for Prosecution. 
John Webster 


Sir E. Marsuatt Hatt—I am much obliged. I don’t know 
much about the law, but I know a lot about figures. ] 

Cross-examination continued—Before you made your 
examination were you told to anticipate the presence of 
arsenic /—No. 

When were you asked to give an analysis of the weedicide? 
—Not until after the inquest. 

Between the inquest and the magisterial hearing 7—Yes. 

You commenced your examination on 16th April, did you 
not ?—Yes. 

When did you make your report?—31st May. 

A quarter of a grain was the whole quantity of arsenic 
found in the intestines, and that was of interest to you ?!— 
Yes. 

During the war we had to relax the care exercised over 
the importation of these substances from outside?—I agree. 

And there was a wide distribution of very minute quan- 
tities of arsenic in many articles of general use; and arsenic 
is a tonic in proper doses?—Yes. 

And do you know that arsenic is largely used by so-called 
beauty specialists in preparations used to improve the com- 
plexion ?—I believe that is so. 

The weight of specimens submitted to you amounted to 
about 101 ounces !—About. 

There are 176,040 grains in 100 ounces. In that, accord- 
ing to your tests, you would find a quarter of a grain of 
arsenic. First of all, that would depend upon the visual 
observation, and then multiplication. You are assuming 
that there was equal distribution of the arsenic throughout 
the whole of the organs. Unless you are right that the dis- 
tribution over the whole body is equal to the parts you 
examined, the whole thing would be fallacious. [Handing 
the witness a packet in red paper, Sir E. Marshall Hall con- 
tinued.] That contains one-quarter of a grain of arsenic. 
Is that the total quantity you say was found in the body 
at the time you examined the organs ?—Yes. 

How many grains of arsenic does it take to kill!—About 
2 grains. 

There is an important question I forgot to put to you. 
Ten months after death would you expect to find traces of 
morphia?—I should expect so, but it is possible that I should 
not find it. 

Re-examined by Sir Marnay Samson—You tried in the first 
instance for a variety of poisons, and by the process of 
exhaustion you found arsenic!—That is so. 

Your tests were negative with regard to any other poison? 
—That is so. 

How many years’ experience have you had of the particular 

143 


Harold Greenwood. 


John Webster 


test on which you relied in this case?—Twenty years’ 
experience. 

And in all the tests you have made you have arrived at 
your results by the same process of calculation that you 
have told us of to-day ?—That is so. 

It is suggested to you by my learned friend that there are 
certain fallacies in the system you have adopted—first of all, 
in respect of the distribution of the organs tested ?—Yes, 
that was suggested ; but I think the method of different parts 
taken from each organ is the best way to get at the true 
result of the total amount of poison in that organ. 

In your opinion, after twenty years’ experience, is it 
reasonably likely that you would make a mistake of more 
than one-tenth in each mirror ?—No. 

Will you assume against yourself, please, that you had 
made a mistake in matching the mirrors? You know what 
I mean ?—Yes. 

What difference does that make on the whole of the organs 
if you had made a mistake of one-tenth in each mirror /— 
Leaving out the liver it would bring the total amount down 
from .28 of a grain to .245 of a grain. 

So that if you had made a mistake in respect of each 
mirror of one-tenth, that would be the whole mistake that 
you had made ?—That is so. 

So that it would still remain nearly a quarter of a grain? 
—Yes. 

Take 100 bodies, in how many would you find any trace 
of arsenic’—In 10 per cent., very minutely. 

How much do you suggest is a minute trace /—One-thou- 
sandth part of a grain. 

Is it a fact that the Arsenic Commission found that a man 
had died of arsenic without any arsenic being found in the 
body afterwards ?—I believe that is so. 


Dr. Witu1am Henry Wixucox, examined by Sir Marzay 
Samson—I am medical adviser to the Home Office. From 
19th to 23rd April I examined the organs of the late Mrs. 
Greenwood, which were in the possession of Mr. Webster. I 
examined all the viscera. They were all well preserved, con- 
sidering the time that had elapsed since death, which was 
about ten months. 

Did their good state of preservation enable you to draw 
any inference in respect of them?—I would not like to draw 
any exact inference, but after certain poisons the organs 
are well preserved. Although I do not think that too much 
importance should be attached to that, the importance that 
I attach to it is that if the organs had not been in a state 
of fairly good preservation I should have drawn the con- 
clusion that it was probably not a case of arsenical poisoning. 

144 


Evidence for Prosecution. 
Dr William Henry Willcox 


Therefore, you say the state of preservation in which 
they were had some bearing on the case /—Yes, some bearing. 

First of all, as to the heart. Give us your detailed observa- 
tions of the heart ?—There was a good deal of decomposition. 
The valves showed no sign of disease. The muscles of the 
heart had decomposed. 

Having regard to your observations of the valves of the 
heart, could the cause of death have been valvular disease 
of the heart?—No; there was no valvular disease. 

What do you say as to the uterus}—There was a small 
tumour present, known as a fibroid tumour, about the 
size of a thrush’s egg. It was not a malignant tumour. 
It was a type of tumour commonly found in the uterus. 

What was the condition of that organ?—The organ was 
healthy apart from the presence of the tumour. 

Was it a condition which would cause pain and suffering 
during lifetime!—It might have caused a certain amount 
of pain, and possibly a little tendency to hemorrhage, but 
it would not in any sense be dangerous to life. 

Having made an examination of the organs, did you find 
any sign of disease which would have accounted for death? 
—No. 

Having regard to all the circumstances of the analysis of 
Mr. Webster, what, in your opinion, was the cause of death? 
—aArsenical poisoning. 

What is a fatal dose of arsenic!—About 2 grains. 

[Dr. Willcox then proceeded to explain in detail how 
arsenical poisoning would vary under different conditions. 
For instance, he said, the symptoms would appear sooner 
when the stomach was empty and when the arsenic was in 
solution, whereas the symptoms would be delayed possibly for 
hours if the stomach was full and the arsenic was in solid 
form. If taken in solution on an empty stomach the 
symptoms would probably appear in an hour. | 

Examination continued—In your opinion, how was the 
poison taken in the case of Mabel Greenwood ?—I should say 
it was taken in the system. 

And in what way was it taken in the system?—By the 
mouth. 

What is your reason for saying it was taken by the mouth? 
—There was a certain amount of poison present in the 
gullet, the stomach, and the intestines. 

Do you draw any other inference from the amount in those ? 
—Yes. 

What do you draw!—The fact that there was very little 
in the stomach indicates that several hours must have elapsed 
between death and the time the poison was taken. 

Perhaps you will state clearly why that is so?—Because 
there was very little poison found in the stomach, and the 

L 145 


Harold Greenwood. 


Dr William Henry Willcox 


stomach must have emptied itself of its contents, and probably 
some must have been expelled by the vomiting. I may add 
that a great deal of poison was got rid of from the intestines. 

By the Court—By diarrhcea?—Yes. The quantity in the 
intestines was small. That also indicates several hours’ 
interval between the time the poison was taken and death. 

Examination continued—Can you express any approxi- 
mate time as to when this dose of arsenic was taken !— 
Probably at least nine hours must have elapsed before death. 

Can you give us it more definitely!—The poison might 
have been taken between lunch at 1 o’clock and 6 p.m.— 
that is, assuming it was taken in one dose. 

What are the symptoms of arsenical poisoning /—There may 
be some pain at the mouth if the solution is strong. There 
is also pain in the upper part of the stomach. There might 
be nausea, and then possibly later sickness with colicky pains 
in the abdomen. There might be symptoms also of diarrhea, 
and another symptom would be exhaustion and collapse. 

After collapse what might happen?—Death might occur. 

Are there any other symptoms to be found in some cases !— 
Cramp in the legs occurs. 

The statement has been made that Mrs. Greenwood com- 
plained of pains below the heart. Would “‘ suffocating 
pains ”’ be an accurate description of those pains?—A person 
might possibly describe the pains as such, but it is rather 
unusual. 

By the Court—Would it seem like acute indigestion or 
heartburn ?—It would be something like heartburn. Heart- 
burn acidity arises from the stomach. 

Examination continued—Having given us the symptoms in 
this case, what, in your opinion, was the cause of death ?— 
Heart failure. 

And what did the heart failure result from?—From pro- 
longed diarrhea and vomiting, due to the effects of the 
poison. 

Assuming a person to be suffering, as Mabel Greenwood was, 
from an affection of the heart, would that, in your opinion, 
have any bearing on a person who had had arsenic ?—Very 
much. It would diminish the resistance of the person to a 
great extent. A small dose would produce much greater 
effects than on a normal person. 

Your opinion is that the functional organs were all affected, 
apart from affection of the heart ?—Yes. 

Can you form an opinion of the total amount of arsenic 
in the body in addition to that found in the organs that 
were examined ?—I can form an approximate opinion. 

What is your opinion of the approximate amount taken 
into the body, including the organs not examined ?—The 
organs not examined—the muscles, skin, &c.—would contain 

146 


Evidence for Prosecution. 

Dr William Henry Willcox 
two or three times as much arsenic as was present in the 
organs that were examined. 

By the Court—How would it be distributed’—It would be 
distributed through the valves of the heart. 

How does that come through? Is it through circulation 1— 
Through circulation. 

Examination continued—And then it is carried on to the 
parts of the body. What, in your opinion, was the total 
quantity of arsenic found in the body at the time of death 1— 
Probably three-quarters of a grain to a grain. Taking into 
account the amount of diarrhcea and vomiting, and the time 
that elapsed before death, my opinion is that something 
approximating the minimum fatal dose must have been 
taken. 

Cross-examined by Sir E. MarsHatt Hatt—Have you been 
in many poisoning cases!—A great many. 

Have you ever given evidence for the defence in those 
cases /—I should think I have, but not in any Crown cases. 

In criminal cases have you ever given evidence for the 
defence ?—-Not in any cases for the Crown, but I have in 
other cases. 

You gave evidence in the Seddons case, where death was 
due to arsenical poisoning /—Yes. 

Does the whole of the evidence in this case strengthen or 
weaken your opinion !—I am still of the opinion that arsenical 
poisoning was the cause of death. 

Diarrhea is more of a sign of gastric irritation than of 
arsenical poisoning ?—It might have been in the case of dis- 
turbances caused by eating food such as gooseberries. 

Would you expect diarrhoea to precede the vomiting !—Pos- 
sibly it might. 

Oh, Dr. Willcox, so many things are possible. As a 
medical man, and not as a medical expert, would you not 
expect, as a rule, diarrhcea to be followed by vomiting 
after disturbing food had been eaten?—I would not say as 
a rule. Usually you have vomiting first. 

Might Mrs. Greenwood have been susceptible to many kinds 
of food ?—Yes. 

About the effects of morphia pills, if Mrs. Greenwood had 
had a grain of morphia when in the condition that she was 
in, would you have expected her to die in a few hours ?—Yes. 

Could you give an opinion as to the effect of the two pills? 
—tThe effect might have been more of exhaustion. 

Independent of the pills !—Yes. 

Might the sleep which preceded death have been due to 
exhaustion ?—It might. 

Would the opium pills have been absorbed after ten 
minutes 7—No. 

In your opinion, as a medical man of long standing, is 

147 


Harold Greenwood. 
Dr William Henry Willcox 


it possible for another medical man to fail to distinguish 
between morphia and opium?—I don’t think a medical man 
should make such a mistake. 

Have you ever known a medical man to say that the terms 
morphia and opium are interchangeable ?—No, I have not. 

When Dr. Griffiths says that morphia pills are often called 
opium pills, is that news to you ?—Yes. 

What is the relative strength of morphia to opium ?— 
Morphia is ten times more powerful. 

The equivalent of one-tenth of a grain of morphia would 
be in two opium pills ?—Yes. 

We have heard in this Court that since 1917 and during 
1918 and 1919 very large quantities of arsenic went to 
Rumsey House !—Yes. 

You have also heard that there were some hundreds of yards 
of paths in the garden ?—Yes. 

In order to employ weed-killer effectively, it is necessary 
that it should be used when the ground is slightly moist, and 
not wet ?—Yes. 

Would you then get the best effect ?—Yes. 

Heavy rain and strong sun have to be avoided to get the 
best effects 7—Yes. 

Would it be possible for a person to absorb poison by 
walking about the garden ?—Can you suggest a likely way? 

By the Court—Would it be possible to absorb arsenic by 
breathing ?—Yes; by inhaling the dust in a closed room, 
which would cause some irritation, but I have not heard 
of poisoning in that way. 

Cross-examination continued—Would you like to take the 
responsibility of saying that, assuming she died from arsenical 
poisoning, every possibility of accidental poisoning should be 
ruled out?—I do not know what care was taken with the 
weed-killer, but with the ordinary way by watering I do 
oe ik there would be any risk in walking over those 
paths. 

Is it not possible that she might innocently have absorbed 
arsenic?—Do you mean that arsenic got in the food? It is 
possible that the arsenic might have contaminated the garden. 
I am only here to answer what is the cause of death, and 
not any other questions. 

Do you agree with this, that if arsenic was, according 
to your theory, administered from wine on the table at 1 
o’clock, and that if Miss Irene Greenwood took a wineglass 
of the same wine, she could not escape the symptoms ?—No; 
she must have been very ill or have died, assuming that she 
took the same quantity as Mrs. Greenwood, and assuming 
that there were 2 grains of arsenic in the glass. 

Do you say that if Mrs. Greenwood had taken that fatal 
dose of arsenic at 1 o’clock, or between 1 and half-past 1, 

148 


Evidence for Prosecution. 
Dr William Henry Willcox 


it would have been possible for her to be apparently in good 
health, as stated by one of the maid-servants, at 5 o’clock? 
—It would be very unlikely. 

Mr. Justice SamarmMan—It does not amount to anything 
more than this, that the maidservant, when she put the tea 
on the table, did not notice anything then. 

Cross-examination continued—We are told that Mrs. Green- 
wood sat out in the garden practically all the afternoon. 
Do you think she could have done this if she were suffering 
from arsenical poisoning!—She would probably have felt 
unwell in the afternoon. 

The symptoms would have shown themselves before 5 
o’clock !—Usually they would. 

After retiring from the garden she sat down to tea, and 
had cake and bread and butter ?—Yes. 

By the Court—lIf she had tea at 5 o’clock, as stated, you 
would be very much surprised ?—Yes. 

Cross-examination continued—At 6 o’clock, or half-past 
6, she complained of the pain in her heart?—I remember 
that being mentioned. 

If she were correct in her description of the pain in her 
heart, it would be something more than the food Mrs. Green- 
wood had had?!—No, I do not agree. 

Do you agree with what was said yesterday about the 
gastric disturbance caused through eating food and the 
forcing of the heart into a corner ?—It is rather a picturesque 
description of what happens. 

It might create a pressure which would cause faintness !— 
I don’t know. It is impossible to attach importance to the 
description of pain given by people. 

You agree that the heart walls were seriously thin ?!—I 
should not like to give an opinion, because of the change 
which had occurred during decomposition of the body. 

Have you not said that, under the circumstances, you 
would not be surprised that a doctor should have given a 
certificate that death was due to valvular disease of the 
heart ?—Yes; on account of the description of the symptoms 
given to him. 

In a statement made by you at the police court did you 
not say that from the evidence you had heard in Court you 
had no doubt that the walls of the heart were thin !—Yes; 
on the evidence given in Court. 

Can you tell me which of the symptoms you say is entirely 
inconsistent with gastric trouble!—Yes; the long-continued 
vomiting and diarrhcea for several hours would be more con- 
sistent with arsenical poisoning. 

Can you give me any one of the symptoms which is entirely 
inconsistent with gastric trouble?—I cannot give you the 

149 


Harold Greenwood. 


Dr William Henry Willcox 


symptoms, because there is no distinction between the 
symptoms of the two conditions. 

If she had intestinal disturbances in the condition of her 
health, would you be surprised if she collapsed and death 
occurred ?—I would be surprised if death or collapse occurred 
from that disturbance alone. Gooseberry skins would cause 
the intestinal irritation, but it would not produce a con- 
dition similar to the symptoms of arsenical poisoning. 

It is known in cases of ptomain * poisoning that several 
persons have taken the same food, and only one of those 
persons has been affected ?—Yes. 

Has it occurred to you that if the gooseberries were acci- 
dentally sprayed by weed-killer composed of arsenical solu- 
tion it would be reasonable to expect arsenical poisoning /— 
If the gooseberries had been picked immediately after spray- 
ing there would be obviously some arsenic on them, and 
unless they were washed before being cooked there might be 
some risk in eating gooseberry tart, and all the persons who 
partook of the tart would be similarly affected in all 
probability. 

The utmost deduction that you can draw against the 
accused here is that something on the borderline of the pos- 
sible fatal dose had been administered ?—Approximately the 
minimum fatal dose had been administered. 

[Sir E. Marshall Hall then quoted a case of arsenical 
poisoning from a standard American book on poisons, and 
also quoted Taylor’s work on the same subject, in which it 
was stated that ‘‘ There must be unequivocal proof that some 
rational quantity—that is to say, at least a grain or a large 
portion of a grain—of the metal was found in the viscera.’’ 
He asked the witness whether he agreed with that. Dr. 
Willcox replied that he agreed with it in the main, but, 
he added, ‘‘ In this case the great vomiting and diarrhea 
would account for the elimination of considerable quantities 
of the arsenic.’’ ] 

Sir Maruay Samson—It is only fair that my learned 
friend should read the qualifying paragraph in Taylor’s 
book. 


Sir E. Marswatyn Hatt—Why say that? I did read it 
just now. 

Mr. Justice SHmarman—Please don’t get so excited. The 
witness says that in the main he agrees with it, so why pur- 
sue it? 

[The witness said that in the main he agreed with it, but 
the circumstances in this case did not agree with the circum- 
stances on which Taylor’s point was based. In this case 
there was violent vomiting and diarrhea. | 


_* The term ‘‘ ptomain poisoning ”’ is no longer employed, ‘‘ food 
poisoning ’’ being the correct description to offer. 
150 


Evidence for Prosecution. 
Dr William Henry Willcox 


Cross-examination continued—Where death has ensued 
within such a short time after the giving of the fatal dose— 
within nine hours—have’ you any recorded cases where such 
a small trace was found in the viscera?—I have not said 
nine hours. It might have been longer than nine hours. 

How many hours elapsed between the giving of the dose 
and death in the Seddons case?—A shorter time than in this 
case. In this case probably 1 o’clock is the earliest hour 
that the arsenic was administered. In the Seddons case 
probably not less than nine hours had elapsed between the 
giving of the poison and death. 

Have you eliminated the possibility of death from uremia 
or kidney trouble?—I have considered that. 

The kidneys were fairly well preserved !—Not absolutely. 

Preserved sufficiently for you to say definitely there was 
no kidney disease!—If there had been grave disease of the 
kidneys I think I should have detected it, and I feel sure 
you can exclude the possibility of death from uremia in this 
case. 

Why did you not examine the muscles or the skin?—I was 
not present at the autopsy. Six weeks elapsed before I came 
into the case. 

In the Seddons case the muscles and the skin were 
examined !—Yes. 

In the Seddons case you had a second examination in order 
to see if there was any arsenic in the hair?—That is so, and 
also to take portions of the muscles as well. In this case 
I thought that, under all the conditions, it was not necessary 
to have a second examination. 

Is it a well-known fact amongst you experts that one effect 
of arsenical poisoning is to preserve the body !—Yes; I have 
dealt with this. 

And that, if you wanted to employ a poison and to escape 
detection, there is no worse poison to employ than arsenic? 
—TI would not say that, because the preservative effect is not 
so marked that you can diagnose arsenical poisoning by pre- 
servation only. Where a large dose has been given there 
is ample preservation. 


The Court adjourned. 


151 


Fourth Day—Friday, 5th November, 1920. 


Dr. Witucox, cross-examination continued by Sir E. Mar- 
SHALL Hatt—Have you ever known a case of death from 
arsenical poisoning in which there have not been vomiting 
and diarrhoea?!—I have heard of such cases. They are rare. 

[The witness said that he agreed with Taylor’s book that 
there must be proved to be at least a grain or a large fraction 
of a grain in the viscera, but he made the qualification that 
this case was not on all fours with the case of which Taylor 
spoke. ] : 

I take it Taylor meant an ordinary case of death from 
arsenic /—Yes. 

Therefore, I may take it, it had reference to a case where 
there had been vomiting and diarrhoea ?—Yes. 

Vomiting and diarrhea must precede death /—Generally. 

If, therefore, Taylor’s standard work says you must find 
practically a grain in the viscera after death, it means a 
grain after there has been vomiting and diarrhcea ?—Yes; 
but that is subject to the qualification I have made. 

But the qualification is as to vomiting and diarrhoea !— 
Yes; but in this case there was a sufficient length of time for 
the greater part of the arsenic to be evacuated from. the 
stomach and the intestines. 

When once arsenic has got absorbed into the system, how 
long would that absorbed arsenic last in the system so as 
to be, in your opinion, detectable after death ?—Perhaps 
a fortnight. That is the average time. 

Do you agree that cramp and thirst are generally two of 
the most important symptoms in arsenical poisoning ?—I 
believe they are common. 

Have you ever seen a case of arsenical poisoning where 
they were not present?—Yes, a good many of them. 

Where death has ensued ?—Yes; in the Seddons case there 
was no cramp, but there was thirst. 

But in the Seddons case thirst was a prominent feature? 
—Yes. 

Dr. Willcox, try to get rid of what I call the lecture- 
room style 

Mr. Justice SHzarman—Oh, no! 

Cross-examination continued—Do you not think that the 
absence of thirst and cramp in this case would cause you 
to doubt that this poor woman did die of arsenical poisoning? 
—No; because I do not regard them in any way as constant 
symptoms. 

152 


Evidence for Prosecution. 
Dr William Henry Willcox 


You say that in your opinion the arsenic that was found 
in the body of this poor, lady must have been administered 
by the mouth ?—Yes.: 

You say that, in your opinion, 2 grains were the minimum 
taken /—Yes. 

Since you last gave evidence in an arsenic case, the use of 
salvarsan for syphilis has been largely increased !—Yes. 

Is a normal dose of salvarsan such that 2.2 grains of 
arsenic are injected into the blood of the patient !—Yes. 

That is to say, in the salvarsan treatment the minimum 
is something more than the minimum that is a fatal dose. 
It is injected into the blood of the patient every week 7—Yes. 

That shows that the human body absorbs a very large pro- 
portion of arsenic?—Yes; the arsenic in salvarsan is in 
organic combination, and does not have the same effect as 
free arsenic. 

It has not a selective action on particular parts of the 
body /—Yes. 

Mr. Justice SHzEARMAN—Explain that to the jury. I might 
know something about it, but the jury might know nothing 
about it. 

Cross-examination continued—lf a man is poisoned in the 
leg, where is the symptom shown ?—You would probably get 
leg colic. 

Is there any effect upon the legs or arms?—It may affect 
the nerves of the arm. 

If arsenic is poison, what is the corresponding effect !— 
Arsenic is a poison which affects the nerves of the arms and 
legs. You might get with arsenic cramp and weakness in the 
legs. 

I take it that generally there are certain poisons which 
take upon themselves to select certain portions of the human 
body on which the action is more violent than on others ?— 
That is so. 

And more quickly ?/—Yes. 

[The judge here asked Sir E. Marshall Hall to explain 
what he meant by the viscera, and counsel replied that in 
speaking of the viscera he meant the liver and intestines, 
and all the organs examined. | 

Cross-examination continued—Do you agree that the liver 
is somewhat uneven in formation, not all in one piece!— 
No, it is not. 

And that the poison would not be evenly distributed 1— 
I think it might be taken it would be evenly distributed 
in infinitesimal portions. 

Is it usual for the official expert to reserve a portion of 
the viscera for examination by another expert?—I think 
in every case of poisoning the official expert reserves a 

153 


Harold Greenwood. 
Dr William Henry Willcox 


sufficient quantity of the viscera in order that an analysis 
might be done by some one else. That, I think, holds this 
time. ; 

In this particular case the police were making inquiries 
in October from Mr. Greenwood ?—Yes. 

It is quite obvious from this that what suspicion there 
was of the criminal death of Mrs. Greenwood was attached 
to the husband?—I believe so. 

Do not you think it would have been better if some one 
had had the opportunity of asking for the examination of 
the viscera by Mr. Webster, on behalf of Mr. Greenwood !— 
I think if the application had been made, there would have 
been no objection. 

Do not you think as an authority that an opportunity 
ought to have been offered and not have to be asked for 1~— 
No; I would not go so far as that. 

Have you ever troubled to think of any explanation of 
this case ?—I have. 

[Sir E. Marshall Hall then produced two small bottles, 
and asked the witness to look at them, stating that one con- 
tained Fowler’s solution of arsenic and the other a standard 
mixture of bismuth. ] 

Dr. Griffiths said that both these bottles were kept in his 
surgery, and he states he gave this lady a dose of four tea- 
spoonfuls of this mixture of bismuth !—Yes. 

If by some unfortunate mistake he, in the anxiety and 
hurry, gave her four teaspoonfuls of Fowler’s solution, you 
would have got all the arsenic you found, or more than you 
found ?/—Yes. 

And there would be practically no distinction in colour in 
the mixture, whether the mixture were of bismuth or a solu- 
tion of arsenic?—No. They resemble one another. 

By the Courr—Assuming Dr. Griffiths did give this lady 
the teaspoonful of the powdered solution, would that account 
for the arsenic discovered in the body?—I don’t know that 
it would account for the arsenic. 

Sir E, Marsnarn Hatxr—I must protect myself from any 
suggestion that I am putting the blame upon Dr. Griffiths. 

Mr. Justice SHzearMan—Unless you reject it in a possible 
defence, that is the suggestion. The jury are asked to 
believe that, by a colossal blunder, Dr. Griffiths poisoned 
this lady. 

Sir E, Marsuatt Hatt—I don’t suggest it. 

Mr. Justice Sumarman—lIt is suggested that Dr. Griffiths, 
having these things in his surgery, sent over something which 
poisoned the lady, and did that by mistake. It is a shock- 
ing blunder, and he should be given an opportunity to refute 
it. I am bound to speak strongly. 

154 


Evidence for Prosecution. 
Dr William Henry Willcox 


Sir E. Marsan Hatu—These two things are practically 
the same colour. 35 

Mr. Justice Sazarman—It is the suggestion which is made 
of a blunder by Dr. Griffiths. 

Re-examined by Sir Marztay Samson—Is the red weed- 
killer coloured by acid 1—Yes. 

And did the contents of the stomach contain .1 to .2 parts 
of hydrochloric acid !—Yes. 

By the Court—Dr. Griffiths told us that opium pills are 
ready-made, and that they are quite common ?—Yes. 

Are not made-up morphia pills quite common ?—Yes. 

Are made-up morphia pills as strong as half a grain 
quite common ?—They are common. In order to verify that 
I made inquiries from a pharmacist in the town, and he 
said it is the custom to sell them. 

It is suggested that an enormous number of people have 
been killed?—A good many. 

[Sir E. Marshall Hall rose, and the judge, addressing 
him, remarked—‘‘I am asking these questions in order 
that you may ask questions further.’’ | 

Sir E. MarsHaty Hatt—I am very much obliged, my 
lord. It is very kind of you. 

Re-examination continued—Can you recollect a case where 
a large amount of arsenic was found?!—The case in which 
the largest quantity was found that I know of was one in 
which I believe 24 milligrams was found in the liver. 

Were the cases in the Manchester district cases of chronic 
arsenical poisoning or acute arsenical poisoning ? 

By the Court—It was a case where glucose was used as 
a composition ?—In the preparation, my lord. 

Re-examination continued—What would 24 milligrams 
in the liver work out at ?—At 1-26th part of a grain. 

In cases where arsenic might be found in glucose, would 
there be an obligation on any medical man to report to the 
public department /—Yes. 

So that is how the Manchester inquiry began?—I think 
the Manchester inquiry began through recognition at the 
Manchester Infirmary of the symptoms being due to arsenic. 
That, then, led on to the detection of arsenic in the beer, and 
that led on to the detection of arsenic in the glucose in beer. 

It would be a grave danger to the public at large if a 
medical man did not call attention to it?—Yes; the medical 
officer of health would call attention to it. 

Since 1903 have you, as medical adviser to the Home 
Office, known of cases where glucose contained any arsenic? 
—It hag not come to my knowledge. It is only fair for me to 
say that it would not be reported to me. 

It is suggested that this is one of the ways this lady had 

155 


Harold Greenwood. 


Dr William Henry Willcox 


arsenic in her system. Would that be likely to occur to one 
individual only in this locality ?—No. 

Why do you say ‘‘ No?’’—Probably many people would 
be eating glucose. 

And it would affect several cases ?!—Probably. 

Is it possible for one person to take it without showing 
any symptoms of it?—No. 

Is it correct to say, then, that you would expect to see 
indications in the neighbourhood of the poison in the glucose? 
—Yes. 

The other theory put to you is absorption from the weed- 
killer ?—I have heard it suggested. 

Do you know that when weed-killer is put on the 
ground and the water put on, it evaporates, and can be so 
thrown into the atmosphere that a person would undoubtedly 
inhale it to some extent?—It would be quite possible. 

What colour would be the morphia pills referred to in 
this case?—If{f they were not coated they would be of a 
whitish colour. 

Did you actually see those in respect of which you made 
inquiries in this town?—No; but I have some myself. 

What colour do you say they are?’—Light brown. Morphia 
is white, and the stuff used to make the pills colours them. 

What is the colour of opium?—Opium would be dark 
brown, but it would be quite possible to disguise the colour. 

It is suggested that the vomiting in this case would be 
caused by gooseberry skins. If gooseberry skins caused the 
vomiting, would it continue and have serious irritation in 
the same way as poison?—No; it would not continue to the 
same extent. 

Having regard to the nurse’s evidence, is that consistent 
with the arsenical poisoning or with vomiting after the goose- 
berry skins ?—It is more consistent with arsenical poisoning. 
The diarrhoea and vomiting were more consistent with 
arsenical poisoning than with gooseberry skins. 

You have been asked whether the passage in Taylor’s 
book is in conflict with your opinion in regard to arsenical 
poisoning. Does the passage in any way conflict with your 
opinion ?/—No. 

By the Court—There are always vomit and diarrhea, but 
in some cases there are more vomit and diarrhcea than we 
have here?—Yes, my lord; and death occurs within six 
hours after the poison has been taken. If the time is much 
longer, say, twelve hours or so, then the arsenic would be 
eliminated from the stomach to a great extent. 

Re-examination continued—In your opinion, is the 
principle of injection of salvarsan wholly different from the 
taking of arsenic in its natural state ?—Yes. 


In salvarsan arsenic is so blended with other ingredients 
156 


Evidence for Prosecution. 
Dr William Henry Willcox 


that it becomes innocuous to the human body ?—Not innocu- 
ous so much as it becomes less toxic rather than poisonous. 

When you have administered arsenic in the form of 
salvarsan you would expect, if death had occurred from any 
other cause, that arsenic would be found in the body ?—Yes. 

But you draw no inference from such as that which has 
been suggested to you that death was due to arsenic ?—No. 

Further cross-examined by Sir E. Marsuatn Hati—In 
the case of a person who dies after salvarsan treatment, the 
arsenic you find in the viscera is the same arsenic as you 
would find in the case of arsenical poisoning !—I don’t think 
that has yet been proved, Sir Edward. You will get the 
arsenic out in the same way by the same process, but the 
arsenic in the organs is probably an organic combination. It 
would be the same result after the Marsh test, but the com- 
bination would be different. 


Superintendent Samus, Jones (recalled) produced a new 
note-book similar to the one in which he had written Green- 
wood’s statement, which was produced yesterday. This, like 
his old note-book, contained 50 pages. 

Sir E. Marswatt Hati—I will say nothing more about 
this, my lord. If Superintendent Jones had not said what 
he did say yesterday nothing more would have been asked 
of him. Therefore, let it drop. 

Mr. Justice SHearmMan—But there was the imputation 
that leaves had been torn out of the book. 

Sir E. Marsuatt Hati—No, not that he had torn them 
out of the book; but that there had been leaves torn out of 
the book. 

Mr. Justice SHearman—Very well. Let that close the 
matter. 


Dr. T. R. Grirritas (recalled), cross-examined by Sir E. 
MarsHatL Hatu—Do you keep all your solutions and drugs 
in your surgery !—Yes. 

Please understand I am making no suggestion, but is it 
possible that by an accident on that night you might have 
dispensed the powdered solution instead of the bismuth !— 
Quite impossible. 


Miss Grirritus (recalled), cross-examined by Sir E. Mar- 
SHALL Hatt—Was there a flag day at Kidwelly on 7th June, 
1919%—I cannot remember the date, because there have been 
so many flag days. I was treasurer for several. 

I asked you a few days ago whether there was a strained 
relationship between you and Mrs. Greenwood, and you 
said there was not. I suggest to you that you were not on 

157 


Harold Greenwood. 


Miss Griffiths 


speaking terms as late as 7th June?—I was on speaking 
terms. 

And that you were on bowing terms!—I was more than 
that; I was on speaking terms. 

Well, now, Miss Griffiths, please look at that [handing 
witness a letter]. Satisfy yourself first of all that that 
is Mrs. Greenwood’s letter. Is it her handwriting /—It looks 
like it. 

Look right at the end of it, and read those last few words. 
Now read them very carefully, Miss Griffiths.—Yes, I have 
read them. 

Mr. Justice SHzarmMan—The whole letter must be put into 
Court. 

Sir E. MarsHatt Hatu—I cannot technically put it in, my lord. 

Sir Martay Samson—I have desired that it should be put 
in, my lord. It is part of the evidence in the case. 

Cross-examination continued—Here is a letter from 
Rumsey House, Kidwelly, dated 7th June, 1919, from the 
late Mrs. Greenwood to her daughter. The first three pages 
are not important, but this is important. ‘‘ Flag day 
yesterday. Miss G. was treasurer. We are still only on 
bowing terms.—With lots of love, your loving Mother.”’ 
Is the statement in that letter true or false?—I can account 
for that. 

Do you still suggest that you were on speaking terms with 
her within a few days of her death?—I had been with her 
at a public function, and we were on very comfortable terms. 

I put it to you that Mrs. Greenwood was jealous of you ?— 
She never told me so. 

And you say the terms between you were absolutely 
amicable?—Yes; except with regard to little disputes now 
and again. 


Evidence for the Prosecution closed. 


Opening Speech for the Defence. 


Sir E. Marsuatt Hatt—Gentlemen of the jury, I can, if 
I like, submit to you that there is no case to be submitted to 
you, but I think it far better, after a remark that his lord- 
ship let fall this morning, that you should hear my evidence. 
I will call expert witnesses from your own neighbourhood, as 
well as distinguished men from London, who will say that 
death was not due to arsenical poisoning at all, but due to 
acute gastric attacks. I will call the most important wit- 
ness of all, who will tell you that she took a glass of the 
same wine with her mother on the Sunday for lunch and 
supper. You have now also the admission from the girl 

158 


Opening Speech for Defence. 
Sir E. Marshall Hall 


Hannah Williams that she had put two big red glasses on 
the table. She endeavoured to say that one was for Mr. 
Greenwood, but Mr. Greenwood will tell you that he was in 
the habit of drinking his whisky and soda out of a big tumbler. 

It is my duty to point out the real position in law that 
Harold Greenwood stands in at this moment. Sir Marlay 
Samson referred to ‘‘ acts of obstruction ’’ by Greenwood, 
but those have now gone into thin air, and I can afford to 
disregard them. But there is a principle of our criminal 
jurisprudence in this country which is the foundation on 
which justice is built, and it is a cardinal principle. You 
hear people say sometimes, ‘‘ Give him the benefit of the 
doubt.’’ It is not a case of giving a man the benefit of the 
doubt. In this country a man in the dock is by law pre- 
sumed to be innocent of the offence with which he is charged, 
and that presumption of innocence can only be displaced by 
proof in evidence of his guilt. If the evidence falls short 
of that proof it is not the benefit of the doubt that the 
prisoner is entitled to claim, but a verdict of ‘‘ Not guilty.” 
Harold Greenwood has not got to prove his innocence. Harold 
Greenwood has not got to prove that Mrs. Greenwood did 
not die of arsenical poisoning. Harold Greenwood has not got 
to prove where the arsenic came from which was found in 
her body. That is the Crown’s duty; and in order to prove 
their case they must prove two facts, namely, that Mrs. 
Greenwood died of arsenical poisoning, and, secondly, that 
that poison was deliberately administered by her husband 
with intent to kill her. I submit that there is no jury in 
the world that would convict this man on such evidence 
as has been led. Harold Greenwood can take his stand 
and say, ‘‘I call no witnesses, and I decline to say any- 
thing myself,’’ and then submit that the case has not been 
proven. He is entitled to do so. 

This unfortunate man has been four and a half months in 
close confinement. During that period Greenwood has been 
unable to see even his solicitor except in the presence of 
an official. He has had no uninterrupted conversation 
with his fellow-men or with his wife and children, because 
in this country bail is unknown in murder cases. This 
case, from the moment it was started at the Kidwelly 
inquest, has excited the mind of the public, so much so 
that this man has been labouring under the disadvantage of 
a prejudice which has been created merely on gossip and 
is the result of suspicion. Trifles light as air are confirma- 
tion strong as Holy Writ to jealous people. And so it is 
that you have only to make a suggestion against the man 
in this case and suspicion immediately runs rampant. For 
four months and a half he has had to wait for a trial. He 
could have applied that the venue of the trial should be 

159 


Harold Greenwood. 


Sir E. Marshall Hall 


transferred to London, and there is no doubt that had he 
applied his application would have been granted, for it 
would only have been necessary to exhibit one of the local 
papers, where the portrait of a well-known counsel in criminal 
cases was published in the paper as having been retained 
for the defence when the counsel had not even been 
approached. If Harold Greenwood had made such an appli- 
cation to the Court in London it would have been granted 
on the ground that he would not have a fair trial in his own 
country. But do you think that any man, even after four 
and a half months of confinement, is going to a London 
jury who would say, ‘‘ Oh, he could not face his own country- 
men. He is afraid of them, and has come to London to 
be tried ’?? Greenwood, with that judgment which I com- 
mend, decided that, however irksome to wait for the trial, 
it was better for him to be tried by his fellow-countrymen, 
Welshmen, who have been associated with him in his work. 

It has been laid down again and again by administrators 
of the law that it is the bounden duty of the police to make 
inquiries that will tend in favour of the accused person, as 
well as inquiries that will tend to incriminate him. But in 
this case I do not care what contradiction is made to me; I 
feel bound to say that it is little less than an injustice for 
the police not, to have called Irene Greenwood and the man 
Benjamin Williams. You have been told that Benjamin 
Williams knew something about the weed-killer, and that the 
empty tins had been, to the best of his belief, thrown into 
the river. Not only was he not called, but there has been 
no copy of his statement so that the public prosecutor could 
decide whether he should be called or not. 

Much more important than that is the fact that the 
daughter has not been called who was with her loved mother 
in her hour of agony. She is the one person not likely to 
be prejudiced in favour of her father if she knew that her 
father’s hand slew her mother. No questions have been 
asked of her, and no policemen have been to see her. They 
ought to have taken a complete statement, for if they had 
they would have found that she had drunk twice out of the 
bottle of wine which is alleged to have been taken by Mrs. 
Greenwood. 

_ You are dealing with expert evidence which is minute in 
its precision with regard to some facts, but it lacks to a 
degree of incredulity on the question of detection. The 
highly trained expert who spends his life in mechanical pro- 
cesses and another gentleman who has never given evidence 
on behalf of an accused prisoner, but who always has been 
retained on behalf of the Crown, professed to be able to 
detect 11-5000th part of a grain of arsenic in the few cubic 
centimetres they have examined for the purpose of the Marsh 
160 


Sir Edward Marshall Hall, K.C. 


Opening Speech for Defence. 


test. They put before the Court a set of tubes of varying 
length, and they professed to be able to give results with 
tubes that have not been tested as to similarity of length and 
thickness. Having found 1-120th part of a grain of arsenic 
in the viscera, a gentleman from London, for whom we have 
every possible respect, comes down and says that a very small 
portion of arsenic in the viscera has caused the lady’s death. 
He says, ‘‘ From that, and the symptoms I have heard, I 
Say in my opinion death was due to arsenic.’’ I asked him, 
““Is that the opinion you expressed some months ago?— 
Yes.’? Then I asked him, ‘‘ Has the evidence you heard in 
this Court weakened or strengthened your opinion?’’ He 
hesitated for quite a number of seconds before he said, ‘‘ I 
am still of opinion that she died from arsenic.’’ That seems 
to be the sole evidence against the accused, that this death 
was due to arsenic; and the witness has to be faced by two 
facts—one he admits and one from which he could not get 
away. The one he admits is that he is not able to point to 
any single symptom that he believed to have occurred in this 
case which is absolutely consistent only with arsenical poison- 
ing and is inconsistent with ptomain poisoning* or poison- 
ing from another source. He has got to admit this, whether 
he likes it or not. In the recognised authority on this sub- 
ject, Taylor’s book on medical jurisprudence, in the year 
1920, with all the knowledge at the disposal of experts, the 
fatal line is, ‘‘ Unless yon find a grain or practically a grain in the 
viscera, it is not safe to say a person died of arsenical poisoning.” 

I shall call before you Dr. Toogood and Dr. Griffiths, of 
Swansea, who will tell you they have heard this case from 
the very beginning to the very end. They have listened to 
every symptom, and they will tell you that in their opinion 
this death was due to gastric irritation produced by a meal 
and gooseberry skins. They have had an opportunity of 
seeing Rumsey House, and will tell of the condition of the 
paths, and the condition of the grass on the paths. They 
will be able to say, as honest medical men, that they were 
satisfied that sufficient arsenic could have been absorbed by 
Mrs. Greenwood to account for the small portion of arsenic 
said to have been found. This is the evidence of two medical 
men against one. I am not suggesting that Mr. Webster 
would deliberately make a mistake, but to err is human. 
A very minute mistake might alter everything. Nobody else 
took part in this analysis, this critical examination. We 
are entirely dependent on Mr. Webster. 

It is suggested that this man Greenwood murdered his 
wife with arsenic. The symptoms of arsenical poisoning are 
as well known as the symptoms of any disease, and it is well 


* See note on page 150. 
M 161 


Harold Greenwood. 
Sir E. Marshall Hall 


known that you can recover arsenic from the body after 
death. It will remain in the system, preserving the body, and 
will be there for an indefinite number of years. This man, 
according to the evidence that is worth relying on—except 
one or two gossipy persons—owed everything to his wife. 
In one sense it was her money which kept the house. She 
was a woman who was lovable and loved, charitable and 
kind, to whom every one seemed rightly and properly 
attached—the woman on whom he was dependent for every 
luxury of life, for his practice as a solicitor was compara- 
tively small. Yet it is suggested that he murdered this woman 
in this cruel way—a way in which detection would be certain. 
If he were guilty there was an easy way to dispose of this 
body, by cremation, but he buried her in a brick grave. It 
is known to everybody that one of the first things in an 
arsenical case is the easy way in which the earth around 
is contaminated with arsenic. 

There was talk of his having murdered this woman in a 
gossipy place like Kidwelly, and he goes and draws atten- 
tion to the fact by marrying Miss Jones. He has taken 
the trouble to get 104 lbs. of arsenic in a tin like that (point- 
ing to a tin on the table), labelled all over, sent by rail, so 
that everybody in the place could see it, so that everybody 
could know at the station, or through the man who de- 
livered it, that arsenic was sent to Mr. Greenwood. If he 
were guilty there was a certificate of death for her disease. 
There would have been no difficulty in getting a second 
doctor to verify that. He could have had this body cre- 
mated, and there would then have been no possibility of 
discovery. The onus of proof is on the prosecution, and it 
is for my learned friend to satisfy you. What evidence has 
he? Do you believe a word of Hannah Williams’s evidence ? 
The girl contradicted herself. Do you believe Hannah 
Williams when she said the accused was not in the habit of 
going to the pantry to wash his hands, while the other 
servants say he regularly went? 

What was done by Dr. Griffiths? At the inquest he swore 
he gave Mrs. Greenwood two morphia pills, each containing 
half a grain. He was cross-examined that it would be fatal 
to give her two half-grains of morphia, and said, ‘‘ No; it 
is a perfectly safe dose.’’ Dr. Griffiths admitted to me he 
knew that Mr. Ludford was _ cross-examining him about 
morphia and not about opium, and admitted he knew that 
one was deadly and that the other was comparatively harm- 
less. He knew that, and allowed Mr. Ludford to proceed 
under that mistake without attempting to put him right. 
Nothing I can say can exculpate Dr. Griffiths, and, so far as 
he is concerned, on his own admission, he has done things 
which are intolerable. He was asked for the copy of his 

162 


Opening Speech for Defence. 
Sir E. Marshall Hall 


prescription, and he sets down on a bit of blue paper what 
purports to be a copy of his prescription, and what do we 
find? I want you to look at it. The first component part 
of stock solution of bismuth mixture, which he is in the habit 
of buying. He gets it out of a book. He puts down another 
mixture in the form of a tonic, and then he writes down, 
** Pill. opia. half grain,’’? and that purports to be what he 
put on the box for the direction of the nurse in the middle of 
the night to dose a patient dangerously ill. Translating 
from the Latin, it was, ‘‘ One at once, and the other an 
hour after.’? Was it likely you would find anything like 
that put on a pill box in a hurry, and in the middle of 
the night? He was sent for the prescription book, and he 
comes back and says the book was destroyed when he 
retired from practice. Then he says, ‘‘ No, it was after- 
wards.’’ He retired in December and destroyed it in June. 
He is asked why he destroyed it, and he cannot say. 
Don’t you think it is more than possible that this man might 
have given morphia pills, and that it might be that death 
was caused by giving the morphia? It is admitted that two 
doses of this mixture sent over by Dr. Griffiths were, in fact, 
given some time after 8 o’clock. Dr. Griffiths said he never 
paid a visit at 1 o’clock at all. Why he says that I do not 
know, but the nurse is positive about it, and you will hear 
that Mr. Greenwood is equally positive. Why is this denial 
of the visit at 1 o’clock? It is really such a far-fetched 
explanation to make in such an extreme difficulty. 

Gentlemen of the jury, you are to satisfy yourselves 
beyond reasonable doubt that Harold Greenwood killed his 
wife, and that arsenic killed her. Can you explain, knowing 
what the manner of Dr. Griffiths was, and of the excitement 
that he was labouring under that night, and that the solution 
in the two bottles was almost of the same colour, that they 
were stock solutions, that they were both kept in the surgery 
—is it so highly impossible with the explanation that this 
man had made a mistake? We have heard that eminent 
men have made mistakes. Is it beyond reasonable supposi- 
tion that this man had made this unfortunate mistake? 
And if he did make this mistake, and although I have not 
suggested, and do not suggest, that necessarily arsenic was 
administered which would be over the minimum fatal dose 
which would have killed her, 2 grains of arsenic is not even 
a probable fatal dose. I am not here to suggest that if a 
mistake were made that it was a mistake that killed her. 
I am here to suggest that after an unfortunate mistake of 
pouring out of one bottle instead of another, and the dose 
given that night, all the arsenic that was found in this 
woman’s body is explained. 

163 


Harold Greenwood. 


Sir E. Marshall Hall 


I shall have to address you again. I am here fighting 
for a man’s life. It is not for us to prove his innocence, 
but for my friend to prove his guilt beyond reasonable 
doubt, and unless you, each one is prepared to stand up 
in that box and put your hand on your heart and say: 
‘“JT believe and am convinced that Harold Greenwood 
poisoned his wife, and that she died from the poison that 
he administered,’ it is not the benefit of the doubt I ask 
at your hands, but we will demand an acquittal, because 
that measure of satisfaction and certainty to which you 
must arrive to secure a verdict of guilty is not bound to be 
arrived at by the evidence in this case. I am going to call 
formal evidence to prove a plan, and then call my two 
medical experts, as I want to release them. Then, having 
called these, I propose to call Mr. Greenwood and Miss 
Greenwood, and the man Williams, and one or two others. 


Evidence for the Defence. 


Haroup GRIFFITHS, examined—I am a surveyor in Llanelly. 
I have prepared a plan of Rumsey House, which I now pro- 
duce. The distance from the coach-house to the china pantry 
is 67 yards. 


Dr. FReperick SHERMAN Toocoop, examined by Sir E. 
MarsHaLtL Hanti—I have some personal experience of 
arsenical poison in the body, fatal and non-fatal. 

Have you any doubt that a grain of morphia, if ad- 
ministered at any time before midnight, would result in 
death before 3 or 4 o’clock?—That is so. 

With regard to the suggestion as to the similarity between 
the bismuth and arsenic solutions, do you agree that if, 
unfortunately, a dose like that referred to in this case were 
given, it would account for any arsenic found in the body? 
—Yes; it would be ample. 

What do you say of morphia causing the death of Mrs. 
Greenwood!—Taking the gastro-enteritis from swallowing 
gooseberry skins, and assuming that a grain of morphia was 
given, the actual cause of death was morphia poisoning. 

If, on the other hand, morphia was not given ?—I believe 
that an attack of gastro-enteritis was practically terminated 
at 1 o’clock, and I believe if only opium had been given 
that she would not have died. 

Did you, in forming your diagnosis, give great considera- 
tion to the condition of the heart wall ?—yYes. 

I do not know what the effect on the jury’s mind is of 
Dr. Willcox’s evidence, but would you tell us if any of the 

164 


Evidence for Defence. 


Dr Frederick S. Toogood 


symptoms in this case would be consistent only with death 
from arsenical poisoning ?, Does the absence of symptoms of 
cramp and excessive thirst affect your opinion?—No. Can 
I give you my reasons for saying that? 

You may ?—Excessive thirst is caused by the draining of 
water from the system by vomiting and diarrhcea, and the 
thirst comes on shortly after the vomiting and diarrhea. 
Cramps in the legs are due to the same cause. 

Do you draw any inference one way or the other from the 
absence of the symptoms cramp and thirst in this case ?—No. 
I draw more inference from their absence than from their 
presence. 

In cases of arsenical poisoning do you expect cramp and 
thirst ?—You expect to find it, but you don’t always get it. 
It depends really upon the presence of the vomit and 
diarrhea. 

In a case of arsenical poisoning what do you expect first, 
diarrhea or vomiting?!—Vomiting, particularly as it is 
suggested in this case it was taken in wine. 

What is the relative time between arsenic administered 
in wine and arsenic administered in water ?—The first point 
is this, as alcohol is practically the only substance directly 
absorbed by the stomach—putting it in a homely way—once 
a champagne bottle is open the whole character of the 
assembly is changed. 

Alcohol is immediately absorbed, and then arsenic so 
absorbed would be immediately absorbed in the alcohol. 
Assuming the poison was given in the burgundy at 1.30, 
when would you expect to find absorption in the stomach? 
—Absorption would practically begin at once, and it would 
certainly take place within one hour. 

The more rapid the absorption the more rapid the vomit? 
—Yes; because sickness is one of the first symptoms. 

Supposing a condition of gastric enteritis is produced by 
swallowing gooseberry skins in the way suggested, would you 
expect diarrhoea or vomiting to take place first !—Diarrhea 
first. 

What is the effect of gooseberry skins!—Gooseberry skins 
would act as a chemical irritant. 

Assuming a gooseberry tart taken at 1.30 set up enteritis, 
what would be the first symptom !—Diarrhea, 

Would the swallowing of the skins set up nausea and wind? 
—Yes; the gastric conditions follow later than the diarrhea. 

In the case of a patient with a weak heart, what would 
you expect?—Possibly you might get flatulence, but it is 
quite common to have pain round the heart. 

Assuming there was diarrhoea between 3 and 4 o’clock, 
would you expect in that case the symptoms to subside !— 

165 


Harold Greenwood. 
Dr Frederick S, Toogood 


Yes, for a time. During the interval between the diarrhea 
and the vomiting one is pretty comfortable. 

If the patient took it at 4.30, what would be the effect 
of that?—She would throw it up again. 

What would you then expect !—Diarrhea, and very likely 
vomiting. 

If the sickly feeling comes would you expect that to be 
relieved by immediate vomiting /—Yes. 

Would the diarrhcea and vomiting recur !—Yes ; they would 
recur several times; sometimes very intensely. Unfor- 
tunately, I have had experience myself. For instance, I 
dare not touch tomatoes. It is exceedingly painful—quite 
alarming. 

Your heart, I suppose, is all right?—Yes, thank God. 

To you tomatoes would be very serious if you had a weak 
heart /—Yes. 

If it is a fact that the vomit was seen by Dr. Griffiths 
at 6.30 containing the contents of the stomach, would that 
enable you to say one way or the other whether it was the 
first or the second vomit after taking food!—The very great 
probability is that it was the first—that the stomach was 
emptied in the first vomit. The second vomit always con- 
tains a lot of bile. 

Is there any particular form of diarrhoea which is peculiar 
to arsenical poisoning?—Yes; diarrhcea after arsenical 
poisoning is accompanied by intense pain. 

By the Court—You have said that if opium had been given 
she would not have died?—If it was an opium pill I do not 
think she would have died. I think she would have been 
living to-day. I do not think I can carry it further than 
that. 

What do you say made her die!—The morphia. 

Examination continued—After hearing all the evidence, 
you say it was morphia that killed her?—Oh, certainly. I 
came to that conclusion at once. 

You have heard that she fell asleep before death ?—yYes; 
that is what would happen. You have a system from which 
a great deal of water had been drained away. Morphia would 
be at once absorbed. The patient would go into a sleep from 
which she would not wake up again. 

By the Courr—Assuming that she was suffering from acute 
indigestion, it would not be an improper treatment to give 
her opium pills?!—No; it would not be improper. 

You agree with Dr. Griffiths that morphia in small quanti- 
ties is a recognised treatment for a patient in this condi- 
tion?—Oh, yes. If you asked me how I should have done 
it, I would have given it in pill form. 

Examination continued—Assuming for a moment that two 

166 


Evidence for Defence. 
Dr Frederick S. Toogood 


pills of opium were in fact given, would you expect to find 
her asleep within ten minutes !—No. 

How long would it také*for the opium to get absorbed in 
the form to produce sleepiness!—Opium takes considerably 
longer. A dose of opium is only one-tenth of a grain. 

Supposing in fact that on 16th June, 1919, morphia was 
administered to Mrs. Greenwood, from which she died, would 
you expect to find traces of morphia in the intestines 
in April, 1920, ten months after death?—No; not under the 
circumstances. Morphia is an alkaloid, and all alkaloids 
become decomposed in a body. Morphia is particularly alive 
to decomposition. 

Have you considered the possibility of death from disease ? 
—There was some evidence of failing health in this case, 
and one of the causes of failing health is chronic Bright’s 
disease. This might continue for a long time without being 
suspected. 

You don’t put it higher than to say that it is not possible 
to exclude it?—You cannot exclude it. 

Have you been over to Rumsey House with Dr. Griffiths, 
of Swansea, and seen the paths!—Yes. Most of them have 
been covered with a ‘‘ breeze’”’ of porous cinders. I re- 
moved the upper portion of the layer and found the original 
layer was a kind of gravel. 

You have had a great deal of experience in these matters? 
—wWe carried out a large number of experiments for the 
Royal Commission on Arsenical Poisoning. 

Assuming that a large quantity of arsenic was brought into 
the house every year by weed-killer, and weed-killer was 
taken in solution to water the paths, can you say if the dead 
woman could have inhaled sufficient arsenic into her system 
to account for the presence of a quarter of a grain!—I will 
not say it was impossible. 

You agree that it is advisable to apply this weed-killer 
when the ground is moist, and not when the sun is shining? 
—That is so. 

Do you think it would be impossible to breathe arsenic !— 
I don’t think it would be impossible at all. You have 
abundant evidence for that in the manner painters get lead 
into the system. They don’t get it by washing their hands, 
but they get it into their lungs during the process of rubbing 
down. The same thing applies to T.N.T. 

Do you agree with the selection of the organs as sent up 
for analysis!—No; because the whole of the organs ought 
to have been taken for examination. 

What, to your knowledge, is the largest amount of arsenic 
ever found in a body ?—Five grains. 

You have reviewed all the circumstances, and given this 

167 


Harold Greenwood. 
Dr Frederick S. Toogood 


case your best attention, and do you still say that death 
was not due to arsenical poisoning ?—That is so. 

Cross-examined by Sir Martay Samson—When was the first 
time you were asked to give expert advice in this case?—A 
month ago. 

Were you engaged then only to give your opinion on the 
possible effects of a grain of morphia?—That is so. 

By what date was your attention directed to any other 
part of the medical aspect of this case?—I think I had 
practically the full facts from the beginning. 

You have told me your attention was drawn to morphia 
when you were first consulted. When was your attention 
specially directed to any other special aspect of the case?— 
Will you tell me what particular aspect you are referring 
to? . 
Any other aspect. It has been suggested to you to-day 
that the presence of arsenic in the past may be interrelated ? 
—That is a suggestion of mine. 

When did you first make it?—Two or three days ago. 
A special point was made of it then. 

So it is correct to say that it was only yesterday that you 
suggested the possibility of the absorption of arsenic by 
breathing it from the paths?—I did not know it was the first 
time. It was certainly not the first time it came to my 
mind. 

I did not ask you that. When did you, as an expert 
adviser of the prisoner’s representatives, first suggest that 
as a possible source of the arsenic?—It was then that it 
was brought prominently forward. 

I did not ask you that. I asked you when was the first 
time you suggested it?—Yesterday, or the day before. 

Do you attach any importance at all to the theory of 
arsenic having been breathed into the system from the paths? 
—TI do. 

Why did you not put it forward sooner ?—I was not 
acquainted with the locality. I knew nothing about the 
extent of the paths. I knew nothing about the habits of 
the people, and now I know them I put it forward yesterday. 

When were you first asked as to the possibility of the 
weed-killer being the cause of death?—I knew that from the 
first, months ago. 

Did you not think it worth while to make inquiries with 
regard to the paths before?—No. 

I suppose you would agree that the situation of the garden 
by the side of the river would be apt to render the atmosphere 
somewhat damp !—Yes. 

And if the atmosphere was damp that would tend to prevent 
the arsenic from getting into the air ?—Not in this particular 
case. The river is well below the garden. 

168 


Evidence for Defence. 
Dr Frederick S. Toogood 


I suggest that if there was a quarter of a grain in the 
organs, she must have taken by inhalation at least 2 grains? 
—I don’t say that. 

Is it your suggestion that the quantity found in the body 
was insufficient to cause death /—Yes. 

Would it be sufficient to cause a serious illness?—I don’t 
say that. 

_ Is this the first occasion on which you have given evidence 
in a criminal arsenic case ?—Yes. 

Do you agree that Dr. Willcox is one of the greatest 
authorities in the kingdom on this particular subject ]—Yes. 

Have you had personal experience of patients who have 
died from arsenical poisoning !—Yes, I have. 

How many !—One. 

How long ago!—Fifteen years ago. It was a case of 
suicide. 

In order to satisfy yourself upon the matter, did you first 
of all take into consideration the symptoms which had existed 
before death’—Yes. That was an overdose. It doesn’t help 
us in this case at all. 

So it is correct to say that your experience in arsenic cases 
is limited to one case fifteen years ago?—Yes, a fatal case. 

Do you challenge in any way the accuracy of Mr. Webster’s 
figures?—I challenge the way in which he arrived at them. 

Do you challenge his calculations /—No. 

Did it occur to you a month ago, when you were con- 
sulted, that by reason of such calculations Mr. Webster might 
be in error in the figures he was giving?—I did not go to 
the laboratory to see for myself what the figures should be. 
I am not an analytical chemist at all. 

Why did you not do it?—Because I was unwilling to 
place myself in the position of holding myself up to be an 
analytical chemist when I am not. 

Did you suggest that the prisoner’s representatives should 
have employed an independent analytical chemist{—I did 
think it was necessary, but I was informed that the prisoner 
was not sufficiently well-off to afford it. 

Why did not you suggest that an independent analyst 
should be employed?—I did not know that it could be done. 
The conduct of the case was not in my hands at all. JI am 
not responsible for the conduct of the case. 

By the Courtr—Did you recommend that an analytical 
chemist should be brought in?—Yes. I had not a knowledge 
then whether the whole of the organs had been taken by 
examination or not. I think certainly they should have been 
taken. 

Cross-examination continued—Didn’t you think it of 
sufficient importance to advise your people to apply to the 

169 


a 


Harold Greenwood. 
Dr Frederick S. Toogood 


Home Office for permission to get an independent analytical 
chemist —I did not know it could be done. 

Have you had any experience whatever in calculating the 
amount of arsenic by means of the Marsh test quantatively ? 
—None whatever. 

On the other hand, Mr. Webster is a man of high reputa- 
tion !—Oh, quite. 

Would it be correct to say that his knowledge and 
experience as to this very delicate matter are second to none? 
—I do not say that. What I do say is that he has not taken 
the proper. method of estimating the whole of the arsenic, 
inasmuch as he has not taken the whole of the organs. 

You are not an analytical chemist ?—No; but I am a man 
of ordinary common sense. 

You have never practised analytical chemistry /—No; but 
I have a very nodding acquaintance with chemistry. 

Is the finding of a quarter of a grain in the viscera after 
death what you would expect to find there if 2 grains had 
been administered before death ?—I should expect much more. 

Would it not depend upon the time the fatal dose had been 
taken /—It would. 

By the Court—How much would you expect to find in the 
whole body, assuming that a quarter of a grain had been 
found in the viscera ?—Providing 2 grains had been taken ? 

No, no, I am not stating anything of the sort. Supposing 
a quarter of a grain had been found in the viscera, how 
much do you think there would be in the whole body ?— 
I do not know that. It never has been calculated. The 
greatest amount that has ever been found is 2.7 grains. 

You cannot answer my question. You would expect to find 
more than a quarter of a grain?—Yes; because there would 
be some in the muscles. 

Cross-examination continued—Would you agree with Dr. 
Willcox that 2 grains is the minimum fatal dose ?—yYes. 

And, of course, it would depend on the health of the 
person as to what would be a fatal dose ?—Yes. 

You agree, I understand, that arsenic was in fact found 
in the organs ?—Yes. 

You do not dispute that !—Oh, no. 

But you dispute the amount. Now, if it was a quarter of 
a grain, or thereabout, that was found in the viscera, how did 
it get there ?—I have no reason to suppose that arsenic could 
not remain in the liver for a long time. 

What do you mean, that it has been there for years ?— 
I do not mean to say for years, but it is known to have been 
there for ninety-three days after taking a single dose. That 
is a case quoted on page 426 of Paterson and Haines. 

Is that your suggestion, that it had been there for a long 

170 


Evidence for Defence. 
Dr Frederick S. Toogood 


period ?—That is not my suggestion, but it is quite possible 
for it to have been there, for a long time. 

Mr. Justice SHzarman—There is no onus on this gentleman 
to say how it got there. 

Cross-examination continued—If there had been uremia 
present would it not be detected!—Yes; if decomposition 
had not been too far advanced. 

Would there not have been such symptoms as Dr. Griffiths 
would have recognised !—No; not beyond gradual failure of 
health. Often enough it is not recognisable. 

The coma following uremia would not be a matter of hours, 
but of days?—Very often there is no coma at all, but arsenic 
coma does not last longer than an hour as a rule. 

If morphia was not the cause of death, is there anything 
in this case to show that death was not due to arsenic?— 
There is the onset of the diarrhcea before there was any 
vomiting, or any complaint of nausea. 

Do you know that Mrs. Greenwood went to lie down because 
she felt unwell?—Most ladies go to lie down after Sunday 
lunch. 

Do you say that vomiting must precede diarrhca?—No, 
I do not say that; but in this case, where it is suggested that 
arsenic was taken in form of arsenite of soda, diarrhoea 
would inevitably precede vomiting because of the soluble 
state of the poison. 

I suggest to you that there is no general rule with respect 
to that. You heard Dr. Willcox say that?—Yes; but I dis- 
agree with him. 

I think your opinion was that she died of morphia 
poisoning as the result of pills given to her ?—Yes. 

You describe that as mechanical poisoning. Arsenic would 
be mineral?— Yes. 

As the mechanical element was expelled, the patient be- 
comes better 7—The patient becomes better when the last goose- 
berry skin, which was causing the irritation, is expelled. 

The patient would become a great deal better 1—Yes; all 
the pain ceases, and the diarrhoea and vomiting. 

You have heard there was vomiting at 10.30, and at 12 
o’clock the diarrhoea ceased !—Yes. 

Mr. Justice SHzarman—That is the nurse’s evidence. 

Sir Marutay Samson—That is the evidence before us at 
present. 

Cross-examination continued—If that was so, would you 
expect the nurse to be alarmed at 1 o’clock if a state of 
collapse showed itself?—A state of collapse would show itself. 

Would that be the result of a person having got rid of 
the mechanical irritation 7—No; the collapse results from the 
loss of fluid in’ the body, and from the pain which the 


patient has passed through. ; 
171 


Harold Greenwood. 


Dr Frederick S. Toogood 


Then is this correct: collapse at 1 o’clock might be equally 
consistent with arsenical poisoning and mechanical poisoning ? 
—Yes. 

If this sickness and diarrhoea, due to a mechanical cause, 
had ceased, the patient would become easier after the cessa- 
tion of these two symptoms ?—Yes, as far as the patient is 
concerned. 

On the other hand, if arsenic were the cause, you would 
not expect the patient to become easier, would you?—Yes, 
in arsenical poisoning, after the cessation of the symptoms. 

Does not arsenic act. first of all, causing stomach pains, 
vomiting, and diarrhea ?—That is one way. 

Does it also cause the organs to cease their function by 
reason of the deposit in the organs ?—Yes. 

It would be one of the distinguishing features between 
arsenical poisoning and poisoning by gooseberry skins ?!— 
Yes; the gooseberry skins would have no effect in causing 
any permanent damage to the organs. 

If the organs are ceasing to function by reason of the 
deposit of arsenic within them would that cause collapse !— 
That would be the cause of collapse. 

In arsenical poisoning would collapse at 1 o’clock be an 
indication that the patient was suffering from arsenical 
poisoning ?’—Taking that symptom alone, yes. 

Would it be more consistent with mineral poisoning, the 
whole of which is expelled !—No; mechanical irritation would 
cause intense collapse, and there are, of course, numerous 
cases of death from it. 

Would absence of vomiting and diarrhoea after 1 o’clock 
possibly be due to the approach of death?—No; I should not 
like to say that. 

You think not ?—Not in this case, at all events. 

You have heard of the diarrhcea at 10.30, and I suggest 
that would not have got rid of any mechanical poisoning? 
—It would depend on the extent of the vomiting, and the 
extent of the diarrhea. It might tend to, but is not always 
successful. 

My question to you was whether the presence of arsenic 
in the system did not cause the organs to cease to function, 
and cause the collapse that came on at 1 o’clock?—No, I 
think not. 

Is this your view, that the symptoms were consistent with 
that ?—Putting the question generally, yes. 

Is it not more consistent with the poisoning by arsenic 
that you find collapse takes place at I o’clock, with the 
cessation of sickness and the diarrhoea at 10.30 and 12 
o’clock 7—No, it is not. 

Why not ?—Because I have seen it in the other condition. 

172 


Evidence for Defence. 
Dr Frederick S. Toogood 


What do you say, then, was it that caused the patient not 
to get better and recover, having expelled all the poison ?— 
It was the strain which was put upon the system. 

The strain would be greater still if there were arsenical 
poisoning, because the organs would cease to function, would 
it not ?—Oh, yes. 

Assuming that 2 grains was the dose, would it not be 
consistent with 2 grains of arsenic that the collapse should 
be rapid?—Two grains? Are we talking about arsenic in 
weed-killer or arsenic itself? 

I am talking about arsenic.—I would have expected a 
collapse would have taken place much earlier. 

Do you attach any importance to the colour of the vomit 
as described by the nurse, or do you say there is any inference 
in regard of that?—Do you mind telling me exactly what 
the nurse said? 

She described the vomit as whitish.—No; all the contents 
of the stomach having been expelled, the colour of the vomit 
is not material. 

Do you mean it would not have any effect upon the colour 
of the vomit?—It would not have any effect on the colour 
of the vomit, whether mineral poisoning or mechanical 
poisoning. 

On the post-mortem examination the organs were found 
to be healthy. Assuming that the symptoms were such as 
were described here, which would be, as you say, consistent 
with either gastro-enteritis or sickness and diarrhoea, if 
you found a quarter of a grain of arsenic on analysis after 
death, would it be a fair inference that death was due to 
arsenical poisoning ?—No, it would not. The only assump- 
tion one would take from that is that arsenic must have 
been administered at some time or other. 

Have you any knowledge of a grain of arsenic being found 
in a body after death, and that person shown to have not 
died of arsenical poisoning?—No; I don’t think there is 
any such case on record. 

[In re-examination Sir Edward Marshall, Hall was pro- 
ceeding to quote from a medical book when the judge inter- 
posed to inform the jury that anything in the book was 
not evidence unless the writer was in the box, but the witness 
could say if he agreed with it.] ; 

Re-examination continued—Can you say whether, assuming 
only a quarter of a grain was administered in the form of 
solution about 8 o’clock, you would expect to find more in 
the case of a patient who had vomited, and if 2 teaspoon- 
fuls of powdered solution were administered, a very little 
quantity would eject a very large quantity of arsenic!— 
Yes; I question whether that would be retained by the 


stomach. 
173 


Harold Greenwood. 
Dr Frederick S. Toogood 


By the Courr—How much is ejected would depend upon 
how long the vomit took place after it was taken into the 
mouth ?—That is so. I have seen many cases of poisoning 
by over-doses, large doses. 

Re-examination continued—The evidence you have given 
is founded on those cases /—Yes. 

In the absence of any direct theory as to how arsenic 
got into the body, do you exclude innocent absorption !— 
No, I do not. 

Have you varied your opinion in the slightest as to the 
cause of death in this case?—Not in the slightest. 


Dr. Witu1am GRIFFITHS, examined by Sir E. MarsHau 
Hatit—I am in practice in Swansea. I have seen a copy of 
all the medical evidence given before the magistrates. 

What do you say as to the finding of a quarter of a grain 
of arsenic in the viscera?—I think that the finding of a 
quarter of a grain of arsenic in the viscera of a corpse is 
by no means conclusive evidence that the person died of 
arsenic poisoning. 

Will you give me your reasons!—My reasons are that a 
living body can contain more.than a quarter of a grain of 
arsenic, and not only more than a quarter of a grain, but 
very frequently does contain 24 grains of arsenic, and it 
may contain as much as 5 grains of arsenic without 
any deleterious effects upon the health of that individual. 

Is there any definite and accepted theory known to the 
medical profession in which the finding of a quarter of a grain 
of arsenic in the viscera would mean that at least 2 grains 
had been administered before death /—Not to my knowledge. 

You have great experience, of course, in the salvarsan 
treatment ?—Yes. I will qualify that by saying that I have 
had experience, not great experience, of the salvarsan treat- 
ment. J was at one time in charge of a venereal department. 

Is metallic arsenic the same from whatever source derived ? 
—Metallic arsenic is believed to be the same according to 
the present knowledge of science. 

Supposing metallic arsenic is applied through salvarsan 
or arsenite of soda, the element would be the same?—The 
element, metallic arsenic, would be the same from whatever 
compound it would be extracted. 

Do different forms of arsenic differ in solubility?—I am 
not much of a chemist, but I think so. They do differ in 
solubility undoubtedly, and, therefore, the more soluble salt 
will be more likely to be absorbed from the stomach into the 
system than the insoluble salt. 

Is arsenic an article that is very widely distributed? 
—Yes. 

174 


Evidence for Defence. 
Dr William Griffiths 


And is it frequently found in food and beer, even articles 
of clothing ’—Yes; it is common knowledge that arsenic is 
frequently found in the first. 

Have you known of glucose containing arsenic ?—Yes. 

What is the latest time you remember an analysis of glucose 
which resulted in the discovery of arsenic?—In 1907. 

Do you agree that iron tonics, and things of that kind, 
frequently contain arsenic!—Oh, yes. Arsenic is very often 
—I believe almost invariably—present in commercial 
bismuth. It is so difficult to completely free the bismuth 
from arsenic. A proportion of arsenic is allowed in bismuth. 

Have you been over to see the paths at Rumsey House ?— 
I have. 

Assuming the weed-killer to the extent we know in this 
case had been put on the path in 1917, 1918, and 1919, is 
it possible to exclude the possibility of the contamination 
of individuals using this path ?—It is not possible to exclude 
it. 

Are some people more susceptible to the effect of arsenic 
than others?!—Yes. I know of cases where medicinal doses 
of arsenic have caused foot-drop, and other cases where they 
invariably cause gastric pains. 

You have heard all the evidence during the whole of these 
proceedings /—Yes. 

You have taken a great interest in the case ?—Yes. 

What, in your opinion, was the cause of this poor lady’s 
death on the morning of 16th June?—I think that she died 
of morphia poisoning. 

Is there any other solution which commends itself to you as 
much as that, having regard to all the evidence in the case? 
—I think that a woman suffering from heart disease, more 
especially when we know it was muscular disease rather 
than valvular disease, I think that a severe attack of gastric 
enteritis causing vomiting and diarrhoea might be sufficient 
to cause heart failure, and death from failure. 

Your best opinion is that death was due to morphia ?— 
Yes. One has seen cases suffering from heart disease where 
the turning point has been an attack of diarrhoea and 
vomiting, followed by death in a few hours. 

Is there any doubt that simple diarrhoea and vomiting are 
more dangerous to a person with a weak heart than to a 
person with a strong heart ?—None. 

On this question of the evidence we are told that at the 
time of the taking of the pills, within a period of ten 
minutes Mrs. Greenwood fell into a sleep from which she never 
awoke. Would that change have been produced by two 
half-grains of opium?—Very unlikely. 

Would it be produced by two half-grains of morphia!— 
Two half-grains of morphia administered to a delicate 

175 


Harold Greenwood. 


Dr William Griffiths 


woman exhausted by diarrhoea and vomiting would probably 
have caused unconsciousness and sleep within a few minutes. 

And death?—Almost inevitably death. 

Having listened to the evidence, can you tell us of any 
symptom which is inconsistent with gastro-intestinal poison- 
ing ?—No. 

Do you agree with Dr. Toogood’s evidence?—I do. 

Cross-examined by Sir Maruay Samson—Have you had 
any experience of Fowler’s solution being sent out instead of 
arsenic /—No. 

Have you ever known of any case of morphia administered 
in mistake for opium pills?—No. 

I understood Dr. Toogood to say that in his opinion Mrs. 
Greenwood would be alive to-day but for the morphia pills 
being given. Do you agree with that?—It is an exceedingly 
difficulty question to answer without having examined the 
body during her life. The probability is that she would 
be alive to-day. 

I understand you to say that the question of a quarter of 
a grain of arsenic has no bearing on the matter at all?— 
I cannot say that, but I am of the opinion that the finding 
of a quarter of a grain in the body is very far from being 
conclusive evidence that death was due to it. 

By the Courr—Are you attributing no importance to the 
presence of arsenic as being the possible cause of death !— 
Oh, no. The presence of arsenic in the body would suggest 
undoubtedly that death might be due to arsenic. In my 
opinion, it would have been advisable to estimate the 
quantity of arsenic present. 

Cross-examination continued—Do you agree that the 
presence of a quarter of a grain may account for death !— 
I think the finding of arsenic in the body is of great im- 
portance, and every care should be taken to investigate the 
cause of its being there. 

Do you suggest that you would find that percentage of 
arsenic in the organs of an ordinary person?—You may find 
it there if the person absorbed it accidentally. Arsenic is 
so common these days that the probability is that if many 
of us died and our bodies were examined arsenic would be 
found in us. 

Did you hear Dr. Willcox and Mr. Webster’s evidence 1— 
Yes; but I don’t remember hearing them state how many 
bodies they have examined. 

Have you ever examined a corpse for arsenic ?—Never. 

Are 2 grains of arsenic recognised in the medical profession 
as a fatal dose !—According to the authorities, it is regarded 
as the minimum fatal dose. 


Re-examined by Sir E. Marsnatn Hatt—What do you 
176 


Evidence for Defence. 
Dr William Griffiths 


think is the percentage of bodies examined for arsenic !— 
Infinitesimal. About two in a million. 

You were asked if you had known of cases in which two 
morphia pills were given for two opium pills ?—Yes. 

Have you ever known a doctor 

Mr. Justice SHEarMan—Now you must not put that 
question. This is not the proper time to make a comment. 
You can do that in your speech to the jury. 

Re-examination continued—Is the giving of wrong 
medicine in these cases an unheard-of thing!—It is not 
unheard of. It is not published more often than is necessary. 

Is it customary to stock solutions in your bottles in the 
surgery !—I never dispense myself; but it is the custom of 
men who do their own dispensing. 

Amongst men who do their own dispensing, is it customary 
to keep a prescription book in which you put down what is 
dispensed ?—I don’t think it is customary to keep a record 
of every prescription made up. 

Have you ever known a poisonous medicine given for a 
harmless medicine ?—Yes. 

In that case what were the two medicines ?—Carbolic acid 
was administered, but what it was administered for I don’t 
remember. It was given in the early nineties at Swansea, 
and the patient died. 

There are cases of strychnine having been given?!—I have 
heard of them. 


Harotp GREENWOOD (prisoner on oath), examined by Sir E. 
MarsHatt Hatt—I was married to Mabel Bowater twenty- 
three years ago. There are four children of the marriage, all 
of whom are alive. 

On what terms did you live with your wife!—Very happy. 

Had your wife any private means?—Yes. I don’t exactly 
know how much, but about £900 a year. 

Your wife died on 16th June, 1919, and you were present? 
—Yes. 

You have since married Miss Jones. Had Miss Jones any 
money or any other means ?—None whatever. 

Now, Harold Greenwood, did you, directly or indirectly, 
administer, or cause to be administered, to your wife any 
arsenic at any time in your life?—I have not. 

Had you anything to do with your wife’s death !—Nothing 
whatever. 

After your wife’s death what happened to her private 
means !—They went to her children. 

By the Courr—Did they go under her will ?—No, through 
her people. 

Examination continued—You have been in prison for four 
and a half months, and are now ready to answer any 

N : 177 


Harold Greenwood. 


Harold Greenwood 


questions my learned friend may ask you relative to this 
case /—Yes. 

Cross-examined by Sir Martay Samson—What age was your 
wife when she died !/—Forty-seven years of age. 

Were you attached to her at the moment of her death !— 
Very. 

She died on 16th July !—No, in June. 

Mr. Justice SHzarman—Would you like to sit down, Mr. 
Greenwood ? 

The Witness—No, thank you, my lord. 

Cross-ezamination continued—On 4th July you wrote to a 
London firm of jewellers asking that diamond rings should 
be sent to you /—Yes. 

Did you pay £55 for a diamond ring on the 15th ?—Yes. 

To whom did you give the ring!—It was bought for my 
daughter. 

Answer my question—Who did you give the diamond ring 
to’—To Miss Gladys Jones, my present wife. 

When ?—On 27th July. 

Why, if you had bought it for your daughter, did you not 
give it to her ?—I was having one of my wife’s rings altered 
for my daughter. When it was returned to me a diamond 
cluster ring was also sent, which my daughter said she 
preferred. That is why I bought it. 

Why, if your daughter preferred the diamond cluster ring, 
did you not give it to her?’—I took it to the Mercury office 
at lunch time and showed it to Miss Jones. 

On what day did you show it?—On or about the 12th 
July. 

And did you propose marriage on that day ?—Yes. 

If you had such great affection for your wife, why within 
a month after her death should you give Gladys Jones a ring 
for which you paid £551—I do not know how your remark 
applies at all. 

Please answer my question. If you had such a great affec- 
tion for your wife, who died on 16th June, why on 12th 
July did you give this ring to another lady who is now your 
wife?’—I considered the matter. 

Do you consider that you were showing your affection for 
your late wife by marrying again so soon?—I felt so hope- 
lessly out of it—it was not like a home. 

And you say you proposed marriage to your present wife 
on 12th July ?—Yes. 

Were you fond of Gladys Jones while your wife was alive? 
—I was not. I am perfectly certain. 

Did she ever stay at Rumsey House during your wife’s 
absence from home ?—Yes. 

How long had you known Gladys Jones before you married 
her ?—For twenty years. 

178 


4 
4 


sf 


Evidence for Pieloase: 
Harold Greenwood 


Gar she come to your office from time to time!—Very 
Did you go into the back room1—No. 
Why did you pay £15 for a dressing-case for Miss Gladys 
a ny your wife’s deathi—It was bought for some- 


ho paid for itt—The Llanelly Mereury. 
Who handled the money for the caset—I did. At lunch 


They asked if I knew anything about dressing-cases, and 
I said I had bought one for my wife, so they asked if I 
would buy one for their sister. I went with Gladys Jones 
to buy the dressing-case, and after it had been bought I 
went back to the Llanely Mercury office and told them I 
had paid £15 for it, and they gave me the money. 

You suggest that Llewellyn Fat bought the bag in order 

to give it to another sister 1—Yes. 

Is he here1—No. 

Is he alive1—Yes. 

How long have you been in Rumsey House 1—About five 

years. 
the latter part of your wife’s life did Miss Bowater 
live at Rumsey House!—She used to make the house her 
riers. 

Did she pay expenses1—Twenty-five shillings a week. 

But did she share the house, and was not part of her furni- 

ture there1—Only one bedroom. 

Did she go away from Bumsey House about the end of 
il, and was it uncertain when she would return 1—Yes. 
had a row with my wife. 

I understand that you used to buy wine from Mr. Brig- 

stocke, of Carmarthen 1—No. 

Who bought the wine then!—My wife and Miss 

Bowater it in turn. 

Did you at any time buy wine there/—No, I did not. 

Have you never bought any invalid port from Mr. Jones, 

of Kidwelly!—No, never. I never took port wine. 


Pe arte Be I Tukey there. 

I am asking you about wine!—No. 

I suggest that ihe ad angen 1S 9 seni at the 
end of June, was going to join her sister. Before Miss 
Bowater went away in April was your wife’s health much 
the same as during the last year!—My wife’s health had 

179 


ig 


Harold Greenwood. 


Harold Greenwood 


been failing for the last nine months. The doctor was in 
attendance more frequently in the last six months. 

On account of her state of health during the past two 
years had sexual intercourse been impossible?—That is so. 

During the two years were you on intimate terms with Miss 
Gladys Jones!—I was not. 

You were fond of her, were you not?—I was not at that 
time. 

When did you become fond of her ?—I did not become fond 
of her until 12th July. 

It really dawned on you all of a sudden ?—AIl of a sudden. 

Just at the moment you happened to have a diamond 
ring in your pocket?—She told me she was breaking off an 
engagement. 

You had been talking to her over the telephone from Dr. 
Griffiths’s house /—No. 

Did not Miss Griffiths come to your house to tell you you 
were wanted on the telephone, and that it was Miss Jones 
who was speaking?—That was the Tuesday after my wife 
died. 

I suggest it was before. Did you frequently use Miss 
Griffiths’s telephone ?—About three times in the year. 

Did you tell Miss Griffiths that it was the caretaker {—I 
might have; I don’t remember. 

Did Miss Griffiths tell you that it was not the name taken, 
and that she had given the name of Miss Jones?—I don’t 
think so. 

Were you anxious that Miss Griffiths should not know it 
was Miss Jones who was ringing up?—No. 

Miss Jones was at your office from time to time?—No, she 
was not. She began to come to my office when her sister’s 
husband died. 

Why did she come then ?—Because her sister was in New- 
castle and he was in my district. She asked me to do 
business for her. 

You suggest she was there only on business?—Only on 
business. 

Miss Jones would knock at the glass door of your room in 
the office and go into the room?—She never did that. 

I suggest that you were seeing Miss Jones frequently during 
the last year of your wife’s life?—No. 

And that she was staying at your house and had been 
there often?—She was staying in my house when she was 
invited by my daughter. 

By the Courr—Where did you usually lunch?—At the 
Mercury office. 

Was Miss Jones engaged at the Mercwry office1—Yes. She 
was not always there at lunch. 

180 


Evidence for Defence. 
Harold Greenwood 


Have you ever met her at lunch there?!—Oh, yes, my lord. 

Cross-examination continued—Did you see her very 
constantly there !—Yes. , 

On 12th July, when you proposed to her, did she accept 
you !—No; she asked for a fortnight to consider it. 

And then she did accept you !—Yes. 

I put it to you that during your wife’s lifetime you and 
Miss Jones had been on very affectionate terms!—We were 
not (emphatically). 

During the six weeks before your wife died, you say that 
her health became much worse!—She had been worse in the 
last few months. 

Did she become much worse the last few weeks before she 
died 1—Gradually. 

Did she complain to you at any time that the wine was 
being tampered with?!—Yes, with water. 

Did she suggest that something had been put in it and that 
she could not drink it!—Not at all. The only time she com- 
plained was when water was put in it. 

Was she taking a tonic after lunch at any time you were 
there 1—Yes. 

Was your wife in the habit of taking medicine?—Yes. 
She kept it sometimes in the study and sometimes in the 
dining-room. She did not stay in the same room every 
day. 

You used to see the medicine from time to time?—Yes. 

She was taking medicine up to the time she died?—Yes; 
all sorts of medicine. 

Did she always take it after lunch?—I do not know. 

Did she take any tonic on this Sunday?—I do not know; 
I do not remember. 

On this particular Sunday can you say whether she took 
the medicine after lunch?—I cannot say. She went straight 
to bed from the dining-room. I have never seen brought 
into the house a bottle of wine like the one produced. 

In the ordinary way your wife, who bought bottles of wine 
singly, would bring in a bottle of wine and give it to the 
maid, who would put it in the dining-room1—Yes. 

By the Court—Who ordinarily uncorked the wine, you or 
she !—It was I, probably. 

Cross-exzamination continued—Before lunch did you go 
into the dining-room on this Sunday morning!—I cannot 
remember. 

Did you go into the china pantry that Sunday?—I went 
there every day. 

But did you go that Sunday!—No doubt I would go. 

By the Courr—If you did, you say it was a natural thing! 
—Yes. a 


Harold Greenwood. 


Harold Greenwood 


Cross-examination continwed—I suggest that you went 
into the china pantry that particular Sunday and were there 
about a quarter of an hour, and then you were in the dining- 
room for about five minutes!—Pure imagination. 

Did you use the china pantry for any purpose?—I would, 
to wash my hands. There was a towel there specially for 
me. 

You would go there before lunch on Sunday ?—I would. 

And from there you would go to the dining-room !—Prob- 
ably I would. On that particular Sunday I did not go in 
to wash my hands until the gong sounded for dinner. 

What did your wife have to drink that Sunday ’—Either 
burgundy or whisky. She very often had whisky and soda 
for dinner on Sunday. 

Had you port wine in the house!—No; never at any time. 
Christmas was the last time I can remember. 

You had a large number of bottles of all sorts in your 
house?!—They were not mine. They belonged to the man I 
bought the house from. 

On the afternoon of that Sunday did your wife come to 
you about 3.30 and complain of diarrhoea !—Yes. 

Did you suggest to your wife that it was due to eating 
gooseberry tart?—She suggested it. 

I am trying to get from you how much of this particular 
sentence you did say, and how much you say you did not 
say. Did you first say she had an attack of diarrhoea ?—I 
did not. 

[At the request of the judge, the accused was here given 
a copy of the depositions. | 

Do you say the greater part of this is inaccurately taken 
down !—No; I don’t say the greater part, but some of it. 

We will deal with that later on. Your wife came to tea, 
did she not?—She took no tea. 

After tea did she lie down again ?—I won’t say yes or no. 

She seemed unwell then, did she?—No. 

Not well?—Not quite well. 

You noticed no difference between her condition then and 
lunch time?—(The witness’s answer was inaudible.) 

By the Court—Between lunch and tea was your daughter 
out in the car with Foy?—I believe she was. 

Cross-examination continued—You don’t know what time 
she came back?—I am not quite sure. 

At half-past 5 was your wife in the garden ?—Yes. 

Did she complain of pains in the heart ?—Not then. 

When did she complain of any pain in the heart?—At 
half-past 6 or a quarter to 7. 

I suggest to you it was half-past 5 she complained of pains 
in the heart, and your daughter Irene came then ?—No. 

Did you not go for brandy then ?—No. 

182 


Evidence for Defence. 


Harold Greenwood 


Where did you get your brandy from!—The Phoenix 
Stores. 

And you opened the bottle and poured out a glass there 
on the lawn !—Yes. 

Any one else there ?—My son. 

Irene was not there?—No, not then. 

She was there when you got the brandy and uncorked 
it?—I think so. 

You took a corkscrew to the lawn and poured out brandy 
and gave it to your wife in Irene’s presence /—Yes. 

She was sick immediately you gave her brandy /—No. 

: What time did you say it was?—Between half-past 6 and 

You say there was no brandy given to her at 5.30, and 
you didn’t go for it?—No. 

At 6.30 she was taken to the bedroom?—No; at half- 
past 7. 

Did you then go for the doctor ?—Yes. 

Did Miss Phillips come about the time you went for the 
doctor 1—Yes; I sent her to fetch the nurse. 

She denies that!—I know she does. 

Your wife was in bed; she was sitting up?—She was on 
the ottoman. 

And she complained at that time of pains about her heart? 
—Yes, but not very bad. 

If that was so, why did you send for the nurse?—The 
doctor and I came over, and he stayed till 7 o’clock. 

Did you tell the doctor that you would go for the nurse? 
—No; I did not tell the doctor. 

Miss Phillips says she went upstairs and saw your wife, 
and went for the nurse of her own accord. Do you say that 
is not true!—She never went upstairs until she had fetched 
the nurse. I suggested the nurse. The doctor and I walked 
round the garden. When I came back I asked how my wife 
was. Irene said she was very much easier, and so I pro- 
posed to the doctor a game of clock-golf. 

If she was much easier, what was the necessity for keeping 
the doctor there?—There was no necessity. 

By the Court—The doctor came in, and she was on the 
couch; did he prescribe for her then?!—No; he told Irene 
what to do. 

When was it you played clock-golf?—Directly afterwards. 

When was it the doctor first prescribed medicine for her 7— 
About 7.30. 

And then he went and got the medicine without going up 
to see her again?—-No; he saw her again. 

Cross-examination continued—Did he go upstairs to re- 
examine her in bed, and then go down, and then go for the 


medicine /—Yes. 
183 


Harold Greenwood. 


Harold Greenwood 


Did you go across?!—No, I did not. 

Who brought the medicine over?!—I have no idea. 

Did you say the nurse gave the first dose?—So far as I 
know. 

Did you go up to your wife’s room when the doctor sent 
the medicine over /—No. 

Why?—I did not know the medicine had been sent. 

Did you think she was seriously ill?—No. 

Had the doctor ever before attended her in such an attack? 
—Yes. 

Was she in bed on the last occasion?—I think so. 

Had you on any other occasion kept the doctor there ?— 
He lived close to the house. 

You don’t know who gave the medicine?!—Yes; Nurse 
Jones. 

Were you in the room !—I was. 

Do you say Nurse Jones was not very anxious about 
your wife’s condition?—I do. She said, ‘‘ She is much 
easier now. I must go home to my child.”’ 

She was being sick when the nurse came up?—The only 
time I saw her sick was 6.30. 

Do you suggest that she was not sick after that? Is it 
quite untrue that she suffered from constant sickness through- 
out the night?—I don’t say constantly, but sometimes, my 
daughter told me. 

Were you out of the room most of the time?!—No, I was 
not. 

Miss Phillips remained in when the nurse went, did she 
not !—Yes. 

Did she go down to supper with you and the doctor ?—We 
three went down together. 

There was no wine on the table that night !—Burgundy. 

A full bottle or one that had been used?—I cannot say. 

Where was it got from ?’—Brigstocke’s. 

If your wife had bought Beaune at Brigstocke’s, and there 
was wine in the house, why did she buy this on Saturday 1— 
I cannot understand it. If there was no wine in the house, 
that would account for her buying it. 

After supper did you go back to the bedroom 1—Yes. 

Did your wife seem much more ill then?—I cannot say. 

Do you remember saying that to the superintendent ?—I 
do not remember saying anything of the kind. 

By the Court—Listen to this. I want to know how much 
is accurate and how much not. This is the answer you gave 
in October—‘‘ Nurse Jones came back an hour after. Her 
(my wife’s) arms looked quite white and her fingers on both 
hands were quite blue. I pointed out this to Nurse Jones. 
She was quite rational and told us all what she felt ’’ 1—I 
said her fingers were blue, but not white on the arms. 

184 


Evidence for Defence. 


Harold Greenwood 


Cross-ezamination continued—You did say her hands 
were blue, but you did not say her arms were white; that 
was invented /—Yes. ae 

Did you say you pointed this out to Nurse Jones!—That 
was after the nurse came back. 

By that time she had become very ill ?—Yes. 

Did you notice a marked change in her after you went up? 
—No, I did not. 

Did you notice that she got steadily worse?—No, I did 
not. She got better. 

She had got much worse when the nurse came back at 
10 o’clock. Why didn’t you go for the doctor before the 
nurse came back?—I did not go. 

Mr. Justice Sozarman—As I understand, they had supper, 
and the nurse went away, and Miss Phillips went up till 
the nurse came back. Then, if this is accurate, it is obvious 
she was not well. His story is the nurse went away at 9 
o’clock and came back at 10. 

Sir Martay Samson—ls it accurate? 

By the Court—Miss Phillips says when she went away she 
found you talking to the doctor outside. Is that right ?— 
Yes. 

Cross-ecamination continued—Did you go over to the 
doctor’s house ?—Yes. 

What time was that?—Between 10 and 11. 

Did you ring the bell?—No, I knocked. 

Miss Griffiths opened the door to you. Did you go into 
the drawing-room with her ?—No. 

By the Court—What is your recollection of the time you 
went over and Miss Griffiths opened the door ?!—Between 10 
and 11. 

Cross-ezamination continued—Did you not go into the 
drawing-room with her and have a conversation with her? 
—No. 

Did she go to her brother, and when she came back you 
told her you thought your wife would not get over it!—That 
is a pure invention. 

You have heard the conversation with Miss Griffiths, and 
you say it is untrue!—She has invented it all. 

By the Court—lIs it entirely a mistake that you said, 
‘“ My wife may not get well, and I shall soon be going on my 
honeymoon ’’?—No; that conversation did not take place. I 
did not say that a fortune-teller had told me that I would 
soon be going on my honeymoon. 

Was your wife jealous of Miss Griffiths!—Yes; she was 
jealous. 

Was she jealous of your present wife?—Not a bit. It was 


only of Miss Griffiths that she was jealous. 
185 


Harold Greenwood. 


Harold Greenwood 


How long had you been calling Miss Griffiths by her 
Christian name?—I could not say. 

How long was it before the doctor came over that your 
daughter came to hurry you up!—She came to see if I was 
there. 

Cross-examination continued—Why did Miss Irene come to 
fetch you from Dr. Griffiths’s that night ?—She came to see 
if I had gone over. 

Did not the nurse ask you to go for the doctor ?—Yes. 

And did you go!—Yes. 

Was Miss Irene there then ?—Yes. 

So that she knew quite well that you had gone over !—She 
did come to fetch me. 

And when she came, did you go back with the doctor !— 
did. ; 

Did you tell Dr. Griffiths that your wife was not so well 
again?—I told him I could not find her pulse. She had a 
very weak pulse, and you could not detect it very often 
when she was in good health. 

You never told the doctor she had had diarrhcea in the 
afternoon?—No; I don’t think I did. 

Did you think that was of no importance ?—No. 

When do you suggest that the morphia or opium pills were 
given ?—At 1 o’clock in the morning. 

Do you know that you told Superintendent Jones that they 
were given at 3 o’clock?—I did not. 

You say that is not true’—What he took down in that book 
is wrong. I gave him all about the pills in detail. 

Let me see what you said to Superintendent Jones. You 
said that at about 3 o’clock you lost her pulse absolutely, but 
she was quite conscious. The nurse asked you to go for the 
doctor, and you went over for the doctor and knocked, but 
could get no answer?!—That was at 1 o’clock. 

Is it right that you made a mistake as to the time?—I say 
that statement is a mistake, and not that I made a mistake. 
He did not take it down accurately. 

When you went over at 1 o’clock did you ring?—I rang 
the bell. 

You got no answer !/—No. 

You knew then that your wife was very ill!—No. 

Was the nurse not very much alarmed ?—No, she was not. 

You could see she was very ill?—She was ill. 

You know that she died two hours afterwards ?!—She would 
not have died if she had not had the pills. 

That is what you say. Why did the nurse send you in 
such haste for the doctor!—She did not send me in haste. 

Do you say that she told you to go in a casual way 1—Yes. 

Did you knock at the doctor’s door ?—No, I did not. 

186 


Evidence for Defence. 


Harold Greenwood 


Why not? Did it not occur to you that if you knocked at 
the knocker it would arouse them !—I thought the bell went 
up to his bedroom. 5 

By the Courr—ls it true that the nurse went over herself 
and got him?—Yes. 

Sir Martay Samson—And got him at once, my lord. (Zo 
Wtness)—Is that the last time you went over ?—I went over 
at 3 o’clock. 

By the Court—You say the pills were given at 1 o’clock? 
—Yes, at 1 o’clock. 

He did not bring the pills over’—I took them over. 

Cross-ecamination continued—What time was that ?—One 
o’clock. 

Were there any written instructions with them?—The 
doctor gave me them in a piece of paper, and he said, ‘‘ Here 
are two morphia pills; give them to the nurse. The instruc- 
tions are inside.”’ 

Inside what ?—Inside the parcel. 

Did you open the parcel ?—I did not. 

By the Court—The doctor says that they were to be taken 
separately—one at once, and the other an hour afterwards? 
—The nurse asked me, ‘‘ Did the doctor say to give the 
two pills at once? ’’ and I said, ‘‘ No, but the doctor said 
the instructions are inside.’’ So the nurse opened the parcel, 
and when she opened it she saw ‘‘ Dose, two pills.’’ Mrs. 
Greenwood said we need not trouble to get any water, and 
that if the nurse would put the pills on her tongue she would 
swallow them. I told the nurse that if she liked I would 
go over to the doctor’s again and ask him if the two pills 
were to be taken at once, but the nurse said, ‘‘ Oh, no, it 
does not matter. Here it is inside the parcel, ‘ Dose, two 
pills.’ ”’ 

Are you sure the doctor did not say two opium pills ?— 
No; two morphia pills. 

Cross-examination continued—Did you go to the surgery 
with him?—No, I did not. 

By the Court—The doctor’s recollection is that he gave 
the pills at his 10 o’clock visit. The doctor says that he has 
no recollection of the 1 o’clock visit at all’—Oh, there is no 
question about that at all. It was at 1 o’clock. 

Cross-examination continued—How does it come about, 
then, that you did not mention the 1 o’clock visit to Super- 
intendent Jones!—I say again that he made a mistake. I 
gave him five visits in detail. 

Between 3 and 4 o’clock were you at her bedside?—I never 
left her from the time she went to sleep until she died. 

Your daughter was awakened just before you went for the 
doctor the last time ?—Yes; she was told it was serious. 

187 


Harold Greenwood. 


Harold Greenwood 


You knew your wife was dying!—Oh, I knew it was 
serious. 

You say your wife was jealous of Miss Griffiths !—Yes. 

Was the last visit you made to the doctor at 3 o’clock or 
4 o’clock 1—4 o’clock. 

Did you tell the superintendent you went again at 4 
o’clock? Do you say that that is a mistake?—It is a 
mistake. 

Did your wife and yourself have any quarrels ’—There was 
something, but nothing serious. 

Did you say that your wife was ill at the beginning of 
June /—Yes. 

And did you think she was very ill?—She had a very bad 
attack about the end of May, and I wrote to ask her brother 
to bring down a specialist. I did not post the letter, as my 
wife was afraid she had cancer, and might have to undergo an 
operation. 

Why did you write the letter to Miss David which has 
already been read in Court?—Because she was insinuating 
that I was a liar. It is quite true that Mrs. Greenwood’s 
brother did not come down, but the innuendo in the letter 
was that I was a liar, and I wanted to protest against it. 
Miss David said that Mrs. Greenwood’s brother, Sir 
Vansittart Bowater, had never been at Rumsey House, and 
that he would not deign to put his foot into the house, and 
that he and Mrs. Greenwood were not on visiting terms. 

By the Court—Do you mean that Miss David was trying 
to break your friendship with the Jones family because she 
said your wife was not ill?—She came to my office later to 
apologise for saying Mrs. Greenwood was not ill. 

Cross-examination continued—How many rings did your 
wife leave ?—About six. 

And they were to be distributed between the family 7—Yes. 

Then why did you buy another ring?—I thought of taking 
one, and wanted to give my daughter one of equal value. 

Were you at your office on the day your wife died?—I was. 

Did you see Mrs. Groves, the caretaker, there ?—Yes. 

Did she hand you any letters!—No. 

Did you get a letter that day from Miss Gladys Jones ?!— 
I did not. 

Did she ring you up on the telephone?—She did not. 

Was it the following day she rang you up?—I do not re- 
member. 

You gave notice to marry your present wife on 26th Sep- 
tember /—Yes. 

You intended marrying in October !—My wife was engaged 
to a lieutenant in India. This engagement was broken off, 
and then she asked me to marry her. 

When did you give her the ring?—On 27th July. 

188 


i te te ee i Re ee a)! ne, ae \ 


Evidence for Defence. 


Harold Greenwood 


Did I understand she accepted you on 26th July without 
having heard from the gentleman in India to whom she was 
engaged ?—She accepted me the day after she wrote to India 
breaking off the engagement. I had no intention of marry- 
ing for a year, but because my wife broke off the engagement 
with the man in India she wanted me to marry her at once. 

She had accepted you, in fact, without having broken off 
her engagement to the gentleman in India ?—No. 

I thought you said she wrote to him on the 27th and 
accepted you at the same time?—No, on the 26th. 

I asked you what day it was you gave her the diamond 
one and I understood you to say the 15th?—No, on the 

th. 

Mr. Justice SHzarMan—My note of the matter is 27th July. 

Cross-examination continued—lf at the time you considered 
yourself engaged to Gladys Jones, why did you write this 
letter to Miss Griffiths? 

[Counsel handed to Greenwood the letter to Miss Griffiths 
read on the opening day. | 

You said you wrote it to her at her request. Is there any 
doubt about that being the letter!—No; that is the letter. 

Why did you suggest she should ask you to write her a 
proposal?!—I wrote it on the last Friday in September. I 
had seen Miss Griffiths on the previous Thursday fortnight, 
and came with her from the station, and asked whether she 
would like to see my car. I opened the garage, and she 
got into the car. She said, ‘‘ This is just the thing I would 
like to go for a honeymoon in.’’ I replied that I would like 
to go myself. 

By the Court—The remark about the fortune-teller and 
the honeymoon is not true!—No. 

Cross-examination continued—You told her you would be 
going for a honeymoon in the car?—I said I thought so. It 
was only a joke. I did not say who I was going with. 

I thought on 27th July your wife had accepted you?!—We 
were not to be married for a year. 

By the Court—The question is with whom you were going 
to have a honeymoon’?—I knew with whom it would be. 

Cross-examination continued—You then knew you would 
marry your present wife?—I did. 

‘‘T have been trying hard to get to you this last fort- 
night.’’ Is that true?—No. 

“‘T want you to read the letter very carefully, and then 
very carefully to send me over a reply to-night.’’ Did that 
mean anything !—When the letter is explained it will be found 
to be nothing. 

‘‘ There are many rumours about.’’ What does that mean? 
—She told me on the Thursday night, when she was in the 

189 


Harold Greenwood. 


Harold Greenwood 


car, that my name had been coupled with Miss Phillips, Nurse 
Jones, and two women I did not know. 

Had you heard at that time rumours connected with your 
late wife’s death —Nothing at all. 

When did you first hear rumours regarding your late wife’s 
death?—When Superintendent Jones first came to me in 
October. 

By the Court—Did you hear any rumours about foul play? 
—Nothing at all. 

Cross-examination continued—‘‘ Between you and I this 
letter reveals the true position. It is only right to know 
that Miss Bowater and Miss Phillips between them have 
turned my children against you very bitterly; why, I do not 
know.’’—That was perfectly true. 

If this were only a proposal of marriage at her request, 
why did you put that in?—I will explain the letter. 

“Tt is only right you should know this, as you are the one 
I love most in the world, and I would be the last one to make 
you unhappy. In these circumstances, are you prepared to 
face the music? I am going to do something quickly, as I 
must get rid of Miss Bowater at once, as I am simply fed up. 
Let me have something from you to-night. Yours, as ever, 
Harold ’’?—I wish to give an explanation of the letter. I 
went over on that Friday night to Miss Griffiths to tell her T 
was going to get married on the following Wednesday. When 
I told her, she began to cry, and told me I had let her down 
very badly. She said, ‘“‘ You led me to believe that you 
were going to marry me.”’ I said I had done nothing of the 
sort. She said, ‘‘ You paid a tremendous lot of attention 
to me.”’ She told me that she had been teased by Miss 
Phillips, Miss Meredith, and Mrs. Smart about being the 
future Mrs. Greenwood. She cried again, and turned to 
me and said, ‘‘ Will you say you have proposed to me? ’’ 
I said, ‘‘ If it will help you, I will.’? She cried again and 
said, ‘‘ But they won’t believe me unless I have something 
to show. Will you write me a letter, proposing to me? ”’ 
I said, “‘If it will help you, certainly. If you think J 
have compromised you in any way, I am ready to help 
you.’’ After she had cooled down I went home and wrote 
about four letters before I was satisfied with that one. 

Have you any of the others?—No. 

Was it part of the plan between you and Miss Griffiths 
that she was to have a letter that she could show to anybody 
to show that she had refused you !—That is so. 

Did she ever write a letter in answer to this saying that 
she had refused youl—No, 

Why in this letter did you not say right out ‘‘ I want to 


marry you ’’’—That is strong enough for anybody. 
190 


Evidence for Defence. 
Harold Greenwood 


You notice that there is nothing in this letter beyond 
*“ Are you prepared to face the music ’?’—That is what is 
meant for ‘“‘ Are you prepared to say yes.’’ 

Why did you say in the letter, ‘‘I must do something 
quickly, as I want to get rid of Miss Bowater ’’? If this 
is not a genuine letter why was it necessary to put that in? 
—Miss Griffiths told me to put that in the letter, which would 
give her something to say that she had refused me. 

The letter was partly hers and partly yours ?—Yes. 

Mr. Justice SHzearMan—The meaning really is, ‘‘ I am fed 
up with Miss Bowater, and I must marry some one, and, if 
you don’t take me, I will marry some one else.’’ 

Cross-examination continued—She told you most of what 
you put in that letter?—Yes. I saw her on the Sunday and 
she laughed at it. 

She told us that she saw you on Saturday night, when 
she asked you what you meant ?—Not true. 

And that she treated it as a joke?—Not true. 

The whole of her evidence in regard to that is not true? 
—Not true. 

So far as you are concerned, the whole of the evidence of 
Miss Griffiths as regards the interview at 10 o’clock at night, 
and regarding this letter, is untrue!—Yes. 

Can you give any reason why Miss Griffiths should say 
these terrible. untruths against you when you are on trial 
for your life?—That is what I cannot understand about it 
all. I think she has been got at. 

You think she has been compelled to come here ?—Yes. 

By whom !—tThe police. 

Did you hear rumours of the possible cause of your wife’s 
death after you came back from your honeymoon ?—I heard 
nothing at all then. 

I wish to ask you now about the statement you made to 
Superintendent Samuel Jones at the first interview at your 
office at Llanelly on 24th October, 19191?—Superintendent 
Jones showed me the note-book after the police court hearing 
at Llanelly in the presence of two warders. 

And did you say that the book was all right?—I said some 
of the leaves were out. 

[Accused was then given a copy of the deposition at the 
police court in which the statement appeared. | 

Do you say that much of what is down here is not what 
you said to Superintendent Jones!—There is something here 
which is not what I have said, and something of what I have 
said is not here. Superintendent Jones came into my office 
and said to me, “‘ I suppose you know what I want?’ and 
I said, ‘‘ I have not the slightest idea.’’ After a little while 
he jumped at me, and said, ‘‘ Where is the certificate of the 

191 


Harold Greenwood. 


Harold Greenwood 


death of your wife?’’ I told him, and he said, “‘ It ought 
to be there any day.”’ 

By the Courr—Did he question you ?—He talked about the 
certificate first, and then he cautioned me. 

After he cautioned you, did you know that it was a criminal 
charge ?—No. 

Until the police superintendent came to you, you had heard 
nothing about the rumours!—Absolutely nothing. 

Cross-examination continued—Did you not know that the 
police had come to you in relation to your late wife’s death? 
—I thought the superintendent had come about the pills, 
for Nurse Jones had been talking about the pills. 

If you thought he was going to put questions to you about 
the pills, why did he come to you at all about them ?— 
Because the pills had been given. 

You thought at that time that the only rumours that were 
about were that your wife had died from the morphia pills !— 
Yes. 

You did not think you were in any way concerned with 
the matter 1—No. 

Until the police superintendent came to you, you had heard 
nothing about the rumours ?—Absolutely nothing. 

It was a very great surprise to you when Superintendent 
Jones came?—It was. 

If you thought there was nothing in it, why should you 
be thinking about the pills?]—That is what I was thinking 
about. 

Why did you think about the morphia pills /—Because 
Nurse Jones had asked me not to tell any one about the 
pills. 

What did Nurse Jones ask you not to tell?—About the 
pills given to my wife. 

When did she ask you that?’—When my wife died. 

What time?’—About five minutes to 4 in the morning, 
after the doctor had gone. Let me explain. I took the 
doctor downstairs, and when I went over for the doctor the 
last time at 3 o’clock I told the doctor that since she had 
those two pills she had gone to sleep almost immediately, 
and never awoke, and I asked him if he thought the pills 
were too strong, seeing the state she was in. I then went 
back upstairs to the bedroom. 

You say you had heard from Nurse Jones at the time of 
your wife’s death that she died from morphia pills ?—Yes. 

And that is what you thought Superintendent Jones had 
come to see you about 7—Yes. 

You. say there are many things in this statement which 
you did not say?—I say they have been added to. 

And are there things absent which you did say?—Yes. 
There are four important things. 

192 


Greenwood arriving for his Tria}, 


Evidence for Defence. 


Harold Greenwood 


What are these important things?—I told him, ‘“‘ If you 
can show why I should have my wife’s body exhumed I will 
do it at once, and you need not bother any further.” I 
said that to him at the first interview on 24th October, 1919. 
I think that is very important. 

By the Courr—You could not have offered that, because 
you told us you had not the least notion what he had come 
about ?—I did make the offer. 

Was that when the statement was taken down?—It ought 
to have been taken down on the first page of that statement. 

But you have just told us that you had not the least notion 
what the superintendent had come to talk to you about !— 
When he asked me, I said to him, ‘‘ What is suspicious? ”’ 

Cross-examination continued—You told the superintendent 
that you wished to have the exhumation !—Yes; if he could 
give the slightest reason, and that he need not bother his 
head about it. He has left two out of the five visits I made 
out for the doctor. He has left out the 10 o’clock and the 
1 o’clock visits. 

What else do you suggest he has left out?—He jumped up 
from the table suddenly—I do not know why, I am sure— 
and, pointing his finger at me like this, said, ‘‘ You have 
insured your wife for a big sum.’’ 

Mr. Justice SHuarmMan—That appears in the statement. 

The Witness—Then he asked me to give the names of 
insurance companies with whom I did business. I gave him 
the Yorkshire Insurance Company, the Royal London 
Auxiliary Insurance Company, and others, and I saw him 
write them down. 

Sir Marntay Samson—These two are down in the statement. 

The Witness—No; it is not down. 

Mr. Justice SHzarMAN—I don’t suppose he would put down 
every word that was said. The names of the insurance com- 
panies are down. 


The Court adjourned. 


é 193 


Fifth Day—Saturday, 6th November, 1920. 


Harotp GREENWOOD (prisoner on oath), cross-examination 
continued by Sir Martay Samson—I understood you to say 
that you proposed to Miss Gladys Jones on 12th July, and 
that you showed her the ring on that date ?—Yes. 

Did she accept you on that date?—No. 

Did you then buy a cheap ring in order to get her size? 
—Yes. It would fit either Miss Gladys Jones or my daughter. 
When I first ordered the ring I sent up the size and said it 
was rather small. That was the size my daughter would 
take. In response they sent down a larger size. 

Did you write to the jewellers’ on 10th July: ‘‘ A good 
cluster ring would do, and it is as well if the stones are 
nice and large. I do not want a lot of small stones. I 
have a diamond ring I want you to convert. It belonged 
to my late wife.’’ Why didn’t you call attention in your 
letter to the fact that the size of the ring was wrong ?— 
I did not think it would fit any one. 

Where did you buy the cheap ring?—In Llanelly. 

Was that after you had shown her the diamond ring ?— 
Yes. 

Did you send the ring back on that day to Messrs. Hur- 
comb to be altered !—Yes. 

And did you try the ring in order to get the size that 
the ring was to be altered to?—It would fit the finger either 
of my present wife or my daughter. Their fingers were the 
same. 

When you first bought Gladys Jones the ring did you send 
up the size of her finger? Your letter to Messrs. Hurcomb 
states, ‘‘ The size of the finger is enclosed.’’—Yes. 

And did they send down a ring that would fit her in 
accordance with the pattern you sent them ?—No. 

You had it altered according to her size in the belief that 
she would accept it ?—Yes. 

And you say also that in any event it would have fitted 
your daughter !—Yes. 

Yesterday I asked you to point out any omissions in 
the alleged statement by you to the police officer. You said 
last night that there were four omissions—one about the 
explanation, one about the five visits, and one in regard 
to insurance. Will you tell me what the fourth was?— 
In regard to my will—that my wife made a will in my 
favour. There was also another one, that on the 31st he 

194 


Evidence for Defence. 


Harold Greenwood 


came in to see if I had a copy of the certificate. I had 
one, and made a copy of it. 

[Mr. Justice Suuarman pointed out that the question bore 
reference to the statement of 24th September. They could 
not deal with anything on the 31st. 

Sir E. Marsaatyt Hatt—I have got no copy of the state- 
ment made to Superintendent Jones other than that appear- 
ing on the depositions. There was one statement in the 
book which I never saw until Friday. | 

Cross-examination continued—I want you to point out to 
me in the statement anything which you allege was wrongly 
os down by the superintendent.—That is not my statement 
at all. 

That is not what I am asking you. You have the statement 
before you. Point out what are the things that you say 
the superintendent put down wrongly.—Here is one, that she 
had diarrhoea on Saturday. 

Is there anything else the superintendent has put in which 
you did not say?—Yes. I did not say the words, ‘‘ She had 
another attack of diarrhoea in the afternoon. She came to 
me about 3 or 3.30 and said she had another attack of 
diarrhea.’’ I never said those words. 

Are there any more such statements !—Hundreds. 

Do you say that Superintendent Jones has written in things 
you did not say?—Yes, I do. I never said that about 5.30 
p.m. my wife and daughter walked slowly to the house, and 
that she took my arm and walked as far as the stables. I 
did not say that. 

You understand that we are discussing what you said to 
the superintendent, and not what happened ?—Yes, I under- 
stand. 

Can you point out anything else that you did not say — 
Yes. I did not say that the little brandy she took made her 
sick. 

What else 7—‘‘ On the next day she had more brandy, and 
after taking that she was very sick.’’ That is not true. 

It is untrue to say that she was sick after she had had 
brandy !—Yes; it is untrue to say that the brandy was given 
to her on the lawn. The brandy was given to her in the 
bedroom. 

You say that the superintendent has put that in!—Yes. 
The superintendent has also left out the words ‘‘ or Nurse 
Martin.”’? ‘‘ The reason that I went out to the garden was 
that my wife should undress and go to bed.’’ I did not say 
that. 

What is the next thing?—‘‘ After she had come in for 
supper I asked Miss Phillips if she would stop in the bedroom 
while Irene and I had supper.’? I did not say that. 

195 


Harold Greenwood. 


Harold Greenwood 


But he could not put that down unless you said it?—I 
say that he has put it down wrongly. 

Mr. Justice Suzarman—His suggestion is that Superin- 
tendent Jones might have made a mistake. There are two 
distinct things. One is that the superintendent has put in 
things, and the other is that in taking things down Superin- 
tendent Jones made a mistake. 

Cross-examination continued—What else in the statement 
do you deny?—I also deny having said that my wife stated 
that her hands were cold and she had no feeling in them. 
That was absolutely put in, and in this part there are three 
pages missing from what I told the superintendent. The 
superintendent has omitted all reference to the 1 o'clock 
business about Dr. Griffiths. 

You say that the omission extends over three pages /—Yes ; 
I should think so. Then it says that Nurse Jones asked me 
to go for the doctor. That does not read right at all. 

Did you say, ‘‘ I knocked for the doctor and he failed to 
answer ’’ ?—I said that I rang the bell. 

By the Court—The point made here is that you went for 
the doctor, and that you did not take the trouble to get an 
answer !—I rang the bell. 

What you say is that when you knocked for the doctor it 
was 1 o’clock, and that when you rang it was 3 o’clock? 
[Reading from statement.] ‘‘ Nurse asked me to go for the 
doctor. I knocked for him and failed to have an answer. 
I went back and told her that I had failed to get him. 
Soon after that my wife lost her pulse altogether. Nurse 
Jones went for the doctor, and he came soon after.’’—The 
whole paragraph is wrong. 

Cross-examination continued—So your explanation is that 
the superintendent has left out pages, and that all this para- 
graph comes afterwards!’—He has mutilated the whole of 
this. He put that in of his own accord, and it is absolutely 
untrue. 

What else do you say he has put in of his own accord ?— 
He has put down the words, ‘‘ Her life was not insured, 
either by herself or by me, and all the property went for the 
children.’? When he asked me that, he asked me the names 
and addresses of the insurance companies. 

Have you pointed out to me all the things you say the 
superintendent has put in which you never said ?—Yes. 

Do you want to add anything in regard to the interview 
on 31st October as being added by the superintendent ?— 
In the note-book produced at Llanelly Police Court the state- 
ment finished with the word ‘‘ Ferryside.’’ 

Do you say that the whole of this paragraph has been 
added by the superintendent: ‘‘ She had been unwell all 

196 


Evidence for Defence. 
Harold Greenwood 


the week with her heart’ ” She felt better on 14th June, and 
went to Ferryside ’??—I say that in the book at Llanelly 
those two lines, ‘‘ She had been unwell all the week with 
her heart,’’ and ‘‘ She felt better on 14th June, and went to 
Ferryside,’’? should have been at the end of the last words 
on 3lst October, 1919. 

You said that on 31st October 7—Yes. 

The statement also says, ‘‘ He further said, ‘ The doctor 
had been attending her for the last two months for her 
heart.’ ’’ Did you say that?—~Yes. 

Did you say that on the 24th or on the 3lst?—On the 
24th. [Perusing the copy of the statement.] My biggest 
objection to this statement is that after the word ‘‘ Ferry- 
side ’’ there was ‘‘ H. Greenwood ”’ in the book produced 
at Llanelly, which purported to be my signature; and I 
say it was not my signature. 

Mr. Justice SazarmMan—If the witness is not mistaken about 
that, it must mean, according to him, that it is in a dif- 
ferent note-book to this one. What I think about this does 
not matter a scrap. It is what you gentlemen think. I do 
not want you to think that I am pressing this matter, but 
you might think it is probably an error of recollection and 
nothing more. The suggestion is that leaves have been torn 
out. 

The Witness—I contend that is not the book. 

Mr. Justice SHeaRMan—The signature ‘‘ H. Greenwood ”’ 
appears after what is obviously a copy of a letter, and when 
accused or his solicitor saw it they jumped to the conclusion 
that it is a signature after the whole of the passage. I 
think it is a natural mistake made when people are excited. 
There is a signature ‘‘ H. Greenwood ’’ there, but it is at 
the end of a letter. 

The Wirness—No, my lord; the signature is a very good 
copy of my signature. 

By the Court—Are you now suggesting that he has forged 
your signature ?/—He wrote down the statement. 

Mr. Justice SHparman—That is a different thing. 

Cross-examination continued—Do you suggest that the 
superintendent put in a false statement, and has put in some 
things and left others out? Do you suggest that the super- 
intendent made a false statement purporting to be made by 
you !—He wrote the statement. 

Do you suggest that he wrote the statement and brought in 
matters you never said, and left out matters you have said 1— 
I do. 

Do you suggest that he did that before the police court at 


Llanelly 1—Yes. 
197 


Harold Greenwood. 


Harold Greenwood 


Was that book produced at Llanelly Police Court, and did 
Mr. Ludford, on your behalf, have an opportunity of cross- 
examining the superintendent on it?—I say no. 

You say that is not the book produced at the police court 
at. Llanelly?—I say no, emphatically. ; 

Mr. Justice SHzarMan—It is marked as having been put in 
at the police court as one of the exhibits, so be careful about 
it?—Then I say, if that is the book produced at Llanelly, 
then pages have been torn out. 

Cross-examination continued—You say they have been torn 
out since it was produced at Llanelly’—Yes, I do. 

You know that since it was produced at Llanelly the book 
has been in the custody of 1—It has been in the custody of 
Superintendent Jones. 

By the Courr—lIs it your suggestion that it was handed 
back to the superintendent after the police court proceedings? 
—Yes. 

Mr. Justice SHzEARMAN—The book ought not to have been 
handed back to the superintendent, after having been made 
an exhibit at the police court. 

The Witness—He had it here with him. 

Cross-examination continued—But it is endorsed by Mr. 
Brodie, the justices’ clerk, himself as having been received 
by him in Court as an exhibit. If necessary, I shall call 
Mr. Brodie to prove that it was handed to him. Do you 
suggest that since it was handed to Mr. Brodie, and after Mr. 
Brodie had written his endorsement and signature on it, the 
superintendent has substituted another book?—No; not sub- 
stituted another book, but substituted other leaves. 

Do you seriously say again that since the book was handed 
to Mr. Brodie and marked by him it has been entirely 
altered !—I do. 

And that that has been done since the police court !—Yes. 

What is in the book now is the same as what the super- 
intendent read out in the police court, is it not? You have 
a copy there, have you not?—Yes; but it is not the same 
as what is in the book. That book has got something about 
the insurance companies, and this copy that I have has not. 

Tell me this, where did you keep this weed-killer you used 
to buy ’—It was used the same day. 

I asked you where you kept it?—In a shed. 

Where was that shed?—One of the outhouses. 

Would you go through the kitchen in order to get to that 
outhouse !—Oh, yes. 

[Plans of Rumsey House and grounds were then put in, 
and the accused indicated the shed referred to. ] 

By the Courr—Where do you say, Mr. Greenwood, that 
the weed-killer was kept?—In the store next to the potting 
shed. It was never there long. 

198 


Evidence for Defence. 


Harold Greenwood 


Cross-examination continued—Would it be in your charge? 
—In any one’s charge. 

You knew it was dangerous stuff?_—Not when it was not 
opened. 

But when it was opened ?—It would be finished at once. 

You mean the whole tin would be used up in one day ?— 
Yes; then and there. 

What about this particular tin bought on 22nd May ?— 
On the following Saturday I took that tin down. It had 
not been unpacked. 

Where had it been put?—I don’t know. My wife had taken 
the parcel on Saturday. She asked me to put the weed- 
killer on the paths of her garden. 

Did you ask her where it was?—I did not know where it 
was, and she said it was in the hall in a box. I took it down 
to the garage. 

What time was that?—About 5 o’clock on Saturday. 

By the Court—aAccording to your recollection, this was 
the first Saturday after the weed-killer had arrived 1—Yes. 

Cross-examination continued—Did you open it in the 
garage?’—On the asphalt. Ben Williams was with me help- 
ing me. It was between 5 and 5.30. I think Ben Williams 
got a big acetylene can. 

By Sir E. Marsuatt Hatu—You mean a big carbide can? 
—Yes ; that is it, a big carbide can to mix it in. He emptied 
the whole of the powder in the tin, and then put three times 
the amount of water contained in the empty weed-killer 
tin. 

Cross-ezamination continued—Who actually poured the 
powder out of the tin? Do you recollect that?—I do not 
quite remember that. 

Who opened the tin?—I opened the tin. 

Do you know what happened to the tin afterwards !—It 
would be left there till we finished. 

On the asphalt 7—Yes. 

What happened to it after that?—Williams threw it away. 

You were with him?—Yes; I saw him do it. The big 
carbide can sprang a leak, and it was thrown into the river 
the same time as the Eureka tin. 

By the Court—Was it all used on the same day?—Yes; 
the worms came up, you know, and I was sweeping them up. 

Please attend to the question. This is a 10-gallon tin. 
You say you spread it all?—Yes; through a water can. 

Cross-exzamination continued—Were you there when the 
spreading was being done?—I did the spreading myself; I 
was sweeping up the worms. 

Was anybody helping you?—Williams was helping me. 

All the time ?—Yes, all the time. 

199 


Harold Greenwood. 


Harold Greenwood 


The tin had arrived and your wife had put it on the table? 
—It was in a box. 

Did you take it out to the back through the kitchen, or 
how ?—I do not know which way I went. 

At any rate you took it out into the yard and there opened 
it ?—Yes. 

You had a gardener at Rumsey House named Gould, had 
you not ?—Yes. 

Do you know that he has said that he has never seen any 
weed-killer while he was there ?—I do not think he did. 

Let me read you what he has said.—No, no. What I say 
is I do not think he did see any weed-killer. He looks after 
the beds and the greenhouses. He had nothing whatever to 
do with the lawns or the paths, or any of that part of the 
garden. 

How often did you employ this man ?—Every night. 

Do you mean all the year round ?—Yes, all the year round. 

I suppose Gould would be away on Saturday, would he? 
—He would go at 4 o’clock. 

Do you mean to say the spraying with the weed-killer was 
always done after your proper gardener had gone away ?— 
Yes. 

How many gallons would that carbide can hold?—It would 
have to hold three times the amount of water in the Eureka 
tins. 

That Eureka tin makes about 100 gallons, does it not 2?— 
No; you don’t do it in that way. It tells you on the can. 
You take the powder and empty it into the big tin. You 
take three times the amount of water that the Eureka tin 
will hold, and you mix it, and it is quite dark red. You 
get the water cans full of cold water. It holds four gallons, 
and you pour out a quarter of a cupful and the mixture 
into the water can of cold water and the spray. 

By the Court—You put the cold water in first and then the 
solution, and not the solution first?—No, the cold water 
first. 

You mean to say that you would have used twenty-five 
watering cans full if your watering cans hold four gallons? 
—Yes. 

Cross-examination continued—I understood you to say 
yesterday that in your opinion it was the morphia pills that 
caused your wife’s death ?—Yes. 

Did Nurse Jones tell you that on the morning after your 
wife died ?—Yes; she did. 

And she asked you to keep it secret?—Yes; she told me 
not to go to the doctor. 

Did you tell the doctor afterwards !—I had told him before. 
I said that since she had had the pills she had gone to sleep 
and had never wakened up. 

200 


Evidence for Defence. 


Harold Greenwood 


By the Courr—Did you tell the doctor at any time after- 
wards that he had made a mistake’—I told him that when 
I had the letter from the County Office about the exhumation. 
I went straight to him and asked him what the letter meant. 

Did you tell him then it was the morphia pills that did it? 
—Yes. He was complaining that this had started from 
Nurse Jones’s gossip. I said, ‘‘ Don’t you think those 
morphia pills were too strong!’’ and he said, ‘‘ Certainly 
not.”’ 

But that was just before the exhumation ?’—Yes. 

Did you tell him that Nurse Jones had told you that the 
morphia pills had killed your wife, and that you were to 
keep it secret?—No; I told him that the morphia pills were 
too strong for her, and that he ought not to have given them. 
_ Cross-examination continued—Did you tell the doctor 
before the exhumation that you thought that was why your 
wife had died?—Yes, I did; and he said the morphia pills 
were not injurious. 

You thought it was important that the police should know 
that she had had these morphia pills!—No, I thought the 
police were on a wild-goose chase. 

You knew then that some inquiry was going to be made 
as to the cause of your wife’s death ?—Yes. 

You went even to inquire about the morphia pills!—No, 
no, be fair. I asked him what all those inquiries meant 
about an exhumation. 

[Sir E. Marshall Hall interrupted with a remark that 
was not audible, and Sir Marlay Samson said, “‘ I want to 
give the accused every possible fair play, but he constantly 
avoids my questions on very important matters.”’ 

Mr. Justice SHparmMan—I have noticed that. 

Sir Marztay Samson—I do ask that my learned friend 
should not interrupt me when I am on a very crucial point. | 

Cross-examination continued—What did you tell Dr. 
Griffiths when you heard that inquiries had been made as 
to the cause of death?—I asked him if the pills were not 
too strong, and he replied that they were not injurious. 

Did you think then that Dr. Griffiths ought to tell the 
police that he had given morphia pills?—Yes, I did. 

Why did you not tell the police that?—I did. 

Did you think that your wife’s doctor gave her the pills 
inadvertently ?/—Yes, I did. 

And but for those pills she would have been alive ?—Yes; 
but she would not have lived long, because she was broken up. 

Did you discuss this with your daughter, and did you tell 
her what Nurse Jones had told you on the morning your 
wife died, that it was the morphia pills, inadvertently given, 
that had caused her death?—Yes; I told my daughter, Miss 

201 


Harold Greenwood. 


Harold Greenwood 


Bowater, and Sir Vansittart Bowater at the funeral that that 
was the opinion of the nurse. 

Were you anxious to protect Dr. Griffiths when he had 
made a mistake?—I believed he had made a blunder. 

Were you anxious to protect him from it?—No. 

Did you realise that, unless any other cause of death was 
proved, she died from arsenic?/—I never thought that they 
would find anything. 

When did you find out arsenic had been found?!—The day 
the arrest was made. 

Didn’t you think it very important that.the coroner should 
be told that your wife had been given the morphia pills 
which had caused her death when you knew that arsenic 
had been found in the body?—I think that that came out 
at the inquest. 

Neither you nor your daughter attended the inquest to 
tell the doctor about those morphia pills? 

[Sir E. Marshall Hall here interposed by reading a portion 
of the statement made to the police in which reference was 
made to the morphia pills. ] 

Cross-examination continued—This was in April. Do you 
suggest that he went to the police and made any statement 
about having given morphia pills?—I cannot say ‘‘ Yes ”’ or 
*“No.’’ I have heard it. 

Did you see the vicar on the day when the exhumation took 
place ?—I sent for him. 

Did you have a conversation with him about Mrs. Green- 
wood ?!—Yes; I asked him if he could tell me the meaning 
OL it 

Let me get your words. Did you wonder if she had taken 
anything herself?—No; it was the vicar who asked me if I 
thought that she had taken anything herself, and I said, 
‘“No.’’ It was he who made the statement, and I said I 
did not think so. 

Did you say that she was often depressed and used to stare 
at water?—No; it was he who asked me. It appears that 
suicide 

No, no! Please answer me. 

Mr. Justice SHzarmMAN—This is a very important matter. 
Just take the question and answer it. 

Cross-examination continued—Did you say that she was 
often depressed and was staring at water !—Not exactly that. 
He asked me 

Mr. Justice Sazarman—Now, pause a minute and think ?— 
He asked me if she was depressed, and I told him that she 
had a great fascination for water; that if she had any 
suicidal tendency herself she would have turned to water. 

202 


Evidence for Defence. 


Harold Greenwood 


Cross-examination continued—You knew the vicar said 
that the body would be taken up?—Yes. 

Did you know at the time that the object was to find out 
from what she died !—Yes. 

How long was the vicar with you?—About five minutes. 

What did he say to you!—He asked me if my wife had 
taken anything. 

You understand this: that he was asking you a question, 
asking whether she had taken her own life?-—I did not take 
it seriously. 

Did you take it seriously when you were asked whether 
she had committed suicide? You knew the object of the ex- 
humation. Did you think then that she had died from 
morphia pills!—Yes, I did. 

You said that was the cause of her death?—No; I thought 
the true cause of her death was heart disease. 

Did you tell the police superintendent that if she had not 
taken these pills she might be alive to-day?—Yes; that she 
might be alive. 

Why did not you tell the vicar that?—I saw no reason 
why I should tell the vicar; I could not prove it. I only 
asked the vicar for the reason why application was made 
for the exhumation of the body. 

On 10th June, 1920, do you remember making a state- 
ment to a representative of the South Wales Daily Post 1— 
No, I do not. [The witness was then handed a copy of a 


report which appeared in that journal. It was headed: 
‘“T Welcome Enquiry.’’] I refused to see any of these 
people. 


Did you refuse to make any statement to newspaper repre- 
sentatives?/—Yes, except the Daily Mail. I refused every- 
body else. 

[Mr. Justice Shearman ruled that he could not allow to 
be put into Court the report of an interview. | 

Sir Marutay Samson—Did you see the report of your inter- 
view to the Daily Mail1—I do not remember. 

By the Courr—If you gave an interview, would you not 
look at it to see whether it was accurate!—(No reply.) 

[The witness was then handed a copy of the Daddy Mail 
containing the interview. | 

By the Court—Consider very carefully whether you gave 
that interview which appears in the Daily Mail1—He has 
put in here things which I never told him. 

You say that what is in there was put in without your 
authority /—Yes. The interview I gave to him was at the 
inquest. He came to my house, and I refused to say any- 
thing. He tried to cross-examine myself and my wife, and 


what is in there is not what I told him. \ 
203 


Harold Greenwood. 


Harold Greenwood 


Cross-examination continued—Three months after the 
exhumation did you know that before the inquest it was 
suggested that arsenic had been found in your wife’s body? 
—I heard it. 

Did you get a subpoena to attend the inquest?—Yes. _ 

Did you believe that but for the morphia pills your wife 
would be alive ?—Yes. 

Then why did you not tell the coroner that at the inquest !— 
My solicitor advised me not to attend the inquest. I wanted 
to, but he told me to keep my mouth shut. He said, “‘I 
am conducting this case, and if you go I shall chuck it 
u eee 

Saeco by Sir E. Marsnatt Hatu—Gertrude Jones, 
my present wife’s sister, was married at Greenfield Chapel, 
Llanelly, on 30th December, 1918, and it was for her the 
dressing-case was bought. 

Is there any foundation for the suggestion that you bought 
the dressing-bag to give to Miss Gladys Jones?—None what- 
ever. 

Among your first wife’s jewellery there was a ring that 
had been given by you to her as an engagement ring /—Yes. 

As your wife left no will you knew, as a solicitor, that 
her personal property belonged to you ?—Yes. 

And did you desire that it should pass on to your children? 
—That is so. 

And when Miss Bowater came down did you take out this 
ring, with another half-hoop ring ?—Yes. 

And that ring was to be given to Irene?—Yes. She had 
chosen that ring. 

After you had given it to her did you change your mind, 
and wanted to have it made into a horse-shoe pin for your- 
self 7—Yes. 

Were you to give a ring of equal value to Irene ?—Yes. 

What sort of a ring did she want?—A marquise ring. 

Did you write to Messrs. Hurcomb, of London, for a 
marquise ring?!—Yes; and they replied that they did not 
have one. 

[Sir E. Marshall Hall then read correspondence which 
had passed with reference to the purchase of the ring. ] 

Re-examination continued—Was any reference made at this 
time to Gladys Jones!—None whatever. 

Had you any idea then of giving any ring to Miss Gladys 
Jones ?—None whatever. 

Was your intention of having the ring made into a horse- 
shoe pin carried out?—No, and Irene got back her original 
ring. 

When did you give up the idea of getting the ring made 


a a horse-shoe pin!—The day I proposed to Miss Gladys 
ones. 


204 


i i es Sin 


How 
: Wah there ever won torsion 
baAwoen 3 


your promt wile, wad propridon A the Ua Yuen, 
: 434 you aathet Vien Seas tialiy 1—Nex; ond bo tockprocoved 
by haying me Wild uy my yracine, 

je Mise ONadye Jones nowt—hbows thirty tour. 


ony yuan A Nove, 
on and Gladys ones ww ahher on guy w 
vc nih pallgfr / lay ahi 


Was there ever thought A imyr rAdkiimmbbig 
leween you and Gladys 4onta, hone rg he I pa 


And 414 you know that te ah written shking wo be 
rua Nrom er cnagpgeommntt—Yes, 

And did you we tha \tter1—Ya, 

Nurse Jones hah oom nuriing your wile on 4 yreviows 
wMenitiat—T a, 


ied Surse Sones over oon wgeaire until after tee had 

ees cess aan: 

thorwing witness a yink winegian.| Bove you ever token 

ert cone oe x tone sw oso heat te 
ys 
Vas 


Never. 

amy reMletion A \rene ever baving bad Wur- 
guntyl—Yes; the aways 2A it, 
Did you at the time A your wiles death that the 
ville bed killed bert, 1 4d wor, 
Whst was tt that first of ol mate you wuspicious that the 
pills were ton hrongt—The statement make by Nurse Jones. 
You sre a silicitor, and you know that there is 2 law A 
angio ship OE been juste in thing the 

7 in 

scar “Maat had killed your wilet—Mo. 
By the Covet—Have you ever wen her taintingt—TYas, 
very wHten. 
Ee-cosminstion comtimmsa—Whet wea yorsr rdztiondaiy 
with the late Mr. W. B. Sonest—My sacther’s sister marrieA 
his wite’s brother. 
Can you til us whether your wile wes 2frzid A concert 


—_ 


, aw i = ; 


Harold Greenwood. 


Harold Greenwood 


Mr. Justice SHearmMan—Is Dr. Griffiths, of Kidwelly, 
present? He obviously must be called before the conclusion 
of the evidence, and so one would like to see if he is here 
to-day. 

Sir Martay Samson—He is here, my lord, and will remain 
here. Will your lordship call him now? 

Sir E. Marsnatt Hatit—I have no objection. 

Mr. Justice Suzarman—But I think it should be intimated 
to him what evidence has been given. I do not think it 
is fair to recall him and ask him questions on evidence he 
does not know about. 

Sir E. Marsnatt Hatzr—I do not want to say anything 
unkind. Supposing he were out of Court, he would not be 
told, and why should he be told now? 

Mr. Justice SHzarman—Yes, I think you are right. 


Dr. Tuomas R. Grirritus (recalled), by the Court—When 
under cross-examination the accused made some reference to 
you. He said, ‘‘ After the notice of the exhumation I saw 
the doctor and asked him if he thought the pills were too 
strong. He said they were perfectly innocuous. I told him 
that Nurse Jones told me that they were too strong, and 
ought not to have been given. The doctor said, ‘ No, the 
morphia, pills were not injurious.’ I asked him if he used 
morphia or opium pills, and he said he used morphia. I 
asked him if he informed the police, and he said ‘ No.’ I 
asked him if he thought the pills were too strong, and he 
said ‘ No.’ ’’ Did he come to see you after he received notice 
of the exhumation?—He came to me the day before the 
exhumation. 

Was there any conversation of this sort?—I never remem- 
ber any conversation of that sort. 

Did he suggest to you at any time before the inquest that 
the pills you had given were the cause of death ?—Never. 

You are clear about that ?—Perfectly clear. 

Sir E. Marsan Hatu—I think your lordship has put a 
little more than the accused said. (Zo Witness)—Did he 
ask you if it was possible that the pills you had given her 
were too strong!—I never remember him asking anything 
of the kind. 

Do you swear that he did not?—I do not remember. 

By the Courr—Did he make any reference at the inter- 
view to the pills at all?—None whatever. 

By Sir E. Marsnatt Hatt—Did he come to you before the 
exhumation !—Yes. 

And he spoke to you about the exhumation ?—Yes. 

How long did the conversation last!—For about a quarter 
of an hour. 

206 


Evidence for Defence. 
Dr Thomas R, Griffiths 


And do you swear that. during the whole of that time he 
never asked you if the pills were too strong!’—I am certain 
he did not. 

[An argument ensued between counsel as to an alleged 
conversation between Greenwood and Nurse Jones with refer- 
ence to the pills. Sir E. Marshall Hall, quoting from his 
notes, said, ‘‘ At the time the body was exhumed I may have 
seen Greenwood if I went to his house on business. He 
told me that he thought the pills that Dr. Griffiths gave her 
had killed her. I am not supposed to say anything about 
doctors’ prescriptions, and I said so to the prisoner.’’] 

Mr. Justice SazearmMan—What she said was that it was not 
her business to talk about that, and that she had no recollec- 
tion of having talked about it. That is quite consistent 
with the questions having been asked her by you. 


Nurse Jonus (recalled), by the Court—You have already 
been asked if you said ‘‘ Damn those pills,’’? and you say 
you did not say so?—I did not say that. 

Was there any conversation that night in which the accused 
said that he was suspicious of the pills, and was there a 
discussion about the thing being kept secret /—No. 

Are you clear about that !—Yes. 

Did you discuss with him on the night this lady died the 
question of the pills being too strong, and that they had 
killed her ?—I don’t think so. 

Did you have any suspicion that night, whether you dis- 
cussed it or not?—I don’t think so. 

By Sir Marutay Samson—The accused says, ‘‘ Nurse Jones 
asked me not to tell any one about the pills.’’ Is that true? 
—No. 

And that the pills had killed his wife. Is that true?—No. 

By Sir E. MarsHaty Hatt—Were you very much distressed 
when Mrs. Greenwood died!—I was distressed. 

Is it true that you went from the room to cry ?—Yes. 

And did not the accused come and speak to you?!—No, not 
then. It was a little time after the death that the accused 
spoke to me. 

Do you swear that you never had any suspicion with regard 
to the pills on the night Mrs. Greenwood died ?—I do. 

No suspicion at all ?—No. 

Did you not remark on the fact that Mrs. Greenwood 
went to sleep before death?—She went to sleep. 

And did you not say to Greenwood that one or two pills 
were too strong?—I did not. 

No discussion about the pills at all?—No. 

Have you on any occasion asked the accused not to say 
anything about the pills!/—Never. It was suggested by 


Mr. Ludford afterwards, and I denied it then. Bo 


Harold Greenwood. 


Beatrice Brooks 


Beatrice Brooks, examined—I am employed by Messrs. 
Gamages, Limited, of London. On 14th March, 1918, we 
supplied Weedicide to the accused. I cannot say what quan- 
tity was supplied. 


Mrs. Martua Morris, examined by Mr. Trevor Hunrer—I 
am the wife of William Morris, of Kidwelly. I was a nurse 
in the employ of Mr. and Mrs. Greenwood twenty-two years 
ago, and I| have since called frequently at their home. Mr. 
and Mrs. Greenwood lived on very good terms. The late 
Mrs. Greenwood complained for two years before she died 
that her health had become very bad. 

By the Court—Have you ever seen her faint?—Yes, very 
often. i 

Examination continwed—Do you know that there is a china 
cupboard at Rumsey House ?—Yes. 

Was a towel left there ?—I cannot say. 

Mr. Justice Sazarman—She knows very little of the interior 
of the house. Two servants have said it was regularly used. 
It comes to no more than this, whether the evidence of the 
parlourmaid is inaccurate. It is for the jury to decide. 
One servant said that she didn’t see Greenwood use it, and 
the other servant said all the members of the family washed 
their hands there. 

Examination continued—Have you ever seen Mr. Green- 
wood use the china cupboard for any purpose !—Hundreds 
of times. 

What for?—To wash his hands. I lived quite near, and 
Mrs. Greenwood asked me to throw some of the bottles away. 
She used to keep her medicine bottles in the cupboard, but 
the medicine she was taking was kept in the room where 
she was. There were a good many bottles kept in the 
cupboard. 

By the Court—Did she ask you to throw them into the 
river /—Mrs. Greenwood asked me to do that. 

Examination continued—Do you know anything about the 
bottles after her death?—No; I did not see any bottles after 
her death. 

Cross-examined by Sir Marnuay Samson—How many years 
is it since the Greenwoods came to the house?—Four or five 
years ago. 

You were not one of the servants living in the house ?— 
Not living in the house. I was a servant there, but I used 
to go there every day. 

You mean you were going one day in the week?—I was 
going there every day in the week all the four years they 
were there, nearly every day. 

You have been going there every day to do some work as 
a servant?!—Yes, I have. 

208 


Evidence for Defence. 
Mrs Martha Morris 


By the Courr—aA paid ‘servant !—Yes. 

. Cross-examination continued—You were a paid servant 
living in your own house ?!—Yes. 

Were you paid regular wages ?—No. 

Were you going in and out as it suited you?—Yes. 

By the Cournr—What work did you do? I don’t under- 
stand it?—I was doing cleaning and some washing. 

Cross-examination continued—The tide comes up to the 
wall of the garden ?—Yes. 

It goes into the paths of the garden when the tide comes 
up /—When it is very high. 

It is a damp place, rather, is it not?—Yes, it is rather 
damp. 

A low-lying damp place ?—Yes. 

Does the water get into these big cellars ?—Yes. 

Where did Mrs. Greenwood keep her medicine bottles as 
a rule?—On the mantelpiece of any room she was in. 

Was she taking a good deal of medicine the last week or 
two before she died /—Yes. 

Did you notice there were more new medicine bottles about 
in the last six weeks than before?—I only saw one. 

What colour was it?—A brown medicine. 

Do you remember Miss Bowater going away during April? 
—Yes. 

Did you think Mrs. Greenwood got worse after that !—She 
did. 

Would it be correct to say she began to get worse after 
Miss Bowater went away? Did you notice her becoming 
feebler at the time ?/—Yes. 

Did she talk to you about how she felt?—Yes. She said 
she felt very weak. 

Did she complain of diarrhcea or sickness!—She com- 
plained of diarrhcea sometimes, but not then of sickness. 

Did you notice she was getting very much thinner? 

[Sir E. Marshall Hall interposed, but Mr. Justice Shear- 
man said that they must expect these questions to be put 
in cross-examination. | 

Sir Mariay Samson—This witness is called as the one 
servant who knew this dead lady’s habits. 

Cross-examination continued—Did Mrs. Greenwood come to 
your house on the Saturday before her death 1—Yes ; and she 
gave me nearly half a pound of butter. She used often to 
call. 

Did she seem in very good spirits that day?—No, she 
did not. 

By the Covurtr—What time of the day was it !—Between 10 
and 11. 

Cross-examination continued—Did you think she was worse 

a 209 


Harold Greenwood. 
Mrs Martha Morris 


on Saturday than she was at any time before?!—She sat 
down and rested in my kitchen. 

That was the last time you saw her ?—I saw her again in 
the evening. 

How did she seem then?!—Very low and very ill. 

Was it about six weeks or a month since she had been in 
that low condition ?—Yes; very depressed. 

And did she seem very low during the last three weeks ?— 
Yes. 

Re-examined by Sir E. Marsuatn Hautu—Apart from 
the medicine which the doctor gave, can you tell us whether 
Mrs. Greenwood took other medicines, pills and other things? 
—Yes. : 

What sort of medicines was she keeping in the cupboard 1— 
All those patent medicines. 

Re-examined by Mr. Trevor Hunter—When was the last 
time you saw her faint?—The end of April or the beginning 
of May. 

How did she seem afterwards?—She was much depressed 
during the last three weeks. 

Did you have to do anything with regard to her corsets 
before she died ?—Yes, I had to put wadding in. 

By the Court—Have you ever heard of the change of life 
in a lady 1—No. 

Did you think she was coming to an age when she would 
soon be past child-bearing, and did you think that was the 
matter with her?—I don’t understand. 


IRENE GREENWOOD, examined by Mr. Trevor Huntar— 
Are you the eldest daughter of Harold Greenwood, who is 
now on his trial ?—Yes. 

Do you remember the last Sunday that your mother was 
alive 1—Yes. 

Will you say, first of all, about what time you had break- 
fast on that day—as far as you can remember 7—Ten o’clock. 

ee sat down to breakfast?—Daddy, Kenneth, and my- 
self. 

Kenneth is your little brother, is he not ?—Yes. 

What did you do after breakfast !—I went to my room to 
tidy it up, and then I went to the kitchen to look after the 
pastry. 

Mr. Justice SHrarman—Miss Greenwood, I cannot hear a 
word you are saying, I am very sorry to tell you. You 
must do your best, please, and turn towards the jury. It 
is very important that they should hear. At present I 
cannot hear a word. 

The Witness—I was saying that I went upstairs after- 

210 


Evidence for Defence. 
Trene Greenwood 


wards to tidy my room, arid that then I went to help Hannah 
Williams with the pastry. 

Mr. Justice SHuarman—lI don’t hear a word. 

The Wirness—I went to help Hannah Williams to do the 
pastry in the kitchen. 

Ezramination continued—And then ?—Then I went out into 
the garden and sat on the lawn until the gong went for 
dinner. 

About what time was it you went into the garden ?—About 
12 o’clock. 

Where was your father then ?—He was mending the car. 

Would that be down at the garage!—Yes; down at the 
garage. 

When you were sitting on the lawn, at about what part 
were you sitting?—Just outside the dining-room window. 

Could you see the entrance to the kitchen door or the 
approach to it?—Yes; I could see the approach to it. 

From the time you got into the garden, as far as you know, 
did your father go into the house at all before the gong 
went ?—No; I did not see him. 

About how far were you from the approach to the kitchen 
door 1—I don’t know the exact distance. It was not very far. 

If he had gone in would you have seen him?—Yes, it is 
quite likely. 

When the gong went for dinner where did you go?—I 
went straight into the dining-room. 

Who was there when you got there?—Hannah Williams. 

What other members of the family came in afterwards !— 
Mother, Kenneth, and daddy. 

And was that the order in which they came in?—No. 
Mother came just after me, and then Kenneth, and then 
father. 

Your father was the last to come into the dining-room !— 
Yes. 

Can you say what the various members of the family drank 
with their dinner that day?—Yes; I remember everything 
about it. 

Can you say why you remember everything ?—Because it 
was the day my mother died, and on the Tuesday following 
her death I went through everything that my mother had 
been doing to find out what had upset her. 

Why particularly did you do that on the Tuesday !— 
Because my aunt, Miss Bowater, came down on the Monday 
night. 

"Then you and she went through it together on the Tuesday? 
—Yes. 

At lunch on Sunday, what did you have to drink ?—Daddy 
drank whisky and soda. Kenneth had soda water. Mother 


and I had burgundy. 
211 


Harold Greenwood. 


Irene Greenwood 


By the Courr—Can you tell us what kind of burgundy 
it was!—It was Beaune. 

Examination continued—What kind of bottle /—Something 
like a champagne bottle. pat 

Anything like that bottle on the table there?—No; it did 
not go down straight like that. 

Out of what did you drink your burgundy?—A red 
tumbler. 

I show you a coloured wineglass. Were glasses like that 
used as wineglasses in your house ?—Yes. 

Have you ever seen your father take any whisky and soda 
out a glass of that kind?—No. 

It has been suggested that you never drank burgundy. 
What do you say?—I always did on Sundays, and three or 
four times during the week. 

I think at the lunch period during the daytime you were 
from home?’—Yes; I was at the bank. 

Now, after dinner on Sunday midday, what happened ?— 
First of all, I went out to the garden with mother. Then 
she went to rest, and I went with Foy for about three-quarters 
of an hour. He was teaching me to drive the car. 

About what time do you think you got back /—Somewhere 
about 3.30 to 4. 

About what time did you have tea?!—Beweeen 4 and 4.40. 

Can you tell us who the members of the family were at tea? 
—Ma, daddy, Kenneth, and I. 

The same four. Can you say what your mother had for 
tea !—A cup of tea and some bread and butter. 

I did not ask you this just now, but is it correct that there 
was some gooseberry pie or tart for dinner, and that your 
mother partook of some?—Yes. 

After that, what happened !—There were two letters that I 
took to post, and then I went into the garden. 

Who was in the garden ?’—Mother, daddy, and Kenneth. 

What was the next thing that happened?—Daddy asked 
mamma to go round the garden with him. 

Was that a usual thing for them to do!—Yes. They went. 
She took a step or two and she said she was unwell. 

By the Courr—tThe first time you knew of her being unwell 
was after tea ’—Yes. 

Examination continued—What did she say?—She said she 
felt sick. 

Nothing else?—She said she had pains in her heart, and 
that she had flatulence. 

By the Covrr—Did she complain of flatulence ?—Yes. 
Daddy asked her if she had taken anything to make her 
sick, and she said ‘‘ No.’’ 

Examination continued—What then?—Then she had some 
brandy. 

‘212 


Evidence for Defence. 
Irene Greenwood 


She had some brandy’ first of all? Who gave her the 
brandy !—Daddy. 

Then after she had that brandy what happened ?—We took 
her upstairs. 

Who took her up?—Daddy and I. 

About what time?—About 6.30 to 7. 

What happened when you got her upstairs in the bed- 
room !—Daddy went for the doctor. 

Did he come back with the doctor /—Yes. 

Where was your mother when the doctor came back 1—She 
was sitting on the couch in her room. 

Did anything happen just before the doctor came ?—She 
was sick. 

Can you remember whether it was before the doctor came 
back or after he came back that she was sick?—I am not 
quite certain, but I think it was afterwards. 

As far as you know, that was the first time your mother 
had been sick that day ?—Yes. 

What did the doctor ask you to do?—Put her to bed. 

Did you do so?—Yes. 

What became of the doctor while you were doing it?—He 
went round the garden with daddy. 

And after you did get her to bed, what happened ?’—She 
was sick. 

A second time ?—Yes. 

On this second time was it much or little ?—Not very much. 

Did the doctor see her again before he went away ?—Yes. 

Do you know what time that was?—About 8 o’clock. 

Do you remember Nurse Jones coming there afterwards !— 
Yes. 

Do you know how it was that she came?—Miss Phillips 
fetched her. 

Do you know why !—Daddy and I asked her to go. 

Why did you ask her to go?—Because daddy and I asked 
mamma whether she would have Nurse Jones, and she said 
ce Yes.’’ 

Did you have supper that night ?—Yes. 

Who sat down to supper !—Miss Phillips, daddy, and I. 

What did you drink for supper yourself?—I drank bur- 
gundy. 

Was that from the same bottle you got the burgundy from 
for lunch 1—Yes. 

And then after supper can you say what happened !—Miss 
Phillips and I sat with mother for an hour and a half when 
the nurse was away. The nurse went away about 9 o’clock, 
and then came back at 10.30. 

Were you there when the doctor came again that night ?—I 
don’t remember. 


What had become of you?—I was in my room. 
213 


Harold Greenwood. 


Irene Greenwood 


How close is your room to your mother’s!—Practically 
opposite the passage. 

About what time did you actually go to sleep ?—About 12 
o’clock. 

By the Court—The evidence is that your mother asked 
Miss Phillips and you to go to bed at about 11. Is that 
right !—Yes. 

Examination continued—l think you had gone across to 
the doctor before he paid the visit after supper, and you 
were not present when he actually paid it?—Yes. 

Then I think early in the morning your father woke you?) 
—Yes. 

And you went to the room and stayed there till your poor 
mother died ?—Yes, at 3.30. 

And you were actually there when your poor mother died? 
—Yes. 

What state was your father in when your mother died !— 
He was crying. He seemed to be very much upset. 

Have you always been ready to make a statement with 
regard to this Sunday if you had been asked !—Yes. 

As we know, the police have never asked you to make a 
statement 1—No. 

In fact, I think, on your father’s second marriage, you 
went away from home, did you not ?—Yes. 

And was it not until the following Christmas that you came 
back !—Yes. 

Would you mind looking at that ring. Whose ring is that? 
—My own. 

And whose was it before you had it?—Mother’s. 

Given to you by your father after your mother’s death? 
—Yes. 

Cross-examined by Sir Martay Samson—How old are you? 
—Twenty-two. 

When did you begin to drink wine!—After I was twenty- 
one. 

‘ Was your mother particular about you drinking wine?— 
0. 
Didn’t she disapprove of it ?—No. 

You drank champagne ?—Yes. 

Port, burgundy, and Beaune ?—Yes. 

Did your mother drink invalid port?—No, port wine. 

But Beaune was what she ordinarily drank !—Yes. 

Did you see this particular wine in the house which she 
bought on the Saturday !—Yes. 

That is what is called real wine?!—Yes. 

On the Saturday your mother was able to attend to her 
household duties?—Yes. She was not very well in the after- 
noon, according to what I was told. 

214 


Evidence for Defence. 


Irene Greenwood 


Of your own knowledge,.was she always interested in what 
went on in the village life?—Yes. She visited the sick people, 
and did whatever she could for the poor. She was very de- 
voted to her children. 

When you came into the room that night she was almost 
dying 1—The second time I went in. The first time I went in 
was about 1, and the second time about 3 o’clock. 

At 1 o’clock she was able to speak to you!—Yes. 

Before her death she asked that Miss Bowater should look 
after her children }—Yes. 

By the Covrt—About what time was that?—She did not 
tell me. 

Cross-examination contimued—Who did she say that to? 
—To Nurse Jones. 

Aiter your mother’s death did you go to Miss Bowater 1— 
No; I went to another aunt. 

And after that did you go to your mother’s brother !—Yes. 

When did you go there?—In October. 

How long after your father married again did you leave 
Rumsey House!—Shortly after. 

And how long did you remain away !—Until Christmas. 

How long had you known Gladys Jones and her sister? 
You have met them once or twice in your life—in June, 1919? 
—Yes. 

Would it be correct to say that up to that time they would 
not be friends of yours!—No. I don’t mean they were 
enemies, but they were not friends in the ordinary manner. 

Have they ever stayed at your house 1—Yes. 

When was that?—In 1918 or 1917. 

By the Covurt—More than once?—Only once. 

Cross-exzamination continued—Which one came to stay; 
Miss Gladys Jones or Miss Gertrude Jones? 

By the Court—Both came to stay once together 1—Yes. 

Cross-exzamination continued—Was your mother there !— 
No. 

Did she know of it?—No. 

She was told after they had been !—Yes. 

Did they come for a week-end !—Yes. 

Did they come for two week-ends!—Yes. 

Did they come one week-end after the other !—Yes. 

And they were invited without your mother’s knowledge? 
—Yes. 

Did you invite them’?—I sent a message. 

How often had you met them!—I had met Gertrude once. 

Did you send a message at your father’s direction !— 
Father wanted Gladys Jones then to stay for a week-end. 
She came and brought her sister with her. 

Did you write Miss Jones to stay for a week-end at your 
father’s suggestion? Can you answer ?—Yes. 


215 


Harold Greenwood. 


Irene Greenwood 


Very well, did you tell your mother !—Yes. 

Did they ever come to your house again during your 
mother’s lifetime /—No. 

Did you see Alice Jones or Gladys Jones on your return 
in June, 1919?—Not that I know of. 

Did you see Miss David !—Yes. 

Did Miss David tell you she heard your mother had been 
very ill?—Yes. 

And that she had heard that from one of the Joneses !— 
From Alice. 

[In reply to the judge, Sir Marlay Samson explained that 
there were three girls in the Jones family, Gladys, Gertrude, 
and Alice. | 

Did you tell Miss David that was not true, and that your 
mother had not been very ill?—Not that I know of. 

You would have known if your mother had been ill ?—Yes. 

Did you know, in consequence of that, Miss David told 
Alice Jones it was not true about your mother !—Yes. 

Did you know your father was angry for her letting Miss 
Alice Jones know that !—No. 

Did he speak to you about it?—No. 

By the Court—You heard that he was angry?—lIt was not 
for that reason, but on account of things she was supposed 
to have said. 

Cross-examination continued—Do you know that your 
father wrote a letter on 5th June to Miss David?—I did 
know of it. 

Did he tell you not to continue your friendship with her? 
—He did. 

Do you say you had burgundy on Sunday, and three or 
four times on week-days ?—Yes. 

If it was hot weather, would you be likely to take it then? 
—Yes. I was advised to take it. 

Do you keep a diary ?—No. 

When did you first have to consider whether you drank 
burgundy or not on that particular day /—After the inquest. 

After the inquest you were directing your mind to what 
you had drunk in the house on that particular day 7—Yes. 

And from the time of the inquest onwards you were dis- 
Seca with your father the events of that particular day? 
—No. 

Were you not?—I do not remember. 

When you knew that the body was to be exhumed it became 
a matter of great importance, did it not ?—Yes. 

Did he talk with you after the date of the exhumation 
about the events of that particular day?—Oh, yes; he talked 
about it. 

_Did he tell you about your mother having taken morphia 
pills ’—Yes. 

216 


Evidence for Defence. 


Irene Greenwood 


Did he tell you that that was what had caused her to die?—Yes. 

How soon after the exhumation did he say that to you!— 
He told me before the exhumation. 

And after the exhumation he again told you?—Yes. . 

On this particular Sunday when your mother died, Miss 
Phillips was at supper !—Yes. 

Was the whisky bottle out!—The decanter was out. 

By the Courtr—An ordinary decanter with a glass stopper 
to it ?—Yes. 

Cross-examination continued—Was there brandy in the 
flask /—Yes. 

At supper-time the flask was on the supper table by your 
mother’s place ?—Yes. 

Do you say that Miss Phillips had wine that night ?—I 
asked her to have wine, and she refused to have it. 

Miss Phillips, I think, was an intimate friend of your 
mother’s !—Yes. 

During the morning you were sitting part of the time on 
the lawn. Were you in sight of the back entrance all the 
time ?7—Yes. 

What were you doing?!—Reading a book. 

And I suppose you were some way away from the back 
entrance of the premises ?—Yes. 

And you would be interested in your book, and would not 
be watching what was happening at the kitchen door ?—No; 
but I could see what was going on. 

Do you mean you were keeping your eyes on the kitchen 
door ?—Yes. 

You would be about 20 yards away?—I was just in front 
of the dining-room window. 

Is it correct to say that your mother had hardly any tea 
on that Sunday? I am asking you if that describes it cor- 
rectly in the light of your father’s statement to the police ?— 
I know she had a cup of tea and some bread and butter. 

For her, would that be, ‘‘ hardly any tea ’’?—No; she 
never had very much. 

At about 5.30 did you and your mother go slowly up the 
garden past the stables?—I don’t remember that. 

And did your mother sit down ?—Yes. 

Did your father sit down with her?—Some of the time. 

Did your mother go into the house to fetch the cloak !—No. 

Did your father meet her, and did they go on as far 
as the stables!—No. 

Did you hear her say that she had a suffocating pain at 
the heart?’—She said she had a pain at the heart. 

And did he bring a chair /—Yes. 

And she sat there for a few minutes ?—Yes. 

Did she then say she was better and would try again ?— 


I do not remember. 
217 


Harold Greenwood. 


Irene Greenwood 


After she had gone about 30 yards did she fall against 
your father and say, ‘“‘ Oh, I can’t go another yard ’’!— 
I don’t remember. 

Did she complain of a frightful pain at her heart ?—She 
said she had a pain. 

Did your father put her on a chair and get some brandy ! 
—Yes. 

Your father had suggested that he should give her some- 
thing that would make her sick ?—Yes. 

And when she had brandy she was not actually sick /— 
No. She felt sick. 

Was it a bottle or a glass he brought it in?—(No answer.) 

When Miss Phillips went away you got your mother to 
bed ?—She had got into bed before. 

Who came back first, Miss Phillips or Nurse Jones ?—Miss 
Phillips, and she was followed later by Nurse Jones. 

Miss Phillips was getting very nervous about your mother ? 
—She was a bit anxious. 

And no doubt you were a bit anxious too !—Yes. 

[Sir E. Marshall Hall made an interjection, and Sir 
Marlay Samson remarked to him: ‘‘ Please do not interrupt 
if you can help it.’’| 

When the nurse came back, you realised that your mother 
was very, very ill?—I did not think she was seriously ill. 

Did you know that there had been a good deal of sickness ? 
—TI had seen some sickness. I thought it was gastric 
sickness. 

The diarrhoea was a good deal worse than any previous 
attack you had seen !—Yes. 

So you realised by that time that she was in a very serious 
condition /—Yes. 

When the nurse came back, did she ask your father to go 
over for the doctor again ?—Yes. 

And he went downstairs for the doctor !—Yes. 

4 Were you sent over afterwards to fetch your father 1—Yes, 
was. 

That was because he was such a long time bringing the 
doctor ?—It seemed a long time. 

And Nurse Jones and Miss Phillips seemed so anxious that 
they asked you to go over?—Miss Phillips was there. Nurse 
Jones was not there. 

I thought you told us that she asked you to go over and 
fetch your father?—I went over for the doctor when Miss 
Phillips and I were alone. 

By the Court—Was it at the nurse’s suggestion that the 
doctor was sent for ?—No. 

Cross-examination continued—Did you go to bed?—My 
mother asked me to go to bed at 11. 

218 


Evidence for Defence. 


Irene Greenwood 


Were you anxious about your mother?—Yes; but I did 
not think she was seriously ill. 
ee did not think that she would die before morning ?— 

5 BO: 

When did you next see your mother again ?—At 1 o’clock 
I was brought into my mother’s room by my father, because 
he was alarmed about my mother’s condition. I remained 
in the room for about twenty minutes. 

During the time you were there did your father go for 
the doctor ?—I do not remember. 

Aiter 11 o’clock, when you went to bed, did you hear any 
sounds in the bedroom ?—No. 

It was not whilst you were there that your father came 
back and said he could not rouse the doctor ?—No. 

Dr. Griffiths certified that your mother died from valvular 
disease of the heart ?—Yes. 

Do you know that as early as October, 1919, there were 
rumours in reference to your mother’s death?—No. I did 
not hear any remarks until the order was made for the 
exhumation of the body. I went away in October and stayed 
in London till Christmas. 

When did your father tell you that he was going to marry 
Miss Gladys Jones !—About two days before he married her. 

It was a great surprise to you?—Yes. 

And a great shock ?—Yes. 

Did you speak to your father when you heard the rumour? 
—I do not remember. He told me that morphia pills had 
caused my mother’s death, and I believed it. 

Did you appreciate whether the question might arise as 
to whether your father was concerned in your mother’s 
death ?—Yes. 

Did you give any information to any one as regards your 
mother’s death?!—Mr. Ludford. 

By the Court—What did you tell Mr. Ludford?!—I don’t 
remember. 

Cross-examination continued—Did it occur to you that in 
your father’s interests you should have attended the inquest, 
and stated what you knew about your mother’s death?—I 
was not asked to. 

- Was it as a result of Mr. Ludford’s advice that you did 
not attend the inquest ? 

Sir E. Marswatt Hati—I object to that question. 

Mr. Justice Surarman—I think the question is on the 
border-line and had better not be put. 

Cross-examination continued—You knew the inquest was 
being held, and you did not attend to make a statement !—No. 

Re-examined by Sir E. Marsnatn Hatu—Why did you 
think your mother died of valvular disease of the heart ?—I 
saw it on the death certificate. 


219 


Harold Greenwood. 


Irene Greenwood 


When did you see the certificate/—My father sent me to 
fetch the certificate from the doctor, and I brought it back 
to him. 

Had your mother been in the habit for a long time of 
taking iron jelloids, No. 2?—Yes. 

[Miss Greenwood having left the box, some discussion 
occurred as to whether Dr. Griffiths should be recalled, and 
Mr. Justice Shearman asked if there were some new theory. | 

Sir E. MarsHatt Hatt—No, no new theory. 

Mr. Justice SazarmMan—Then I think not. I propose to 
hear the speeches on Monday. I do not wish counsel to think 
I am asking them to curtail their speeches, but I do not 
want to sum up at a late hour. ; 

Sir E. Marsnatt Hati—I realise how important it is to 
get to the end of the case on Monday night. There is a 
reasonable expectation of so doing. 

Mr. Justice SHearman—lI hope so, but it is not advisable 
to push the jury late into the day when they are tired. The 
case may not finish on Monday, although I hope it will. 
You both have to speak on Monday, and I am in the dark as to 
what points will be emphasised. It seems to me, apart from 
questions of law, which will be for me alone, that the points 
for the jury are these. The first question will be, was there 
arsenic in the body? Next, was the accused man intention- 
ally responsible for introducing it there? If the jury are 
satisfied he was not responsible for introducing the arsenic 
there, then that is the end of the case. If the jury should 
not think that, then the next question is, did the arsenic he 
introduced in the natural and ordinary course of events 
produce death? If it did, it is murder. If not, it is 
attempted murder. I don’t know whether the prosecution 
has considered that. 

Sir Martay Samson—I quite follow. 

Mr. Justice SHzarman—Did he attempt to poison her, and 
was the attempt unsuccessful? That has probably not come 
to your mind. Assuming a person tried to poison another 
person, and failed, and death results from medicine im- 
properly given, that would be an attempt to murder, and 
not actual murder. I don’t know whether that is going 
to be emphasised or not. The defence may put it that there 
is no attempt at all. 

Sir E. Marsaatn Hatt—My contention is that he never 
administered arsenic at all. 

Mr. Justice SHzarman—lIf he did not, then there is an 
end of the case. 


The Court adjourned. 


Sixth Day—Monday, 8th November, 1920. 


[At the outset Mr. Justice Shearman entered into a con- 
versation with Sir E. Marshall Hall on the question of the 
alleged tampering with the note-book of Superintendent Jones. 
It was impossible to hear the whole of what was said, but 
the purport of it seemed to be that Mr. Justice Shearman 
had satisfied himself that there was no breach of duty by 
any one as far as the handling of the book was concerned. | 


Closing Speech for the Defence. 


Sir E. Marsnart Hatxt—Gentlemen of the jury, in view 
of the fact that I am suffering from an illness, it is probable 
that, after making my speech, I will have to leave the Court. 
I know that you place very great importance on the attend- 
ance of counsel, but I hope that, after this explanation, you 
will be under no misapprehension if I leave. The accused 
man has called evidence, and therefore the last word is given 
to counsel for the Crown. I have absolute confidence that 
Sir Marlay Samson will not take undue advantage of the 
fact that he is the last to speak before the judge’s summing- 
up in this case, and that I cannot again address you. 

No speeches of counsel or summing-up of the judge can 
remove the responsibility from your shoulders. You will 
have to say whether Harold Greenwood is guilty or not guilty 
of the crime charged against him. On Saturday his lordship 
gave utterance to a principle in law which was, of course, 
perfectly sound. In strict law, if you find that Greenwood 
administered arsenic to his wife intending to kill her, and 
if you are not, in fact, satisfied that she died of his adminis- 
tration of the arsenic, then you will be entitled to find 
him guilty of attempted murder. Greenwood’s case is, and 
always has been, ‘‘ I have never given arsenic to my wife, 
knowingly, willingly, feloniously, or at all, and I do not 
depart from that case which has always been that, whatever 
caused my wife’s death, I never administered arsenic to her, 
and I say to the jury I am not guilty, because I never gave 
her arsenic.”’ Your verdict must be based on the actual 
evidence given, and must not be given from sympathy, fear, 
favour, or any other reason. 

It would be idle to deny, either by inference or by a direct 
statement, that the case against Greenwood is this, that at 
or about half-past 1 on Sunday, 15th June, 1919, Harold 

221 


Harold Greenwood. 
Sir E. Marshall Hall 


Greenwood poisoned a bottle of red wine with arsenic—I use 
the word ambiguously for the moment—which the prosecu- 
tion alleges to have been port wine, and that he poisoned it 
with arsenic, and that he did it with the intention that 
each glassful of that wine should contain a poisonous dose, 
that his wife, in consequence of imbibing a poisonous dose 
at lunch, died of it at 3 o’clock the following morning. 

Have you the smallest doubt that that was the case put 
before you on behalf of the prosecution? Gentlemen, 
remember the advantage of the prosecution. They have un- 
limited wealth at their disposal. They have the most skilled 
and the most experienced chemical experts and medical men. 
They have the finest force of detective police. They have the 
whole of the machinery of the law at their disposal; and you 
may fairly assume that when a case like this is started, as 
it was practically, by inquiries in October, 1919, followed 
up by exhumation in 1920, and six weeks’ analytical exami- 
nation by Mr. Webster, a hearing before the coroner which 
lasted two days, on 15th and 16th June, a further hearing 
by the magistrates, which lasted over three days, from Ist 
to 3rd July, 1920—have you any doubt whatever? They 
have taken every possible advice, every consultation has been 
as theoretically and practically exact as possible, and they 
have studied every possible aspect of the case. As a result 
of that, all they have put forward is that on 15th June, 
1919, this wine was poisoned by Greenwood, and that it 
was poisoned and administered at his desire to his wife, 
and as a result of that she died. 

Gentlemen, that case has gone into thin air, and nobody 
realises it more than my learned friend. Attempts were made 
on Friday and Saturday, little tiny attempts, to shift it, but 
the case could not be shifted. We are here to fight that case. 
Two bottles of red wine, made up by Mr. Webster, have been 
produced here to show that arsenic contained in the wine 
does not alter it, and it retains almost the same taste, smell, 
and sight. 

If there is any pathos, any sort of sympathy or feeling 
that could be raised, it must have been raised by the sight 
you saw on Saturday afternoon—a young woman standing 
in the witness-box in a trial of her father for his life. 
Don’t forget that if she loved her mother, as it is admitted 
she did, she would be hardly likely to have a kindly feeling 
for her father, whose hand had done to death the mother 
whom she loved. And yet her evidence puts an absolute end 
once and for all to the case, if you can believe her—if there 
are any of you who heard the girl, who saw the girl and 
watched her under the very stringent, very effective, very 
direct, but very courteous cross-examination of my learned 

222 


Closing Speech for Defence. 
‘ Sir E. Marshall Hall 


friend, who will not believe her? He felt it his duty to test 
the girl’s evidence, and he tested it by the most searching 
cross-examination, and what was the result? He never shook 
her one iota. He got nothing out of her. But he did get 
this—that where the accused says that his statement to the 
police is not accurately reported, she supports him, and not 
the evidence that was in that statement. If you believe 
this witness the case is at an end, because she swears that 
she drank that red wine, which was burgundy, at lunch on 
that Sunday, as she always did, and drank it out of a pink 
glass put on the table by Hannah Williams, and she also 
drank it at supper when her mother was upstairs ill. 

I urge that there was not one tittle of evidence to be 
submitted to you that this poison was administered by Green- 
wood at all, or was ever administered by him with the intent 
to kill his wife. There was not a tittle of evidence, not a 
shadow. What has got to be proved in this case? There 
are five points necessary to prove. First of all, motive; next, 
means and opportunity; fourth, action; and the fifth, death 
directly resulting from that action. In the absence of 
direct evidence of a prisoner having committed the act, the 
evidence may be so super-abundant that it leaves no possi- 
bility of drawing any other inference except that the man 
or woman had a motive for the act. 

To take first the question of motive. You have heard a 
good deal about the Maybrick case. In that case you have a 
woman trying to carry on a liaison with another man, 
anxious to conceal it from her husband, and anxious to 
marry the man—an obvious motive. In the Seddons case 
there was very little direct evidence, but there was evidence 
of administering drinks to the woman all through the night, 
and tampering probably with her medicine; and the motive 
was so overwhelming that one was fighting against a 
mountain of pure prejudice. In that case there was a man 
who had robbed an unfortunate lodger of thousands of 
pounds, who had got an assignment of her property, 
covenanting to pay her an annuity which would cease at her 
death. The motive was so overwhelming that no jury could 
have found any other verdict than that of guilty. 

Where in the name of Providence is the motive here? It 
took more than twelve months to search the whole of Llanelly 
and Kidwelly. There is not a tittle of evidence against Miss 
Gladys Jones or the accused of any relationship that was 
even capable of immoral interpretation. There is no sugges- 
tion of intimacy in the way of sexual intimacy, and, above 
all things, no suggestion of pregnancy, and, so far as we 
know, the good lady is not even pregnant at the present 
time. There is absolutely no motive. This is not the case 

223 


Harold Greenwood. 
Sir E. Marshall Hall 


of a lodger who, by her very conduct, made herself such a 
discomfort in the house, as you know was the case in the 
Seddons case, that anybody might be wanting an excuse to 
get rid of her. This is not a case of the prisoner coming 
in for £1000. This is not a case of a man who has got 
an innocent girl into a certain condition and seeks to marry 
her to make the child legitimate before it is born, getting 
rid of his wife and marrying his mistress. 

The accused has stated that his wife’s income was about 
£900 a year, and that amount is probably understated. 


Mr. Justice SHpaARMAN—I am afraid, Sir Edward, that you 
are stating something which has not come out in evidence. 


Sir E. Marsaatt Hatit—I don’t know whether my lord 
has ever had the responsibility of conducting the defence in 
a case like this. At any rate, he probably has not done so 
under the physical discomfort that I am experiencing at the 
present moment. I submit that the accused said that he 
did, not exactly know what the amount was, but it was £900 
a year at least. Had he been in such a position that he 
would gain £900 a year there would have been overwhelm- 
ing evidence of direct motive. But in this case there is such 
an entire absence of motive that no sane man would have 
undertaken such a risk as this. 

I shall now deal with the purchase of the dressing-bag, 
which Greenwood said had been bought for Miss Gertrude 
Jones. The dressing-case was purchased in December, 1918, 
and Greenwood was asked to go out and select a dressing- 
case with Miss Gladys Jones for her sister, and take it back 
to the Mercury office. There is not a scrap of evidence that 
it was a present from himself to Miss Gladys Jones. Then 
you have the incident of the diamond ring. Greenwood 
was legally entitled to keep his late wife’s jewellery, but 
when Miss Bowater brought it down she suggested that a 
five-stone diamond ring should be given to Irene. Greenwood 
agreed to this, and he passed it to her possession on 16th 
June, 1919. That ring had a sentimental value for Green- 
wood, and he wanted it back. The man who has murdered 
his wife wants back the ring he had given her as an engage- 
ment ring! He himself could not wear it as a ring, and 
he wanted to have it made into a horse-shoe pin which he 
could wear himself. Irene agreed to this on condition that he 
gave her another ring, and she expressed her desire for a 
marquise ring. Then followed the ordering of the ring from 
a London firm of jewellers, but they did not happen to have 
a marquise ring, and a cluster ring was bought instead. The 


intention of converting the diamond ring into a horse-shoe 
224 


Closing Speech for Defence. 
Sir E. Marshall Hall 


pin, was not carried out, and the ring was given back to 
Trene. 

With reference to the diamond ring, ordered by the 
accused from London with the object of giving it to his 
daughter on 12th July, 1919, the accused showed the ring 
to Miss Gladys Jones, and she, woman-like, admired it. 
Greenwood was feeling very lonely at this time, and the 
evidence went to show that there had been considerable trouble 
with Miss Griffiths. The accused had known Miss Gladys 
Jones for twenty years, and he told the Court that they were 
discussing this ring when he realised that he was fond of 
her, and he said, ‘‘ If you become engaged to me you can 
have the ring.’’ Although she took fourteen days to consider 
the answer to the proposal then made, the accused was 
satisfied that she would accept, and he then decided to have 
the ring made to fit Miss Gladys Jones. At that time Miss 
Gladys Jones was engaged to another man in India, and she 
was going to write to ask him to release her before she gave 
the accused his answer. On 27th July, when the answer 
was expected, she had not received the reply from her fiancé. 
She told the accused that she would accept him, and he 
gave her the ring on the 27th. Then at the end of September 
she received a letter from her fiancé. She told the accused 
that he would not release her, and when he came back from 
India there might be trouble. It was therefore agreed that 
they had better get married at once. 

As regards the weed-killer, the accused had in his pos- 
session between 1916 and 1919 enough arsenic to poison the 
whole town of Carmarthen, so you need not trouble your- 
selves about the possession of arsenic. There are 900 yards 
of paths at Rumsey House, and quantities of weed-killer 
were bought from time to time to destroy weeds. Huge tins 
were sent down with specific directions. So far as the pos- 
session of arsenic is concerned, the accused has legitimately 
accounted for it, and no inference from that is to be drawn 
against him. 

Let us come to the question of opportunity. Now we are 
on a quite different platform altogether. I don’t quite know 
what opportunity means. Any man who has been living 
for twenty-two years with his wife has, of course, an oppor- 
tunity to administer arsenic to her if he wants to do so. 
But what does opportunity mean in this case? The only 
bit of evidence of the wine having been tampered with was 
by the girl, Maggie Hannah Williams—‘‘ poor little 
frightened thing! ’’ She had been subjected to a pretty 
heavy flood of questions by the big man, Sergeant Lewis, 
to whom the girl made five or six statements. Not content 
with that, she made another statement to Mr. Haigh, of 

Q 225 


Harold Greenwood. 
Sir E. Marshall Hall 


Scotland Yard. A most dangerous thing for the defence to 
do was to call for the statements of the witness. The defence 
did not know what was in the statements, and when I asked 
that those statements should be produced I was entirely 
ignorant of what they contained. They might contain corro- 
borative statements that were damning, and might make 
my case a very difficult one indeed. But I took the 
responsibility of asking for those statements. I pressed 
Hannah Williams in the witness-box, and she stated that 
she put wine on the table, that it was in a black bottle with 
a label containing the words ‘‘ Port wine.’’ Have you ever 
seen anything labelled ‘‘ Port wine’’ or ‘‘ Sherry wine ’’? 
No; it was a little touch of the domestic servant. Hannah 
Williams swore that she saw ‘‘ Port wine ”’ on that label, but 
it will tax the ingenuity of my learned friend, unless it 
was manufactured for the occasion, to produce a label 
bearing ‘‘ Port wine ’’ on it. 

At first Hannah Williams swore there was only one glass 
put on the table, and then, being pressed, she said she put 
two wineglasses, and that the one put for Miss Irene was 
not used, and that only one glass was poured out for Mrs. 
Greenwood, and that she was positive Miss Irene never tasted 
the wine at all. Of course, her evidence would not be worth 
much if she did not say that. To the police she said the 
whisky was in the decanter, but when I pressed her in order 
to test her recollection, she was positive that it was in the 
bottle. She had said that she poured one glass of wine for 
Mrs. Greenwood, and then added, ‘‘ Mrs. Greenwood helped 
herself to wine.’’? In the statement she made to Mr. Haigh, 
however, she said, ‘‘ I poured out wine at her request, and 
I saw her drink it. I cannot remember if she had one more 
glass or not.’”’ She talked about ordinary wineglasses, but 
who would describe these pink tumblers as ordinary wine- 
glasses? It was not an ordinary wineglass. It was a pink 
tumbler used for a particular sort of wine, namely, bur- 
gundy. There was an obvious discrepancy in her statements. 
On 20th June she was seen again, and on that occasion she 
said she put a bottle of wine by Mrs. Greenwood’s seat and 
a bottle of whisky near Greenwood. It was a crucial point 
in the case as to how much Mrs. Greenwood drank out of 
the bottle, and how much she left in the bottle afterwards. 

In order to give the accused an opportunity to poison this 
wine there must be some evidence to associate him with the 
wine. Hannah Williams comes to the rescue, and says that 
she saw him going into the china pantry, and he stayed there 
for fifteen minutes some time after 12.30. I submit that 
is a story you cannot rely upon. I questioned her on it, 
and perhaps I was roused, and perhaps I raised my voice. 
I am sorry I shouted at her, but I suggest that the woman 

226 


Closing Speech for Defence. 


was lying, and wildly lying, and that he was not fifteen 
minutes in the pantry. Of course he might have gone to 
the pantry, for it was usual for him to go there to wash his 
hands. Am I not justified in raising my voice to a witness, 
when I find her, when I press her in cross-examination, 
sticking to that story when she had made a signed statement 
to Haigh that Greenwood never went twice into the pantry? 
Do you believe it credible that Greenwood would have put 
a bottle of poisoned wine on the table for his wife, at a time 
when two of the children were sitting at the meal, and it 
is also possible that any stranger might have dropped in? 
Let yourselves picture the situation for a moment and re- 
construct the scene. The accused was a solicitor who had 
to make a living by the use of his brains. Is it credible 
that he would have sat with the bottle of poisoned wine on 
the table, when at any moment his wife might say to her 
daughter, ‘‘ Well, Irene, you look pale, take some of this ’’? 
Then was it for him to shout, ‘‘ No, for God’s sake, don’t 
do that’’! If he did not do that, the poison would be 
given to his child. Supposing the mother wanted to give 
the little boy a treat and said to him, ‘‘ Well, Kenneth, 
would you like a little wine in the water?’’ That man 
(pointing to the accused) would have had a fit, and yet it 
is the case for the prosecution that Greenwood poisoned 
that bottle of wine. 

The girl Williams swore absolutely that the accused never 
used the china pantry except on the one occasion when she 
said she saw him there. But it has been fully proved by 
other witnesses that he had been there hundreds of times, and 
she must have been telling an untruth. The suggestion, of 
course, was that he went into the pantry with some weed- 
killer, and there made a solution of weed-killer and wine 
with which to poison his wife later in the day. You must 
remember that there was no other place available or con- 
venient for him to wash his hands after he had come from 
the garden or garage except the china pantry. It was a 
most natural thing that he should use the china pantry when 
he wanted to wash his hands instead of going all the way to 
the bathroom upstairs. 

Fortunately for the defence, the police have called Foy. 
It is true that Foy was called for another purpose, but he 
was able to give overwhelming evidence of what the accused 
had been doing all that morning before the gong went for 
dinner. Hannah Williams said (and in that her statement 
was consistent with truth) that the gong was not rung until 
practically 1 o’clock, and that it was not rung until the meat 
and vegetables were ready to be dished up. She then 
sounded the gong, and sounded it again out of doors, be- 
cause she noticed that Mrs. Greenwood was on the lawn. 

227 


Harold Greenwood. 
Sir E. Marshall Hall 


Foy said that Greenwood was with him during the whole 
of that morning in the garage, and that he was there until 
he heard the gong go. When the gong sounded he saw that 
it was 1 o’clock, and it was then that Greenwood went into 
the house. Therefore, the evidence of Hannah Williams 
as to the china pantry is blown to the winds by the evidence 
of the prosecution itself. There was the question of con- 
fusion as to it being the same Sunday as the Sunday on 
which Hannah Williams said that Greenwood was engaged 
for a quarter of an hour in the pantry poisoning the wine, 
whereas, as a matter of fact, he was throughout the whole 
of that morning, right up to the time of the gong going, 
with Foy in the garage. Hannah Williams talked about 
a wine bottle being missing afterwards. I don’t know 
whether it has been the misfortune of any of you to be in 
a house where there has been a death the night before. At 
any rate, I do not think you will attach any importance 
to the statement that no one knows what became of the bottle 
on the day following the death. 

I suggest that under the circumstances in the house the 
disappearance of the bottle is not important. It will have 
been evident to you that it was very difficult for my learned 
friend to assign any direct action to Greenwood, and he, 
therefore, had to rely on Hannah Williams’s statement as 
to the visit to the pantry and the alleged tampering with 
the wine, and, with the exception of that, there was nothing 
which might be referred to as any direct action on which 
evidence has been given. The prosecution, for that reason, 
has had to go back to Greenwood’s conduct during the day, 
and the extraordinary suggestion has been made that this man 
deliberately delayed and prevented the attendance of the 
doctor upon his sick wife. Here is a man who, it is said, 
was trying to kill his wife by the administration of arsenic, 
and he was anxious that she should die as quickly as possible, 
but what does he do? He is told about 3 o’clock in the 
afternoon that his wife has had some little diarrhea. It 
was an admitted fact that gooseberry tart had always dis- 
agreed with Mrs. Greenwood. Dr. Griffiths, Miss Irene 
Greenwood, and the prisoner had said that the diarrhcea was 
caused by the gooseberry tart. 

But what did that wicked man (pointing to Greenwood) 
in the dock do? He knew better than that. He knew that 
it was caused by the weed-killer, so it is said. Do you think 
that under those circumstances he would have gone for the 
Neate Do you think he would have brought the doctor 

ack 

Mrs. Greenwood had just been sick and had got rid of 
some of the contents of her stomach, which included goose- 
berry skins. He went for the doctor, who came and looked 

228 


Closing Speech for Defence. 
Sir E, Marshall Hall 


at the vomit, and said that she must be put to bed. She 
was taken up to bed, and, in order to keep the doctor on 
the premises so that he should not go back to his house and 
be called out to some other patient, Greenwood took him 
into the garden in order to keep him on the premises during 
the time that the poor woman was being undressed. Green- 
wood called from the garden for Irene Greenwood to ask how 
her mother was, and she replied from the bedroom window 
that she. was a little easier, and it was then he asked the 
doctor to come and play clock-golf with him. It has been 
suggested that on one occasion it was necessary that the 
doctor be again called, and this poisoner, the man who 
wants his wife to die, who wants, at any rate, the secrecy 
that all poisoners want, has a hospital nurse in the bed- 
room, and he has Miss Phillips, the local gossip, in the bed- 
room too. Do you think, if he wanted to poison his wife, 
he would have those people there? Now, forsooth, it is said 
that when he went to the doctor he rang the bell, instead of 
knocking at the door. He thought the bell rang to the 
doctor’s bedroom as a night-bell ought to, but it turned out 
that it rang somewhere else, that it was not an ordinary kind 
of night-bell. It was just a kind of bell that Dr. Griffiths 
would have. 

The nurse went after him, and she knocked at the door 
instead of ringing the bell, and she had an answer. You 
are asked to infer from that that this was a deliberate 
attempt on the part of Greenwood to keep the doctor away. 
Such a suggestion would be ludicrous if it were not such a 
sad and terrible case, and such was the weakness of the case 
for the prosecution that they are bound to rely upon such 
a suggestion as that in the opening of the case. They relied 
upon it as an act of obstruction to prevent the doctor being 
brought in to bring some remedy to Mrs. Greenwood, some 
remedy which even at that hour might have saved her life. 
Is it credible that this man should have gone across to the 
doctor as he did when he had the nurse, Miss Phillips, and 
Irene, and everybody else if he had given his wife arsenic, 
when he would know that Dr. Griffiths, who was a man of 
some medical knowledge and some sense, would see the vomit, 
and have it kept and analysed, and would have found the 
arsenic which accused knew he had given? 

The only evidence of any direct action on the part of the 
accused which was alleged to be naturally consistent with 
his desire that his wife should die was that he kept the doctor 
in the garden to play a game of clock-golf. That was far 
from being an act of obstruction, and was an act of fore- 
thought. Had the doctor left the house and gone across to 
the surgery some one might have called and taken him miles 
away. To my mind, it was evidence of the greatest care and 

229 


Harold Greenwood. 


Sir E. Marshall Hall 


consideration on the part of Greenwood. The suggestion 
was that he took the doctor away from his wife in the early 
morning, while she was in a parlous condition, but that 
was more than accounted for by the natural explanation 
that he could not make the doctor hear by ringing the bell 
instead of knocking at the door. Another point depended 
entirely upon the evidence of the nurse and Miss Phillips, 
who said he was away for a whole hour. But Miss Irene 
Greenwood said herself when she went over for him that 
only ten minutes, or a few minutes, had passed. 

The accused man has deliberately denied that he was talk- 
ing to Miss Griffiths about a honeymoon. You have heard 
a letter written to Miss Griffiths, and you have his explana- 
tion upon it. Have you the smallest possible doubt that this 
explanation is not only the true one, but the only consistent 
one? It was either then or a fortnight before that Miss 
Griffiths took a seat in the car, and she said, ‘‘ I should 
like to go for my honeymoon in the car,’”’ and he said, 
“¢] don’t know that I won’t go for mine.’’ I submit that 
the evidence of Miss Griffiths cannot be relied upon on that 
point, because it is so contrary to all probability that a man 
who had murdered his wife would go down to the sister of the 
doctor, and call her attention then and there to the fact that 
he would soon be a widower. No human being could say 
what the relationship was between Greenwood and Miss 
Griffiths. I accept their statement that there was no impro- 
priety. If they had had their names associated, she 
might have hoped that after Mrs. Greenwood was dead 
she might be the second Mrs. Greenwood. When she heard 
he was going—so unwisely and so foolishly as I believe— 
to marry this other girl at so early a period as October, 
she possibly felt that in Kidwelly, where apparently most 
things were known, even sometimes before they happened, 
there might be some difficulty with regard to keeping her 
reputation. In such a case she would like to be able to 
say that he did not marry her because she would not marry 
him. He then wrote a letter of some importance to her. 
She kept it pretty carefully. It is significant that she kept 
the letter until June, and then handed it in to Mr. Pearce, 
the Treasury prosecutor. 

You will remember that letter of Mrs. Greenwood’s which 
was like a voice from the dead. Mrs. Greenwood told her 
daughter that Miss Griffiths and herself were only on bowing 
terms, and it is possible there might have been some cause 
between these two people. When he went over to her brother 
it was obvious that was the reason of some little delay on the 
part of the doctor. 

How on earth could that be used as evidence of conduct 
on the part of this man which is consistent only with his 

230 


Closing Speech for Defence. 
Sir E. Marshull Hall 


guilt? If you can find facts which are equally consistent 
with his innocence you’ cannot consider them as consistent 
with his guilt, because the law assumes they are consistent 
with his innocence. 

Coming to my fifth point, as to arsenic being the cause 
of death, arsenic is probably more universally distributed 
than any other poison. So dire is it in its effect, and so 
dangerous is it from the point of view of contamination, 
that an Order in Council, which was issued last Friday, 
prohibits the carrying of weed-killer or any arsenic in the 
same van as foodstuffs. Arsenic is a substance of very 
peculiar and somewhat mysterious distribution. It. is so 
absolutely intermixed with bismuth and magnesia that you 
cannot hope to get rid of it. But the chief thing—and Mr. 
Webster and Dr. Willcox admitted it—is that it is most 
adulterated with sulphuric acid and zinc, and that it is 
through sulphuric acid that glucose gets contaminated with 
arsenic; through sulphuric acid malt gets contaminated ; 
and it is through this that they get infinitesimal traces in 
various products which are subject to daily use. It ig not 
known how much arsenic is found in the body normally, 
but it is admitted that small traces of arsenic are found in 
the human body, and that it can be absorbed in many ways. 
In a case in Manchester seventy persons were poisoned by 
glucose in the beer they had drunk. Nobody knew how 
much arsenic would be disclosed in anybody’s viscera. 

[Counsel then described to the jury the methods employed 
in making the Marsh tests for the presence of arsenic, and 
pointed out that they had to consider 1-500th part of a grain. 
This was so minute that no human being could decide upon 
its accuracy without having some reasonable doubt. | 

[Referring again to the Seddons case, counsel said that 
the difference between that and this case was that in the 
Seddons case 2 grains were found, and in this case only 1 
grain. Quoting from the latest edition of Taylor’s Medical 
Jurisprudence, Sir Edward said that there must be unequi- 
vocal proof that there was some rational quantity of poison 
found, something that could be really estimated. | 

This is the first case on record where such a small quantity 
of arsenic has been put forward as consistent with a fatal 
dose. Dr. Willcox, who is an honourable man and a great 
expert, has admitted that this case is on the border-line, and 
that 2 grains is the minimum possible fatal dose. It is 
stated that in the liver there was one-half that amount of 
arsenic that was found in the whole system, and in the liver 
the amount discovered was 1-1700th part of a grain. I do 
not know whether your powers of imagination are sufficient 
to enable you to appreciate what that means. 

231 


Harold Greenwood. 
Sir E. Marshall Hall 


The skin, muscles, and bones were not examined in this 
case, and I contend it is not sufficient to say that the quantity 
of arsenic estimated to have been found in the liver is a 
proper and accurate estimate. I also maintain that, even 
if there was a quarter of a grain in the viscera, it is not 
consistent with death from arsenical poisoning. I do not 
want to quarrel with the honesty of the evidence given by 
the experts, but I do challenge the accuracy of their calcula- 
tions, and I ask you to say that it is not right that a man 
should be sent to the gallows from deductions made from 
observations so minute as I have endeavoured to explain to 

ou. 
‘ The point has been made by the prosecution that the accused 
could have had an opportunity of having an independent test 
of the organs taken from the body, but that is an expensive 
process which is not within the means of an ordinary man. 

This test has covered a period of six weeks. I would 
remind you that Dr. Willcox’s evidence has always been 
given from the point of view of the prosecution. Whatever 
may be the result, the unfortunate man in the dock is a 
ruined man, but he is not to blame for that. Dr. Willcox 
has admitted that he could not find a single symptom which 
was consistent with arsenical poisoning only. If the symp- 
toms were not entirely consistent with the deduction that 
death was due to one cause only, then the presumption is 
entirely swept away. I submit that the presumption on the 
question of symptoms is entirely in favour of the accused, 
and that you must find a verdict for the accused. 

Coming now to the medical evidence, Dr. Griffiths, of Kid- 
welly, who saw Mrs. Greenwood frequently, knew of her 
heart trouble, and knew that she had fainting fits and de- 
pression, and was wasting away. He gave a certificate that 
she died from valvular disease of the heart, but when he 
heard that arsenic had been found he said she had died from 
arsenical poisoning. Under cross-examination at the police 
court by Mr. Ludford, he admitted that he was still left in 
some doubt. Never before in the history of the administra- 
tion of justice in this country has counsel for the Crown 
asked for condemnation for murder on evidence like that. 
Never before has one doctor himself admitted in a case like 
this that he is still in some doubt as to the cause of death. 
I submit that that alone is sufficient to create a doubt, and 
on that no man should convict the accused of having com- 
mitted this crime. Dealing with the evidence of the medical 
experts called for the defence, I would point out that Dr. 
Toogood thinks that Mrs. Greenwood died from morphia. 
Dr. Griffiths, of Swansea, who has a Welsh and English 
reputation, says he has no doubt whatever that this woman 


died from morphia, and that she did not die from arsenical 
232 


Closing Speech for Defence. 


Sir E. Marshall Hall 


poisoning at all. If you believe that, then the case for the 
prosecution fails. yaa 

There is evidence that the vomiting and diarrhoea were 
the natural result of eating gooseberry tart. 

Mr. Justice SazarMan—lI do not think any one has accepted 
it to that extent. The special idiosyncrasy of gooseberry and 
tomato skins was spoken of often. When a thing is referred 
to a hundred times, some one thinks it is admitted. 

Sir E. Marsuatt Hatu—tThe evidence is that Mrs. Green- 
wood herself said to the doctor that she had eaten goose- 
berry tart, which always upset her. It is the evidence for 
the prosecution, and therefore I am entitled to quote it. 

Mr. Justice SHzARMan—I am only objecting to the words 
““ special idiosyncrasy,’’ as applied to Mrs. Greenwood, 
because there was a good deal of evidence by Dr. Toogood 
that he had a special idiosyncrasy, and that he himself was 
affected by the skin of tomatoes. That evidence is not direct 
in regard to Mrs. Greenwood. 

Sir E. Marsuatyt Hati—I say I was absolutely justified in 
assuming, so far as Mrs. Greenwood was concerned, that she 
believed that she had this idiosyncrasy. I hope, my lord, I 
will not be interrupted on another point. 

One of my cardinal points is that if Mrs. Greenwood was 
given this poison between 1 and 1.30, and if she was in good 
health at 5.30, as she apparently was, it absolutely precludes 
the possibility of her having been poisoned at 1 o’clock. 
If the arsenic was given, either intentionally or accidentally, 
to the extent of 1 grain, at 8 o’clock, then, as Dr. Willcox 
admits, every subsequent symptom in this case, including 
collapse and death, would be accounted for. 

Dr. Griffiths, in dealing with the matter before the 
coroner and magistrates, stated that he had prescribed a 
bismuth mixture. It was only by some providence that I 
looked at the blue paper that was handed into Court, and 
discovered that the bismuth mixture to which Dr. Griffiths 
referred was in reality a stock solution prepared by Oppen- 
heim, and that he gave her that stock solution direct from 
the bottle. Dr. Griffiths has admitted that he had this bis- 
muth mixture in his stock bottle in his surgery. He has also 
admitted that he had Fowler’s solution of arsenic. He says 
it is impossible that he could have made a mistake. I agree 
that he said that, but if instead of two spoonfuls of bismuth 
mixture at 8 o’clock, there were given two teaspoonfuls of 
Fowler’s solution, they would contain exactly 1 grain of 
arsenic, or a trifle over. I contend that I am justified in 
suggesting that Dr. Griffiths made an unfortunate mistake 
that was colossal in its results. It is admitted that the bismuth 
mixture would not cause discomfort to the patient. It 
is admitted that arsenic solution would cause some irritation. 

233 


Harold Greenwood. 


Sir E. Marshall Hall 


It is proved in this case that, when Mrs. Greenwood took the 
medicine, she complained that it caught her throat. 

Sir Marutay Samson—Who said that? 

Sir E. MarsHatt Hatu—The nurse, I think it was. 

Mr. Justice SHearmMan—That is substantially right. 

Sir E. Marsnaty Hati—I am not making any allegation 
against Dr. Griffiths. I am submitting that this was a 
mistake on his part. I am not going to submit that there 
was a mistake subsequently with regard to the morphia, 
but with regard to the bismuth mixture I am suggesting 
that the mistake did, in fact, take place. 

If this were a civil action in which damages were asked for 
against Dr. Griffiths for negligence in causing the death of 
a person by the administration of wrong medicine, have you 
any doubt as to what the result would be after Dr. Griffiths’s 
admission in the box? Dr. Griffiths knew that inquiries were 
being made, and on 9th June he wrote out the prescrip- 
tion on a piece of blue paper, and swore that it was a copy 
made from a book which he kept for the purpose of record- 
ing prescriptions. One of these prescriptions was on the 
face of it fallacious, because it was not a prescription at 
all, but merely a component portion of the stock solution 
which he kept. He was told to bring the book after lunch, 
and went away and did not bring it back, and his first 
answer was that the book had been destroyed when he gave 
up business. But he gave up business last December, and 
he said he got the prescription from the book in June. If 
he had the book, why did he destroy it, because he must have 
destroyed it in June? At last it dawned upon the mind of 
this unfortunate man that he might have made a mistake, 
and he was anxious to produce evidence to show what his 
prescription was, and he says to the Court, ‘‘ Why, he had 
a book.’’ Don’t you see the difference? If he had written 
in the book at the time when he was making up this 
medicine, that would have been something to show you that 
he had not made a mistake, and, as I say, if it had been 
a civil action, he would have had something to show, and 
he jumps to that. But when he was tested it was found that 
he had really nothing to show. Would you hang this man 
upon evidence of that kind? 

I am defending a man for his life, and no question of 
protecting witnesses must be allowed to enter my thoughts. 
It is not pleasant for me to say these things. The inference 
that must be drawn is that Dr. Griffiths realised the possi- 
bility, at all events, that he might have made this mistake, 
and for his own protection he was anxious to convince every- 
body that it was impossible that he had given her the wrong 
medicine. If we are going to talk about presumptions, 

234 


Closing Speech for Defence. 


Sir E. Marshall Hall 


which is the more violent presumption—that Dr. Griffiths— 
you know what manner 6f man he is—had made a serious 
mistake, small in its possibility, colossal in its results, or 
that the accused, who had lived on terms of the fondest in- 
timacy with his wife for twenty years, who had his children 
home with him, and who knew that his wife’s fortune would 
go with her, was a cruel and wicked murderer of the wife 
whom apparently he loved, and to whom he owed most of 
the comforts of life which he enjoyed? 

It was admitted that arsenic was found in the body. It 
is not my duty to prove Greenwood’s innocence, or to prove 
to you how the arsenic came into the body. That is the duty 
of my learned friend, who is bound to satisfy you that 
Greenwood had poisoned his wife with arsenic, but I am 
sure that you will look at the possibilities of the case. 
Let us presume that Mrs. Greenwood did have diarrhoea 
shortly after lunch, which would remove some portion of the 
discomfort and pressure. Let us presume that she had a cup 
of tea and a little bread and butter about 4 o’clock. The 
warm fluid would generate gas, which in her state would be 
dangerous, and she would take a little walk in the garden, 
which would again set up fermentation. Instead of passing 
downwards, as on a previous occasion, the contents of the 
stomach came up, and the heart being in a weak state, she 
had a feeling of suffocation in the throat, and a feeling of 
faintness. She sat down and felt slightly better, and she 
was afterwards taken to her bedroom. The exercise of walk- 
ing upstairs started her vomiting again. At 8 o’clock, when 
her whole system was enfeebled, when she was in a most un- 
favourable condition for the administration and absorption 
of poison, if she got two teaspoonfuls of this arsenic mixture 
put down into her stomach, it was instantly absorbed, and it 
instantly set up diarrhea. Then we come to the 1 o’clock 
visit, about which there is a mystery. Why did Dr. Griffiths, 
who remembered everything else so well, not remember that 
visit? I would suggest to you why. Because he knew at 
1 o’clock this lady’s condition was desperate, and I submit 
to you that at 1 o’clock some sort of suspicion may have 
crossed his mind that she had accidentally taken a dose of 
arsenic or some other kind of poison sent by him in mistake. 

I do not suggest that the giving of half a grain of morphia 
would be a dangerous thing. I do not suggest that, but I 
go further. I am prepared to admit that if the doctor’s 
object were to give the patient sleep he might have been 
perfectly justified in giving her half a grain of morphia. 
To his credit, be it said, that he went away, and he gave 
Mrs. Greenwood two pills, and he said the directions were on 
the box. But, God help us if the directions on the 
box were the directions put on the piece of paper, 

235 


Harold Greenwood. 
Sir E. Marshall Hall 


because I can’t understand how the nurse would have been 
able to understand them. 

Dr. Griffiths had never meant to give Mrs. Greenwood 
pill opi., because he would have known that one pill opi. 
containing a twentieth of a grain of morphia would have been 
of little use to send her to sleep. You will remember that the 
evidence was that as the result of the pills Mrs. 
Greenwood went to sleep within ten minutes. That would 
have been impossible if they were opium pills, and there is 
not a medical man in Wales who can go into the box and 
say that morphia and opium are indistinguishable terms. 
Dr. Griffiths meant to give the poor lady half a grain of 
morphia. That would have sent her into a peaceful sleep. 
The mistake was to give her the two pills at once, and.the 
effect of that was to complete the work that had been com- 
menced by the 8 o’clock dose of Fowler’s solution. Any 
chance she ever had of recovery at 1 o’clock from the Fowler’s 
solution was entirely taken away by the administration of 
a whole grain of morphia instead of half a grain. Dr. 
Toogood and Dr. Griffiths, of Swansea, both think that she 
did, in fact, die of morphia, and not from arsenical poison- 
ing. 

On this part of the case I have said all there is to be 
said about it, and upon that you cannot convict this man, 
but there are one or two matters which are of minor import- 
ance. There is the police action. Of course, the police had 
to get evidence. They began to get evidence, as you know, 
on 24th October. They interviewed Hannah Williams, Nurse 
Jones, Miss Griffiths, and Miss Phillips. 

One of the mysteries of this case is why, if the police 
made inquiries on 24th October, the exhumation was put off 
until April. There was no explanation offered of that, but 
it was quite clear that at Kidwelly the accused had done 
an unpardonable thing. He had broken the custom and 
married within twelve months of his first wife’s death ; there- 
fore there must be something wrong. So within three weeks 
the police were on the hunt for evidence. 

As men of the world, do you believe you have had the 
whole truth from Nurse Jones? I suggest that there were 
many things that could have been told if she had been so 
minded. The whole keynote of Nurse Jones is that she is 
dependent on medical men for a living. It is not part of 
her duty to criticise doctors’ prescriptions, or talk about 
what doctors gave their patients, but had she known that she 
was giving Mrs. Greenwood two half-grains of morphia at 
: o’clock in the morning she would not have given them to 
er. 

I have dealt with Hannah Williams’s evidence, and not 


any detail of it was important. You have heard the evidence 
236 


Closing Speech for Defence. 


Sir E. Marshall Hall 


of Miss Phillips, which I say was of infinitesimal value, and 
you have heard Miss Griffiths. Greenwood himself has told 
you the truth. It is a cruel thing to ask an alleged murderer 
to go into the box, and then to say, ‘‘ Everything he says 
is a lie.”’ This man is accused of murder, and until 
you find him guilty he is an innocent man, and he not only 
swears that his wife was in a serious condition, but he wanted 
to consult a specialist. 

If Greenwood was telling the truth, and Martha Morris 
was telling the truth, that, in point of fact, this good lady 
was anxious herself about the possibility of Mrs. Greenwood 
being seriously ill, when Miss David wrote to say she was not 
ill at all, was he not likely to write to her and say that the 
statement that his wife was not ill was untrue? It was 
really not a case of the illness of his wife, but the denial 
of her illness, which inferentially made him a liar. With 
regard to the police note-book, I would point out that there is 
really nothing in the incident, but I consider that Superin- 
tendent Jones has been very indiscreet in regard to interview- 
ing the accused during the time that he (the superintendent) 
was being examined and cross-examined at the police court. 
On the whole, it is impossible to make any point for or 
against the accused upon the discrepancies which appear in 
the statement and the subsequent evidence. I venture to 
think that it is impossible that that statement could have 
been made in the form in which it is produced. 

There is only one other point. I have said that Greenwood 
is a solicitor. He is a man who would know that arsenic 
was a poison that produced distressing symptoms, that its 
course was always the same—that it prolonged opportunity 
for examination, and after death it remained in the body 
indefinitely ; above all, from a poisonous point of view there 
was no more futile poison employed, because of its peculiar 
property of preserving the contents of the stomach and body, 
so that even after a lapse of years the body could be exhumed 
and the arsenic detected and the crime brought home. Apart 
from all other circumstances, do you think it is likely that 
the accused would want to poison his wife by employing 
arsenic when he had got a woman not likely to live, and there 
were many other soporific poisons which could be used in 
proper doses with the greatest possible effect ? 

I have done my best as any honest professional man would. 
I would not have been here under ordinary circumstances, 
but the accused is a member of my profession. I have 
achieved some small measure of reputation as to knowledge 
of this class of case, and the accused, as a member of my 
profession, demanded my services. 

At a criminal trial in Scotland it is often said that the 
verdict is ‘‘ Not proven,” and it is a pity that that verdict 

237 


Harold Greenwood. 


Sir E. Marshall Hall 


is not available in England. We call it ‘‘ Not guilty.’ 
It is for the prosecution beyond all reasonable doubt to prove 
that the accused drugged the wine on Sunday afternoon, 
that he caused it to be taken by his wife, meaning to kill 
her, and that she died as a result of that action. : 

If you are of opinion that there is no evidence against 
him, as I submit there is not, you will have no hesitation 
and will require no time for consideration before you find 
a verdict of ‘“‘ Not guilty.’’ If, on the other hand, you 
think there are little things that may be twisted into a 
scintilla of evidence, among this jealousy and surmise and 
scientific opinion, camouflaged as scientific evidence, you 
will discuss it. You have got to have evidence that this 
man administered the arsenic to this woman, knowing that 
he had all to lose by doing it, and nothing to gain, and in 
the absence of any possible motive to suggest why he should 
do so. If you are satisfied he did it, and you are certain 
you can put your hand on your heart and say, if that man 
was standing on the execution platform, you would draw 
the lever to launch him into eternity, then you will find him 
‘* guilty ’’; but if you are not satisfied, and feel that the 
doubt is so strong that it is impossible for you to put your 
finger upon any piece of evidence that overrides it, you are 
bound to say he is not guilty. 

Your verdict is final, necessarily final. Science can do a 
great deal. These men with their mirrors, multipliers, and 
milligrams, can tell you to the ten-thousandth or the 
millionth part of a grain the constituents of the human 
body. Science has enabled us to talk from here to thousands 
of miles away without any intervening wire or visible means 
of communication. Science has enabled us to kill thousands 
and tens of thousands by obnoxious gases, and can enable 
us to blow Carmarthen to pieces with one little explosive. 
But science cannot do one thing: that is, to find the vital 
spark which converts insensate clay into a human being. 
Once the life is gone out of a man, be it as a result of 
a jury’s verdict of murder, or be it by any other cause, 
life is at an end, and no power of science can replace it. 
Science is powerful to destroy life, and many inferences can 
be drawn from science. 

In this case it means something more than life. Upon 
your verdict depends the reputation of the children. What 
think you of this, if in the days to come these children 
are pointed at and it is said, ‘‘ These are the children of 
Greenwood, the man who murdered their mother’? I am only 
emphasising the necessity of deliberate action. Do not be 
led astray. [Sir E. Marshall Hall then alluded to the figure 
of Justice holding the scales. At this stage the accused bowed 
his head to his knees, and was not visible in the dock for 

238 


Closing Speech for Defence. 


Sir E. Marshall Hall 


some moments.] You must be satisfied that one of those 
scales, the scale for the prosecution, has fallen before you can 
be satisfied that this man is guilty. I ask you to remember 
the scene in ‘‘ Othello,’’ where the jealous Moor made up his 
mind to kill Desdemona :— 

Othello enters Desdemona’s chamber, makes up his mind 
to kill her relentlessly, for he believes her to be unchaste, 
and seeing her lying there he thinks of the effect of killing 
her as compared with putting out her light, and he says: 
“* Put out the light,’’ and then he puts out the light. 


If I quench thee, thou flaming minister, 

I can again thy former light restore, 

Should I repent me: but once put out thy light, 
Thou cunning’st pattern of excelling nature, 

I know not where is that Promethean heat, 
That can thy light re-lume. 


Are you by your verdict going to put out that light? 
Gentlemen of the jury, I demand at your hands the life and 
liberty of Harold Greenwood. 


Closing Speech for the Prosecution. 


Sir Maruay Samson—Gentlemen of the jury, when I opened 
this case to you almost a week ago, I told you it would 
require your very closest and prolonged attention. You have 
followed every detail with great concentration, and this has 
caused much satisfaction to those who are concerned in the 
case, but I am sure that there is no one who would begrudge 
one moment of that long time if it has been spent in arriving 
at a true and just conclusion. 

My duty at the close of the case will be to put before you 
on behalf of the Crown such observations as will assist you 
to come to the conclusion that the prosecution has proved 
that Harold Greenwood was guilty of the murder of his wife. 

It must be an immeasurable satisfaction to all concerned 
in the case to feel that the interests of the accused have 
been so worthily safeguarded as they have been throughout 
the whole of the case by my learned friend who has just 
addressed you. My learned friend has a unique reputation 
in the Courts of this land in defence of those who are 
accused of grave crimes. By his eloquence, his unflagging 
zeal, and by his masterly conduct of this case, my learned 
friend has not only amply discharged the duty which he 
owed to the accused, but he has added further renown to that 
great reputation which he has at the English bar. 

I am quite grieved, as I am sure everybody else in this 
case is grieved, if by the strain of this long inquiry his 

239 


Harold Greenwood. 


Sir Marlay Samson 


health has constrained him to withdraw his presence here; 
so far as I am concerned, in presenting the case for the 
Crown the very fact that that is so will make me more 
than ordinarily careful that I present it to you in a right 
and proper form. 

It is a matter of some difficulty in a case of this great 
length to appreciate how, as counsel for the Crown, one may 
best assist the jury. I can say that, in a case of this 
character, and in all cases where counsel appear for the 
Crown, the duty of counsel is to assist the jury in every 
way that may be right and proper to arrive at a true 
conclusion. It will be my duty to satisfy you, if I can, that 
the defence put forward on behalf of the accused is not an 
answer to the charge, preferred by the Crown, and is not an 
answer to the evidence which now stands against him. When 
I opened this case I told you that this would be a case which 
you would have to try on indirect evidence. The crime of 
poisoning is essentially a crime which is performed in secret, 
and so I invite you not to allow your judgment to be diverted 
by an endeavour to concentrate on one particular matter 
which occurred on the day in question. I ask you to look at 
the whole events of that day, and also the events that preceded 
and followed that day. It is of great assistance to me in 
this case that his lordship should have indicated three 
suggestions to which I understand he will specially invite 
your attention. I have been placed in a difficulty in that my 
learned friend followed another procedure, and marshalled 
events in a different order, and did not put them in precisely 
the same order as I intend to deal with them. 

I shall deal with the three questions raised by my lord, 
and then examine the evidence as it now stands in the light 
of those three questions. The first is—was there any arsenic 
in the body? the second—did the accused Greenwood inten- 
tionally cause it to be there? and the third—did the arsenic 
in the ordinary course of events cause death? I will outline 
what the three answers to those questions ought to be in 
view of the evidence that has been given. In answer to the 
first question it is now admitted, as I understand it, that 
there was arsenic in the body, but it is alleged by the defence 
that it was wholly insufficient to cause death. In answer to 
the second question, the defence say that in any event the 
accused did not put it there; and in answer to the third 
question, as I understand it, the defence now say, ‘‘ No; she 
died from morphia poisoning.”’ 

Proceeding to examine these questions—with regard to the 
first, it is a physical fact beyond all dispute that arsenic 
was there. Mr. Webster has demonstrated that to your satis- 
faction. That being so, you have next to consider whether the 
accused intentionally caused it to be there. That is a 

- 240 


Mr. and Mes, Greenwood. 


Closing Speech for Prosecution. 


Sir Marlay Samson 


big question, involving.a large variety of other questions. 
First of all, had it got there from natural causes? By that 
I mean the proposition advanced by Dr. William Griffiths, 
of Swansea, that everybody had arsenic in their bodies. 
Secondly, did it get there by accident? By that I mean 
did it get there either by inhalation—a proposition which 
I believe has now been abandoned by the defence—or through 
glucose in some food, or by what I shall call the theory of 
Fowler’s solution ? 

These are the three theories that have been suggested by 
the defence in support of the idea that the arsenic had been 
present by accident. The first thing you have to do to find 
the answer is to make up your minds as to what is the 
amount of arsenic found in the various organs after death, 
and what is the amount believed to be in the body at the 
time of death. I agreed with my learned friend that the 
amount of arsenic that could be seen by the naked eye was 
the minute particle of 1-120th part of a grain on the 
mirror, and Mr. Webster said that he got also a certain 
amount which he had also extracted from the liver. You 
have to start at the fact that the amount of arsenic ever 
visible to the human eye was intensely small; but, having 
ascertained both by the mirrors and the weighing test, that _ 
the amount in the organs was .275 of a grain, Mr. Webster 
drew the inference that there was a grain or thereabouts 
in the body at the time of death. As a further proposition 
it is asserted that if there was a grain or thereabouts in 
the body at the time of death, the proper and legitimate 
inference is that there were 2 grains in the body before 
death, and 2 grains are a fatal dose. 

Some criticism has been made as to the way Mr. Webster 
arrived at his figures. It is quite clear that my learned 
friend has the highest respect for Mr. Webster, and regards 
him as the highest type of witness that could be brought 
before you, but he challenged Mr. Webster’s accuracy in 
two respects : one was that his mirrors had not been measured. 
Mr. Webster replied to that, that while they had not been 
measured by any scientific instrument, they were as near, 
humanly speaking, in size and bore as it was possible for 
such things to be. 

Then it was said that the samples he had taken from the 
organs did not represent the whole of the organs. Mr. 
Webster replied to that, that he had taken parts from 
different places of each organ, and that is the best method of 
securing the best samples of the whole organs. Mr. Webster 
not only applied the mirror test, but the weight test with 
regard to the liver, and by these two processes he got the 
same results, and therefore he is entitled to infer that his 
process and his reckoning are correct. 

R 241 


Harold Greenwood. 


Sir Marlay Samson 


In the case of all the other organs Mr. Webster has checked 
his mirror results by other experiments, and they have all 
agreed. Furthermore, Mr. Webster has told you that, in 
order absolutely to prevent any over-calculating of the total 
amount in the organs, he had calculated each mirror from 
the standard mirror that was next below the standard mirror 
that matched the Greenwood mirrors. In that way there 
was no danger of over-calculation, but, even after having 
done that, he got a total of 0.245 of a grain on analysis. 
Against all that you have only the mere word of Dr. Toogood 
that he did not think Mr. Webster right. 

What is the next point you have to consider? It is the 
evidence of Dr: Willcox. No one could have been spoken 
of in higher terms than my learned friend spoke of Dr. 
Willcox, and I think you will have been impressed by that 
witness’s thoughtfulness and clearness in all that he said. 
It is not too much to say that you had before you the assist- 
ance in this matter of the most distinguished men in the 
kingdom. My learned friend made one observation that I 
regret should have been made as to Dr. Willcox having acted 
only for the Crown in cases of arsenical poisoning. It was 
the duty of the Crown and the Home Office, who were 
responsible in these cases, to assist you, who had ultimately 
to make inquiries in this matter. How could the Home 
Office and the Crown best assist you but by putting at your 
disposal the most scientific men known to exist in the king- 
dom? You have had Dr. Willcox and Mr. Webster. They 
knew nothing about the human organs until they came into 
their hands. They were asked to make certain inquiries, 
and they made them free from any interest in the case, free 
from any taint of prejudice in the matter. They came there, 
sent down on behalf of the Crown, as being those responsible, 
and who were best able to aid you in unravelling difficulties. 
Their evidence stands before you uncontradicted, and I am 
sure you will accept it. 

Dr. Willcox said they had to take Mr. Webster’s quarter 
of a grain, and his experience showed him that 1 grain was 
absorbed in the muscles and other parts of the body. He 
said that, from his knowledge of the particular case he had 
investigated, there was that amount in the liver, spleen, and 
kidneys, and he was able to make a deduction in respect of 
the amount that was in Mabel Greenwood. He knew, of 
course, from Mr. Webster’s analysis that from some organs 
of Mabel Greenwood, the liver, spleen, and kidneys, the 
amount was 9.30, and he compared that with the 13.47 in 
the same organs as in the Seddons case. He further knew 
the amount was 2.5 grains. If by scientific inference, which 
he was entitled to make, he drew the conclusion that in the 
body of Mabel Greenwood there was a grain or three-quarters, 

242 


Closing Speech for Prosecution. 


Sir Marlay Samson 


if Dr. Willcox was right in starting with a quarter of a 
grain, as found by Mr. Webster, his practical knowledge 
and experience in this matter enabled him to say there must 
have been a grain or three-quarters in the body at the time 
of death, then they asked themselves what amount of it was 
taken in the body during life? They had to rely upon Dr. 
Willcox in respect of that. He told them he formed an 
opinion that at the time of death, with a grain or three- 
quarters of a grain, or thereabout, there would have been 
approximately 2 grains before death in the body. How did 
he account for the absence of the other grain? He said, 
““ My experience in this case enables me to say that the 
sickness and diarrhoea, which occurred in her lifetime, 
carried away a large part, and there would have been at least 
Se carried away, and approximately a grain left in the 
fe) ys" 

I think as regards this particular proportion Dr. Toogood 
agreed with Dr. Willcox. If that is so, the first question 
you will have to ask yourselves is: Is it proved to your satis- 
faction that 2 grains or thereabouts were in the body of 
Mabel Greenwood before death, and is it proved to your satis- 
faction that 2 grains was approximately a fatal dose? 

Both Dr. Toogood and Dr. Willcox agreed it was, and I 
submit therefore that you have no difficulty, on the scientific 
evidence, in coming first to the conclusion that there was 
an amount of arsenic in the body at that particular time, 
and that 2 grains were administered, and that 2 grains were 
a fatal dose. 

If you accept that, you have to examine the next question. 
How did it get there? This is not a matter of oratory, but 
of scientific investigation, and I have to satisfy you that there 
was evidence which proved that the amount of arsenic taken 
on the fatal day was the amount which caused her death. 
It has been put forward that it was there either from a 
natural cause or from an accident. Two theories of accident 
have been put forward, one that it was there from inhalation, 
and the other that it was there from eating such foodstufis 
as contain glucose. Then there is the third theory of having 
taken Fowler’s solution. 

You have to consider whether you will accept one set of 
experts or the other set. Dr. Toogood admitted that he 
only had experience of one case of arsenical poisoning, and 
that was fifteen years ago; and Dr. Griffiths, of Swansea, 
has never made a post-mortem examination of a single body 
of a person who had died through arsenical poisoning. At 
the same time, Dr. Griffiths has put forward the extra- 
ordinary proposition that human bodies may possibly con- 
tain as much as 5 grains of arsenic. Mr. Webster, an ex- 

243 


Harold Greenwood. 


Sir Marlay Samson 


pert constantly engaged in examining human bodies for all 
kinds of poisoning, has stated that normally you would only 
find one-thousandth part of a grain in the ordinary human 
body. You have to consider whether if the poison was not 
there from natural causes, was it there from accidental 
inhalation ? , 

If the poison was not there from natural causes, was it 
there by accident? It is a very strange thing that Mrs. 
Greenwood should have been the only person in the whole 
household and in the whole neighbourhood of Kidwelly who 
had partaken of a single article of diet containing glucose 
which was said to have contained arsenic. I submit that 
you can dismiss that theory from your minds. The theory 
that she died as the result of having had administered 
to her Fowler’s solution has only been put forward by 
the defence at a late stage of the trial. When Dr. Griffiths, 
of Kidwelly, gave his evidence, no such question was put to 
him in cross-examination. It is an eleventh-hour theory. 
When Dr. Toogood put forward the inhalation theory he 
admitted that he only thought of it a couple of days before, 
and it was only put to Dr. Griffiths at a very late stage 
that he administered Fowler’s solution instead of bismuth. 
It was grasping at something which enabled an explanation 
to be given how a quarter of a grain of arsenic came into 
this lady’s body. Dr. Griffiths, of Kidwelly, denied that he 
ever made such a mistake as was alleged. 

Mr. Justice SHearMan—That was not suggested until the 
fourth day of the trial. It was on Friday morning that 
bombshell appeared. 

Mr. Trevor Hunter—Dr. Willcox stated that at least nine 
hours elapsed between the dose and the death, and that from 
the evidence and the symptoms it would probably be taken 
between 1 p.m. and 6 p.m., assuming that it was taken in 
one dose. 

Mr. Justice SHzaRMan—That is where I got it. It is nine 
to fourteen hours. 

Sir Maruay Samson—I quote the following from the 
evidence of Nurse Jones :—‘‘ A dose of bismuth mixture had 
been given before I got there. Greenwood told me that 
the medicine was catching the back of the throat. I did 
give her a dose of medicine. I tasted it, and it had no 
effect upon me then, and I thought it was all right.’’ I 
submit, therefore, that on the evidence it is quite clear 
that Fowler’s solution was not administered. The nurse 
tasted the medicine and suffered nothing. 

I submit that there was no foundation for the statement 
that the arsenic was in the body by a natural cause. The 
suggestion that it was there by inhalation was disposed of, 
and the suggestion that it was there by the consumption of 

. 244 


Closing Speech for Prosecution. 


Sir Marlay Samson 


glucose was entirely negatived by the absence of any similar 
case in the neighbourhood and in the house. I submit, there- 
fore, that the assertion that the deceased might have died 
from the Fowler solution was entirely disposed of by the 
doctor and the scientific fact, and by the nurse who tasted 
the medicine. 

[The official shorthand writer at this stage, quoting from 
his shorthand notes, stated that the nurse said, ‘‘ Because 
Mrs. Greenwood complained that the medicine was catching 
her by the throat.’’] 

Mr. Justice SHzarMan—That shows how difficult it is to 
take down a note without a shorthand writer. Thank you, 
Mr. Towle. 

Sir Martay Samson—I am now going to deal with a 
question of vital importance, afiecting the time and the 
particular way this dose was taken. You have got to get, 
first of all, at the amount of arsenic in the organs which 
were examined, and the amount of arsenic in the body before 
death. You have got to judge as to how it could have got into 
the body by any of the processes suggested by the defence. On 
behalf of the Crown, I am going to submit that it got into 
the body through being criminally administered. Dr. Will- 
cox has told you that it must have been given by the mouth, 
and he gave as his reason for saying so that 6.08 milli- 
grams of arsenic were found in the stomach, gullet, and 
intestines. 

I submit that you can dismiss altogether the suggestion 
that Mrs. Greenwood took Fowler’s solution, because the 
medicine given was tasted by the nurse and she felt no after- 
effects, and I ask you to entertain the suggestion that the 
arsenic was administered criminally. 

It was suggested that the mechanical irritation set up by 
the gooseberry skins would pass away with the removal of 
the skins from the bowels, but with regard to mineral poison 
Dr. Willcox has stated that the mineral remains in the 
organs, and death ensues by the organs ceasing to function. 
When you decide whether the irritation had arisen from 
gooseberry skins or from poisoning you have to consider the 
conclusive fact that the mineral poison arsenic was in fact 
found widely distributed throughout the organs. 

When you find that there was a dispute and a difference 
of opinion as between two medical men, and when you find 
that the view of one of them was borne out by the discovery 
of arsenic in the body, then I suggest that the conclusion of 
that particular doctor was the right conclusion, and that 
conclusion was come to by Dr. Willcox. 

Dr. Willcox proved that the post-mortem showed no other 
causes of death. He proved that there was a quarter of a 
grain of arsenic in the organs, widely distributed. He 

245 


Harold Greenwood. 


Sir Marlay Samson 


proved that the extent of the vomiting and the diarrhea 
and the lapse of time between the giving of the dose and 
the death accounted for no more than a quarter of a grain 
of arsenic found in the organs, and that if there was a 
grain or thereabouts found in the body there would have 
been 2 grains administered during lifetime, and that 2 
grains was an approximate fatal dose. 

Do you accept that view? Dr. Willcox has been referred 
to in the highest possible terms by my learned friend, and 
therefore I do not think it necessary to say much about him. 
But if you have accepted his conclusion that she died from 
arsenical poisoning, you will then have to come to the really 
vital matter in the case: How did the arsenic get there? 
I believe he has been able to satisfy you that it could 
not have got there by any of the theories raised by the 
defence. If you eliminate those theories, it is quite clear 
from Dr. Willcox’s evidence that it was given by some one. 
Was that some one outside or inside Rumsey House? I 
believe you can exclude the possibility of some one outside 
Rumsey House by sounding the evidence as to the time at 
which the dose must have been given. If you accept Dr. 
Willcox’s evidence that it was given some time between 1.30 
and 6 o’clock in the afternoon, you know Mrs. Greenwood 
was in the house or in its grounds throughout that time. 

The next question is, how was it administered? On that 
point I think that science will again assist you considerably. 
A certain amount was found in the gullet and stomach, 
and that proves that it was given by the mouth in some food 
or drink that afternoon. Was it in food? You can exclude 
that, because you know that the same food was taken by the 
servants and the children. My learned friend has suggested 
that it is not open to me to put to you that the arsenic had 
been put into anything but the wine. I dissent from that 
view. Mrs. Greenwood had on that day taken wine, medicine, 
tea, and brandy, and it is open to me to suggest that either 
or all these things may have contained a dose of poison. 
Then there was some difference of opinion as to what kind 
of wine was drunk that day. Was it Beaune, was it port, 
or was it Reo wine? Miss Irene said it was Beaune, and 
that she drank it. There was Beaune in the house that 
day. You know that on the previous day (Saturday) Mrs. 
Greenwood went to the Phoenix Stores and bought one bottle 
of Reo wine, which is of a burgundy character. If there 
was Beaune in the house, why should Mrs. Greenwood go 
on a Saturday to buy one bottle of Reo? 

Does it not suggest itself to you that she wanted that wine 
for consumption on the Sunday? If she had Beaune in the 
house already the presumption is that she would not have 

246 


Closing Speech for Prosecution. 


Sir Marlay Samson 


bought that single bottle on the Saturday. If, however, 
Mrs. Greenwood had bought that one bottle of Reo wine, 
she would take it back and give it to the servant, who would 
put it in the cupboard in the dining-room. The servant said 
it was port wine, but that could be explained by the fact that 
the red wine bottle was the same shape as a port wine bottle, 
and you have seen the two bottles for yourselves. It is quite 
true that there are some discrepancies in Hannah Williams’s 
evidence, which make some of her evidence undoubtedly 
unreliable. But she never varied from the important 
statement that about 12.30 on that day she saw the accused 
going to the china pantry and then into the dining-room. 
It is true that Foy said that the accused was at the 
garage when the gong went, but if you turn up Foy’s real 
words in his evidence you will find that he says that the 
accused was with him ‘‘ more or less’”’ all that morning. 

Mr. Trevor Hunter—In re-examination Foy said that the 
prisoner was with him the whole time until the gong went. 

Mr. Justice SHzarmMan—I have that somewhere in the 
evidence. I am going to read it to the jury to-morrow. 

Sir Martay Samson—I have it here quite clearly that 
Foy said Greenwood was not with him all the time. Although 
Hannah Williams had in October and June undoubtedly 
made inaccurate statements, the errors were with regard to 
the points as to whether Greenwood was once or twice in the 
china pantry, and whether she poured out wine or some one 
else. She, however, has stuck to the important points that 
she did see the accused go into the china pantry at the 
material time, and that after the bottle had been put out 
for supper that night she never saw the bottle again. 

I will now deal with Miss Irene Greenwood’s evidence 
where it is in conflict with Hannah Williams’s story. I am 
glad to know that my learned friend appreciated that in 
cross-examining Miss Greenwood I was placed in a position 
of great difficulty, but it had become a matter of very great 
importance to test the accuracy of her evidence that she 
tasted wine that day. As to the wine, it is important to 
notice that on that particular day Miss Phillips, who was 
at supper, said she saw no wine there. Miss Irene Green- 
wood said she drank wine at supper as well, but Miss 
Phillips gave as a reason why the wine was not there, that 
if there had been she would have had some. That is a 
good reason for her to remember that there was no wine. 
Miss Florence Phillips is corroborated in a certain sense 
by Miss Greenwood, because she admits and acknowledges 
that there was a straw flask containing brandy by her 
mother’s place at supper. It is a matter to consider 
whether Irene is right when she pledged her oath that she 


drank burgundy on that particular night. ize 


Harold Greenwood. 


Sir Marlay Samson 


Speaking for the Crown, it is impossible for us to know 
the reason for this lady’s habit of keeping bottles of medicine 
about in the room. I was not in a position to explain 
to you in my opening statement that such bottles existed 
which might afford a medium by which the fatal dose could 
be administered. There is no direct evidence that I can 
give you in respect to the tea, except that the experts said 
that that particular poison could be put into a cup of tea, 
and it would not be tasted or seen. 

Now we come to the fourth thing that the lady drank on 
that day, and that was her drink of brandy. The brandy, 
as you know, was kept in a straw flask, and was apparently 
available on the Sunday, because on that day at supper time 
the servant who laid the supper said there was a straw 
flask on the table. It seems, however, that the accused 
brought out a new bottle on to the lawn and uncorked it 
on the lawn. Is not that remarkable? Why should he take 
a new bottle and carry it out when there was brandy avail- 
able in the flask? You remember the evidence that the 
accused gave in respect to the bottle of brandy, and that 
when Irene Greenwood was asked whether she had any know- 
ledge of any such bottle being taken out she could not say 
anything about it. 

I point that out to you as a particular way in which 
Greenwood .might have given her arsenic on that day. I 
have endeavoured to eliminate the various possibilities in 
this case. I have tried to show the jury how there were 
certain articles of drink that must have been taken by her 
on that day, and there were unquestionable opportunities 
in respect of them on the part of the prisoner. 

Before I pass away from the brandy there is one little 
point I must call your attention to. According to the case 
as it now stands against the accused, up to 6 o’clock or 
5.30 there had been no sickness and no diarrhea. You 
will remember in the police statements there was diarrhcea 
at 3.30. It is one of the statements I challenge. The 
sickness began after brandy Greenwood had given her 
some time after 5.30. He went in and got the brandy. 

Mr. Trevor Hunter—He said, ‘‘ About 3.30 she came to 
me and complained of diarrhea.’’ He did not say he told 
the police. 

Mr. Justice SuzarmMAn—The question of diarrhoea was 
mentioned in cross-examination, and Dr. Willcox said he 
expected vomiting and diarrhea. 

Sir Marnay Samson—I wish to be quite frank. The 
Crown cannot prove, and do not profess to prove by evidence, 
the way in which the arsenic was given. That is one 
of the things which, of necessity, you have got to infer 
from the whole of the evidence. It would need an eye- 

248 


Closing Speech for Prosecution. 


Sir Marlay Samson 


witness for it to be proved to you quite distinctly that 
poison was administered, and an eye-witness in cases of 
polsoning you never get. What I do say is this: what the 
Crown can do, and does do, in the Court is to call attention 
to Mrs. Greenwood’s drink on that day. The Crown ask 
you to draw the inference that from all the surrounding 
circumstances of the case the accused administered poison 
to her by putting in a fatal dose of arsenic. That brings me 
to another part of the case. The Crown allege that it was 
given in the house, that it was given by a person in the 
house, and that it was given and drunk that day. 

[Counsel then dealt with the means available; secondly, 
the motive; and thirdly, the conduct which, he alleged, in- 
criminated the accused. After pointing out the means as 
to how the arsenic came into the accused’s possession, he 
referred to the dressing-case which had been mentioned. ] 

There are three witnesses who could have been called to 
say that the dressing-case which you have heard about was 
not bought for Gertrude Jones in December, 1918, but that 
it was given to Gladys Jones, with whom the accused was 
on intimate terms. You know that the accused was in the 
office with Gladys Jones, and that he used Dr. Griffiths’s 
telephone to speak to her. Then there is the letter to Miss 
David, and I suggest to you that the accused was leading 
Miss Gladys Jones to believe that the time was not far distant 
when he would be in a position to marry her. There is 
abundant evidence that these two people were on terms of the 
closest intimacy. 

The motive is the most essential part of the case. On 12th 
July the accused proposed to Miss Jones, and showed her a 
£55 cluster diamond ring. The accused has put forward an 
account of how he came to have that ring transaction with 
Miss Irene whereby she was given one ring in exchange for 
another. Does it strike you that when Miss Irene was in the 
box my learned friend only put one question to her? She 
was shown the diamond ring and asked, ‘‘ Is that yours? ”’ 
She said ‘‘ Yes.’’ Not one other question was put to her. Not 
a single word fell from the lips of Miss Irene to corroborate 
the story Greenwood told you as to how he came to be buying 
a £55 diamond ring which was eventually to be given to Miss 
Gladys Jones. If she could have borne out the story, would 
they not have put these questions to her? They did not do 
so because they dared not do so. I suggest that the ring was 
bought on 4th July for Gladys Jones. Did she delay accepting 
him to break off her engagement to a man in India? Is it 
true that it was Gladys Jones who pressed the accused to 
marry her? There is one person who could and ought to have 
given evidence on that point, and that is the accused’s present 

249 


Harold Greenwood. 


Sir Marlay Samson 


wife. Why is it that my learned friend has not got Gladys 
Greenwood to give testimony on this crucial point? The whole 
crux of the case is this—what was the relationship between 
this man and that woman? The accused was animated by 
desire of Gladys Jones, and it was to consummate that desire 
that he removed Mabel Greenwood from this life. The case for 
the Crown is that the accused’s desire for Gladys Jones was 
such that he committed the crime alleged against him. The 
defence have not called Gladys Greenwood, because she would 
not bear out what the accused has told you in the witness- 
box of the true relationship between them. 

In Rumsey House, when the late Mrs. Greenwood died, 
there was a person who had a supreme motive, and whose 
every subsequent action showed that he had a supreme motive 
for removing this woman, and it was suggested by the Crown 
that one desire was the motive here. 

If you arrive at the conclusion that there was no one else 
in the house who had reason to administer the fatal dose, 
then you have to ask yourselves the question—did the accused 
cause the arsenic to be placed in Mabel Greenwood’s body? 
We have tried to show that the accused had the opportunity, 
that he had the means, and that he had a most powerful 
motive. We have also tried to show you that you must 
exclude a consideration of any other person living in the 
house, and by the process of exhaustion and science and 
fact you are driven to the conclusion that the accused man 
did administer the arsenic to take Mabel Greenwood’s life. 

Consider the prisoner’s conduct on the day in question. 
It is quite true that when his wife was taken ill he went 
for the doctor. He could clearly not do otherwise when 
Miss Irene Greenwood was there with her mother. I suggest 
that it was not a very important factor, but there were 
two occasions that night which you have to scrutinise very 
carefully and wisely. These are the 10 o’clock and the 1 
o’clock visits to the doctor. 

With regard to the 10 o’clock visit Greenwood’s own 
evidence was that at that time his wife was getting better. 
The nurse did not think so, and she sent him over to the 
doctor, and then came the remarkable conversation with 
Miss Griffiths, who stated that he told her his wife might 
not recover, and that she was worse than usual. The length 
of time he remained away is in dispute. Miss Griffiths said 
it was a quarter of an hour, and the nurse and Miss 
Phillips asserted that he was away three-quarters of an hour, 
and that was very strongly borne out by Miss Irene Green- 
wood, who said, ‘‘ It seemed a long time,’’ and went over 
for him. I don’t want to emphasise in any sense unduly 
what Miss Irene said, but when she said it seemed a long 
time, do you not think that the nurse and Miss Phillips 

250 


Closing Speech for Prosecution. 


Sir Marlay Samson 


were right in stating that it was something like three- 
quarters of an hour? ~ In addition, you must remember that 
Miss Irene had to be sent over to fetch him. I suggest that 
there was a long delay, which suggested indifference on his 
part as to whether the doctor came to his wife or not. If 
that had happened once you could have understood it. I 
suggest that the 10 o’clock and the 1 o’clock were the two 
crucial times, and, if you find that this man failed to bring 
the doctor when he should, I suggest that it is a very grave 
matter. 

At the 1 o’clock visit Greenwood said he failed to rouse 
the doctor. There was a knocker there, but he said he 
thought it was an ornament. He rang the bell. You are 
entitled to judge these events by what your own actions 
would have been under similar circumstances. You must 
remember that when Nurse Jones went over she had no 
difficulty in rousing the doctor, who came at once. 

Greenwood has challenged the statement put forward by 
Superintendent Samuel Jones as having been given by him, 
and it is obvious why he did challenge it. In that statement 
there were vital omissions on the part of the accused. He 
said nothing whatever about going to the doctor’s house at 
10 o’clock, nor about 1 o’clock. He made definite charges 
in respect of that statement. He stated in regard to the 
superintendent’s book, ‘‘ He re-wrote the statement, and’ 
brought in some matter which I have not said. That is not 
the book produced at Llanelly. Pages have been torn out 
since it was written. Other leaves have been substituted, and 
it has been entirely altered.’’ My learned friend did his best 
to explain away the statements that the accused made. The 
superintendent’s book was produced at the police court at 
Llanelly, and the statement was read out by the superin- 
tendent in the witness-box, and was taken down in the deposi- 
tions, and you will find that what was in that book, with very 
few exceptions, was, in fact, the statement taken down in the 
depositions. 

Mr. Justice SHzarman—The charge is now given up. 

Sir Martay Samson—I am dealing with the accused’s own 
evidence. There, again, I do not want to press this unduly, 
but I want to show that the accused has alleged that prac- 
tically everybody in the case has told lies in regard to him. 
You have to decide whether he was telling the truth or not. 
You cannot shut your eyes to the fact that he has charged the 
police superintendent with a gross forgery in respect of a 
certain book, in exactly the same manner in which he has 
charged the witnesses with lies. What about the letter the 
accused wrote to Miss Griffiths? Was he telling the truth as to 
that? You will have to judge whether it was a genuine letter, 

251 


Harold Greenwood. 


Sir Marlay Samson 


whether it was a letter written at Miss Griffiths’s suggestion, or 
whether, as the Crown suggest, it was a letter written by 
him with the certain knowledge that Miss Griffiths would 
not accept him, and that therefore he could safely write it 
in order not to make an enemy of her. ; 

Do you believe for a moment that it had been written at 
her suggestion? If there was a plan that he should write 
a bogus letter to her, would it not be part of the plan that 
she should write a letter back to him? I suggest that Green- 
wood’s account was untruthful, and that Miss Griffiths was 
telling the truth when she said she did not know what the 
letter meant. Greenwood was in a difficulty with Miss 
Griffiths, and he did not want to make an enemy of her. 
He knew that rumours were abroad, and he knew quite well 
that she would not marry him when his wife had been dead 
for only three months, and he thought he had put himself 
right with her by writing such a letter. 

Now I come to the third proposition suggested by the 
judge, namely, ‘‘ Did the arsenic in the ordinary course of 
events cause death?’ If the arsenic did not cause death, 
the accused would not be guilty of murder; but he might 
be guilty of attempted murder. I think I can show that 
the alternative suggested by the defence, that death was 
caused by morphia, cannot be borne out by the evidence. 
All the doctors agree that if it was a certain amount of 
morphia that was given it would have killed her, but if it 
was opium it would not. I believe I can convince you that 
it was opium and not morphia pills that were given. Dr. 
Willcox has stated that if arsenic were given to Mrs. Green- 
wood at the time suggested it would have sent her to sleep 
owing to the exhaustion. So that it is not necessary to find 
that morphia had been given in order to account for her 
sleep. None of the doctors saw the poor lady that night, 
and they were only drawing conclusions from the accounts 
of the actual eye-witnesses, and, therefore, when considering 
whether it was arsenic or morphia, you must exclude 
symptoms altogether. The presence of morphia in the body 
could be detected after death, and Mr. Webster said that 
morphia was one of the things he made an examination for, 
and he found no trace of it. It therefore becomes important 
to see when the idea of morphia pills first arose. Here 
the accused is in entire conflict with the other witnesses. 
He says the nurse told him about it and asked him to 
keep it secret. The nurse says that this is absolutely untrue. 
The accused says he told Dr. Griffiths, on the morning of 
his wife’s death, that the pills were too strong for the 
patient. Dr. Griffiths denies that, and also denies that the 
accused at any time told him the pills were too strong. 


On 16th April exhumation took place. According to his 
252 


eS Ee 


was the true 
no mention of mo 


had caused 

exhumation, 

went on to wonder 

did suggest was that the had wxmmitted 


ae tise toe 


knew that 
nt, 
yu yg nae M 
ee = mca man he would 


THER! 
“AG 


aay Pari taacdceqataees cet SH 
a tea THT MH ulate i 1 
qn He tr gady ofa st) 
apy PH bes] Suis 
Heater a 
485 a at Beda eed ti HA i ~f | 

+ WEL ass pesakes 
Fe nial is : i ‘a 
a aaenle Hafan i 4 
Hees ih ny. He nae! At is flit io 
ai: & 7 
ifn leg whee : Be ny a 


Harold Greenwood. 


Sir Marlay Samson 


means, and the motive to have administered poison, and that 
it has been proved by scientific experts that it was adminis- 
tered between 1.30 and 6 o’clock on that particular Sunday. 
I submit in support of that last proposition that the accused’s 
conduct, examined as a whole, is evidence of his guilt. On 
all these grounds the Crown submit that it will be the 
duty of the jury to come to the conclusion that the case 
has been established against him. 

The defence was of a twofold character. It alleged 
improper action on the part of the police in respect to Miss 
Griffiths, whom it was alleged the police had got at. The 
question had also been put to Nurse Jones that the police 
had threatened her. The defence, therefore, contained very 
grave suggestions of improper actions by the police, and the 
distinct charges of telling untruths by the witnesses called. 
I submit that the police had in that case only done their 
duty, as they did in all such cases, and that the witnesses 
had told the truth in respect of a man who was their friend 
and against whom they had no reason for telling untruths. 

I appeal to you to weigh all these things in fairness. My 
learned friend has addressed you in, perhaps, one of the most 
eloquent and moving speeches that it will be your privilege to 
listen to. On the other hand, I have no duty to perform but 
to appeal calmly to your logic and to your reason. I have 
endeavoured to put these facts before you in their order to 
show what bearing they had upon the charge against the 
prisoner. I have no desire, even if I had the ability, to 
imitate the brilliance of my learned friend. I only desire to 
make one observation. He was quite right when he said it 
was the duty of the Crown to prove their case against Green- 
wood. When you retire, if you are not satisfied in your own 
mind that the guilt of Harold Greenwood is established, you 
will act upon it. You will commune among yourselves and 
weigh your hearts and consciences, and if it is irresistibly 
borne in upon you by all the evidence and the inferences that 
you must draw from that evidence that the accused man did 
take the life of that poor soul who lies in Kidwelly Church- 
yard, you will remember that, while you owe a duty to the 
prisoner, you owe a duty to her, and if you are convinced 
in your hearts and minds he is guilty, and responsible for 
her death, you will find that verdict against him without 
fear or favour. This is, perhaps, the most solemn matter 
down to the end of your days you will ever be engaged upon. 
If I have failed in my duty to assist you, I am sorry. I can 
only hope in this solemn matter that Almighty God, in whose 
hands are all our destinies, will guide you to a conclusion 
that is both just and right. 


254 


Charge to the Jury. 


Mr. Justice SHuarMan, addressing the jury, said—It will 
be my duty to tell you what is the law on the subject, and 
you will have to accept my direction without question. 
That is quite an easy matter, as there is nothing which re- 
quires explanation. If you think this man intentionally 
administered arsenic to this lady you must return your 
verdict accordingly, but if you are satisfied that there was 
no such attempt, then that is the end of the whole question. 
If you think there was an attempt, but there is a doubt as 
to whether the attempt was successful, you must return a 
verdict of attempted murder. 

Having told you what the law is, it is my duty to see 
that nothing is put before you except such evidence as is 
admissible, and that no rumour reaches you. It was also 
my duty to see that witnesses who performed a public duty 
were in an atmosphere and surroundings which were not 
liable to terrify or unduly influence them. That is why 
judges think that a case of this kind should be conducted in 
silence, and not made into a drama. 

When I have done that I have discharged my task, and the 
whole responsibility of deciding whether the charge has been 
made out rests upon you, and not upon myself. 

Dealing with the question of motive, you must remember 
that motive is not evidence, and you must not be led by col- 
lateral matters, such as what you have heard about the police 
superintendent tampering with his note-book. You have 
also heard it alleged that Dr. Griffiths, of Kidwelly, did 
something by giving a poisonous medicine instead of a sooth- 
ing medicine, and that he had done something which 
amounted to criminal negligence when he gave two pills 
which, in the opinion of every doctor, would have killed the 
patient within an hour after being given. These are not 
things which you have to decide in this case. The only 
single matter you have to decide is whether this man Green- 
wood administered poison with the intention of committing 
murder. When I was sworn in as a judge I had to take 
the oath that I would, to the best of my ability, administer 
justice without fear or favour. You have also taken the oath 
that you will well and truly try and true deliverance make. 
Your oath and my oath were exactly the same, only in 
different terms. You are the sole judges of facts, and I am 
the sole judge of law. You must not be influenced by what 
would be the popular opinion of your verdict, and you must 

255 


Harold Greenwood. 


Mr Justice Shearman 


not be influenced by what verdict the people would like. You 
must not be influenced either for or against the man because 
you do not like him. There may be some things about this 
man you do not like, but you must only judge him on things 
that throw light on this particular charge. 

I shall go with you through the evidence to-morrow, and 
give you such directions as I think right and proper. 


The Court adjourned. 


256 


Mr. Justice Shearman. 


Seventh Day—Tuesday, 9th November, 1920. 


[Sir Marnay Samson referred to the comment he had made 
as to the defence not calling the present Mrs. Greenwood, 
and said that he found under the Criminal Evidence Act, 
1898, it was not open to him to comment upon their not 
calling her, she being the wife of the accused. I wish to tell 
the jury that any comment made by me on the not calling of 
Gladys Greenwood by the defence I desire to withdraw. A 
misunderstanding arose. 

Mr. Justice SHearman—I appreciate that thoroughly. I 
had a few observations to make on the same thing as to the 
propriety of calling her. 

Sir E. Marssatui Haut said he had only to mention the 
matter to Sir Marlay Samson, and he had at once withdrawn 
the observations he had made. He wished to acknowledge 
Sir Marlay’s courtesy in the matter. 

Mr. Justice SHzarMan—I can see every reason why she 
should not have been called. ] 


Charge to the Jury—continued. 


Mr. Justice SHEaARMAN—It now becomes my duty to sum 
up on the evidence. Counsel for the defence has appealed 
to your sympathies, and counsel for the prosecution to your 
logic. It is now my duty to place the evidence before you 
to the best of my ability. The question for you is—did this 
man administer to his wife intentionally a dangerous dose 
of arsenic? If he did, it is attempted murder if you think 
he was not the person who succeeded in accomplishing her 
death. If he succeeded, it is murder. Another thing is as 
regards the attitude of the accused, which can easily be 
summed up in one sentence. You must not act on sus- 
picion, but, in other words, you must be perfectly satisfied. 
You must disregard private letters addressed to you, or 
rumours, or newspaper comments. You are the judges of 
the facts. I am not going to say anything now that has 
any law in it; but sometimes I may have to express an 
opinion of my own. If you do not agree with what I say 
on the facts, you may disregard it without giving offence to 
me or to any one else. It is for you to take the responsi- 
bility of dealing with the facts. 

The question has been submitted to you as to whether 
certain of the witnesses were honest witnesses, and whether 

8 257 


Harold Greenwood. 


Mr Justice Shearman 


their evidence was accurate. I have to point out that it 
was only after some months that inquiries were made, and 
their recollection may not be very accurate, and you must 
bear that in mind. You must not be astonished if a witness 
cannot recollect what actually took place. It need not be a 
question of perjury at all. 

The first question for you is—are you satisfied there was 
arsenic in the body? By that I do not mean a trace of 
arsenic, but a dangerous quantity. Are you satisfied that 
the evidence tendered on behalf of the prosecution is accu- 
rate and reliable; because the evidence says, if you believe 
it, that there was sufficient arsenic in this lady’s body, more 
than a trace, which might have been introduced casually or 
accidentally in some articles of food, an amount which would 
be more than a medicinal dose, a widely-spread and special 
quantity of arsenic likely to produce illness. 3 

As regards the methods adopted by Mr. Webster in making 
his analysis of the organs taken out of the body, two con- 
firmatory tests were made and another test of the liver, and 
the results of these tests are substantially the same. 

Mr. Webster and Dr. Willcox, who are recognised experts, 
have no interest in the case. It has been shown that the 
arsenic went into the stomach and was circulated in the 
blood to other parts of the body, and that is how it was 
found in the brain. The smallest quantity of arsenic likely 
to cause death is 2 grains, and you have to be satisfied that 
the Crown have made out their case that there was this 
dangerous quantity of arsenic in this lady’s body, and that 
it was administered by the mouth. That is the first step. 

The next question is—are you satisfied as to who the person 
was who put it there? That is the real difficulty in the case. 
Did it find its way into the lady’s mouth through a glass 
of wine? That is the theory of the prosecution. References 
have been made to the Maybrick and Seddons cases, but I 
am not going to say anything about them, although I know 
a good deal. As regards the question of motive, as I inti- 
mated to you yesterday, before you considered the evidence, 
motive is no proof of the act of crime. It is only some- 
thing you bear in mind in estimating the importance and 
weight of such evidence of action as you have. People may 
die, and a son, husband, or wife may benefit by the death, 
but that in itself does not signify for a moment a motive. 
But the strength of the motive is of great importance in 
estimating the weight of what evidence you have tending 
to prove that the person accused administered the poison. 
Of pecuniary motive in this case there is none. This man 
had to lose through the death of his wife an income which 
passed at her death to his children. Of course, the children 

258 


Charge to Jury. 


Mr Justice Shearman 


may share the income with their father, but there is nothing 
to show that here. It has been asserted that animal passion 
is a strong motive. The’ accused said he had never had any 
infatuation for Miss Gladys Jones at all until it suddenly 
sprang up a month after his wife died. The Crown’s case 
is to the contrary. Probably, as twelve men you are better 
judges than a lawyer on facts of that description. It is 
stated by the prosecution that the accused’s wife was ill, 
and that the associations of husband and wife did not exist 
between them for two years. It is suggested that the accused 
was infatuated with Gladys Jones, and wanted to get rid of 
his wife in order to marry her. It is said that Miss Gladys 
Jones went to his office, and that she communicated with 
him over the telephone, and that, as there was no telephone 
in the accused’s house, she rung up the doctor’s house and 
communicated with him. It was said by the doctor’s sister 
that she communicated with him on the day of his wife’s 
death. There were other telephone communications. The 
accused said she was offering on the telephone to assist him 
to buy mourning. It is stated by the Crown that he was in 
a hurry to marry Gladys Jones, and that the motive was to 
get rid of his wife in order to do so. Personally I am not 
inclined to attach any importance to the evidence of the char- 
woman when she said she saw a letter at the office on the 
day of his wife’s death, but it is entirely for you to say 
whether you believe it or not, and whether you attach im- 
portance to it. The Crown suggest that the accused lost his: 
head over this girl, and that to marry her was the motive 
for this serious crime. 

What is the evidence that connects the accused with the 
administration of the poison? The Crown, in effect, say 
that there is substantial evidence of his being in the china 
pantry and the dining-room just before lunch. Every one in 
the house took the same articles of food, but the Crown state: 
that there was one thing that that lady took that no one 
else did, and that was a glass of wine. ‘They say there is: 
the opportunity, and that therefore you have to assume 
that he put the poison in the glass of wine, and 
they say you ought to assume it, even although you are 
not satisfied with the accurate recollection of the one: 
person speaking to it. If you are not satisfied, you ought 
to acquit him. Neither of the persons who spoke on this: 
point is conclusive one way or the other, and it is for 
you to say if you are satisfied with that evidence. What 
is the proof that Greenwood had the arsenic in his 
possession? The Crown say it was the weed-killer, and 
the other side say that a man with such a large garden 
would naturally have it. It is common ground that on Ist: 
May a large tin of weed-killer was delivered at the house. 

259 


Harold Greenwood. 


Mr Justice Shearman 


It is quite clear that the gardener, who went away on Satur- 
day afternoon and did not come back until Monday, was not 
aware that any weed-killer had been used at all. That seems 
to throw a doubt, but it is said that a man named Ben- 
jamin Williams, who did some odd jobs about the house, is 
the man who assisted the accused in using this weed-killer. 
Whether he is truthful and accurate is for you to decide. 
Although Benjamin Williams did not give evidence, it is 
stated as a fact that he made a statement to the police to the 
effect that he had been assisting the accused in the grounds 
of Rumsey House for several years, and that in 1919 he dis- 
tributed weed-killer over the paths. He had never seen 
anybody else mixing it. He could not say whether it was 
a powder or a liquid before the mixing, but it had a reddish 
colour when mixed. He also said he did not remember see- 
ing a tin of weed-killer, but he might have thrown a tin, 
after it contained weed-killer, into the river. It will thus 
be seen that Benjamin Williams’s evidence, if it had been 
given, would not have assisted either side. 

According to the medical evidence, the arsenic must have 
been given to Mrs. Greenwood between 1.30 and 6 o’clock 
that Sunday afternoon, and the Crown submit that if it was 
administered intentionally it must have been administered 
by some one in Rumsey House at the time. The Crown also 
say they have shown that there was a glass of wine taken by 
Mrs. Greenwood in which the arsenic might have been put in 
such a way as to escape notice, and with what was an easy 
way of doing it. 

In view of these contentions of the Crown, which go to the 
heart of the matter, I will read out fully the notes of the 
evidence that I have taken of all the people who had any- 
thing to say about it. 

[His lordship then read out at great length the evidence of 
Miss Florence Phillips, Nurse Jones, Dr. Griffiths, and others. 
He then dealt with the evidence of several of the servants, 
who were most emphatic that it was not an uncommon thing 
for the accused to go into the pantry to wash his hands. | 

All this contradicts the parlourmaid, whose evidence only 
comes to this—that not to her knowledge did he ever wash his 
hands there before. There was a towel there, and a tap which 
she said she used. With regard to Hannah Williams, it is 
for you to say how much of her statement was in her recollec- 
tion and how much coloured by bias or feeling. 

The statements made to policemen are not evidence. They 
are examined and pressed so much, not improperly, as to 
what happened, and asked so many questions, that it is diffi- 
cult for them to know what they have said. I make no com- 
ment upon the evidence of Miss Griffiths. It is for you to 
decide whether these are honest witnesses or whether they 

260 


Charge to Jury. 


Mr Justice Shearman 


are inaccurate in giving their evidence. The accused has 
given his evidence in the way he knew. [After reading the 
whole of Greenwood’s statement as taken by the police.] The 
accused had been very properly examined when the inquiry 
was made into the matter. Sergeant Hodge Lewis went to 
see the accused and cautioned him in the usual way that 
he was not bound to answer any question put to him, but 
that any statement he made might be given in evidence 
against him. It would certainly be in the mind of any 
man, especially a lawyer, that a charge might possibly be 
made against him. When a man is giving his first account of 
anything that happened he may be giving that account accord- 
ing to the best of his recollection in the matter. It is said 
by the prosecution that you must not trust what the accused 
said in the Court, and that he is more likely to have told 
the truth when he made his statement to the police as to 
what is likely to be the truth—what he said to the police 
as a trained man, and what he stated in evidence. 

With regard to the superintendent’s note-book and the 
accused’s allegations regarding it, it is quite obvious to any 
one who turns over the leaves that the last three pages do 
not refer to the accused at all, but contain a copy of Miss 
David’s letter. People must be careful before making allega- 
tions. It was stated, first of all, that it was not the book 
at all; secondly, that. it was not the book produced at the 
police court, and then that there were omissions. But we 
are not trying now whether the accused has made an irrespon- 
sible attack on Superintendent Jones, but whether he has 
poisoned his wife. We are not deciding here whether the 
accused is guilty of saying Superintendent Jones has 
tampered with the book. You may think that Superinten- 
dent Jones did not tamper with it, and yet say the accused 
is not guilty of the murder of his wife. 

You must not draw any inference from the absence of the 
second wife. She could give evidence if she desired, but 
one can quite understand her absence. 

If you accept the evidence that the same bottle was used at 
dinner and supper, there cannot have been poison in the 
wine bottle. What is said by the prosecution is that if there 
was a wine bottle at dinner, and the wine bottle was absent 
at supper, it is a sufficient circumstance. 

Sir E. MarsHatn Hatt—Hannah Williams stated she put 
the wine bottle on the table. 

Sir Maruay Samson—She said she put it out for supper. 

Mr. Justice SHzarmMan—It is extremely unlikely that the 
accused would have left it there if there was poison in it. 
Miss Phillips went to supper and said it was not there. 
The accused and his daughter say it was there, and the 

261 


Harold Greenwood. 


Mr Justice Shearman 


daughter says she partook of it. If the daughter partook 
of the wine, then there is an end to the case. 

In reference to the case for the prosecution, I am not 
- going to comment on the diversity in the evidence, for you 
may naturally accept diversity. The prosecution say, first of 
all, that not only was there arsenic, but there were symptoms 
consistent with arsenic. That is a fair submission, even 
though the symptoms were consistent with something else. 
It is said by the defence that the symptoms were consistent 
also with acute indigestion from eating gooseberry skins, and 
that sickness and diarrhea are natural symptoms of that. 
There is a body of evidence that Mrs. Greenwood had had 
stomachaches before from eating gooseberry tart. It is sug- 
gested by the defence that all these symptoms are to be 
attributed to the eating of gooseberry tart, and are not to be 
attributed to arsenic. If one of the symptoms, then, is 
consistent with acute indigestion, you will not attribute 
anything adverse to the accused if it was consistent with 
both. The difference is this: the fact that after the 
mechanical symptoms due to taking gooseberry tart, nature 
resumed its functions, it is said by the evidence for the 
Crown—but it is not accepted by the evidence for the defence 
—that then arsenic was administered, and, though much of 
it was excluded from the body by vomiting, it found its way 
into the organs. Arsenic is such a deadly thing that when 
it has found its way into the organs nature cannot resume 
its functions, and the mechanical effect of this deadly poison 
is such that a person cannot recover because the organs are 
affected by the dose. On the other hand, when gooseberry 
skins are swallowed, one expects nature to resume its func- 
tions, but with arsenic one does not expect nature to resume 
its functions. 

The evidence of the parlourmaid is contradicted by the 
accused and by Miss Irene Greenwood. It is corroborated by 
Miss Phillips in this sense, when she said there was no wine 
there. Though the parlourmaid had put it on the table, 
when she came back to the room she never saw it again. 

You are always entitled, in making up your minds after 
considering motive and means, to look at the conduct of the 
man himself, either in statements or documents that exist, 
made either before or afterwards. It is said by the Crown 
that he was callous, and that when he was sent for the doctor 
on one occasion he was a long time in bringing him back. 
Under all the circumstances, it is said that pointed to his 
knowledge that she was very bad, and he wanted to keep 
the doctor. It is said that, when later in the evening she 
was worse, he said she was easier, and that when the doctor 
had gone again, knowing there was a knocker there, he rang 
the bell with the desire to keep the doctor away. 

262 


Charge to Jury. 
Mr Justice Shearman 


With regard to the honeymoon incident, Greenwood’s 
answer to that was that all the statements about the honey- 
moon were made on a subsequent occasion. As to the letter 
written to Miss Griffiths, it was an indirect offer of marriage 
made a few days before Greenwood was going to be married 
to somebody else. But you are not trying him for that. If 
Greenwood’s story was not true, it did not help the Crown 
to prove their case, except in so far as it weakened Green- 
wood’s warm denial. As to the letter to Miss David, it was 
suggested that Greenwood was angry with her because she 
said his wife was well. The suggestion was that he had told 
Miss Gladys Jones that his wife would soon be dead. It was 
only an argument suggesting that he made exaggerated state- 
ments about his wife, although she was undoubtedly ill. 

With regard to the accused’s conversation with the vicar 
on the day of the exhumation, the vicar said the accused 
wondered whether his wife had taken anything herself. It 
possibly comes to this, that when he found the body was 
going to be exhumed, if he knew arsenic was there, he was 
probably making the suggestion that the lady committed 
suicide. The accused’s answer was emphatic and quite clear. 
He said, ‘‘I did not suggest it. The vicar suggested it.” 
If you accept his evidence there is still the question, how 
did the arsenic get there, if it was there? One plain and 
straightforward suggestion is that, at the very time Miss 
Phillips was sent for, Dr. Griffiths, instead of taking down 
a ready-made solution of bismuth, took down enough arsenic 
to kill three or four people, and sent that over by gross 
carelessness. It is quite clear, if that is 60, it ig not a 
question of damages; he will be liable to criminal prosecu- 
tion, and it will be open to a jury to find him guilty of 
manslaughter. It is suggested by the defence that that is the 
way arsenic was introduced into the body, and, if that is so, 
there will be an end to the case. 

There is no one who says the doctor was drugged or drunk, 
and there is nothing that is not normal about his appearance. 
He was not even asked whether he kept violent poison side 
by side with the ordinary medicine. There is little evidence, 
and I do not know myself who has proved it, how the two 
bottles which were put in were obtained. One would think, 
if they wanted to prove that, they would have called some 
one who compounded them. 

Sir E. MarsHatt Hatt—My point is there is no com- 
pounding; they are both stock solutions, and were bought 
as stock solutions. I will call Mr. Ludford to prove it. 

Mr. Justice SHzarmMan—No one has been called to say who 
bought them or whether they were ever sold. The evidence 
is that they are put up on the fourth day of the trial, 
through a witness who did not dispute what the counsel 

263 


Harold Greenwood. 


Mr Justice Shearman 


suggested. If you are going to suggest that death was due 
to his mistake, I think that this is not the way it should 
be proved. If I speak strongly I have reason. It is not 
decisive, but it is one feature of the case. It charges this 
man with what is equivalent to manslaughter on evidence 
given late in the day, and no evidence as to how he made 

the mistake. I think the poison would be kept in one place 
and the ordinary mixture in another. As regards the sug- 
gestion of a mistake by Dr. Griffiths as between bismuth and 
Fowler’s solution of arsenic, it is a strong thing for you 
to believe. That is my view. Bismuth contains chloroform, 
and has a strong smell, and it will be easy to see the difference 
between it and Fowler’s arsenic solution. If you exercise 
your judgment you will possibly hesitate to believe that a 
medical man has committed such an extraordinary mistake. 

I am not going in detail into all the other suggestions made 
by the defence in favour of the view that the arsenic may 
have got into the body accidentally, but I will remark that 
all those suggestions only refer to amounts of arsenic, far 
smaller than the amount that was shown to be in the body. 

The second allegation against Dr. Griffiths is that he had 
given morphia instead of opium in the pills. It is beyond 
question that in his evidence before the coroner Dr. Griffiths 
described an opium pill as a morphia pill, and that has 
produced a curious effect in the case. If you believe that 
they were opium and not morphia pills, it will vitiate to a 
large extent the evidence of the two medical experts for the 
defence, because they say that the reasonable conclusion to 
come to is that it was indigestion that caused the stomach 
trouble, and that in her weak state the morphia pills had 
killed her. That view neglects altogether the presence of 
arsenic in the body at all; but all the doctors who have been 
called say that, if the pills contained 2 grains of opium, it 
would not have killed her, and would hardly have sent her 
to sleep in the time she did go to sleep. 

On this matter it is important to remember that some 
time before the inquest on 9th June Dr. Griffiths wrote on 
the blue paper, which you can peruse, that he prescribed a 
soothing medicine in the afternoon, and later on a tonic and 
these pills. The latter are described on the paper as “ Pill 
opi., one to be taken at once and the other in an hour.”’ 
There you have the doctor, even before the first public hear- 
ing, describing the pills as opium and not as morphia. Why 
Dr. Griffiths should have said ‘‘ morphia ’’ I cannot under- 
stand. In the doctor’s written statement it is opium, and 
if it was opium it had nothing to do with the lady’s death 
—all the doctors are agreed on that. 

If you are satisfied, on all the evidence given of what hap- 
pened on the Sunday, before her death, that the arsenic was 

264 


Charge to Jury. 


Mr Justice Shearman 


administered by the accused in such a form as to be 
dangerous, it is your duty to return a verdict of guilty. If 
you think that he administered this dangerous poison, intend- 
ing to shorten her life, and that she might have reasonably 
recovered from it if the doctor had not given her morphia, 
then it follows that he should be found guilty of attempted 
murder, and that she died from the blunder of the doctor 
in giving morphia. 

I now ask you to consider this case with courage, earnestly 
and honestly desiring to do what is right and just. That is 
the last assistance I can give you, gentlemen. You will now 
retire to consider your verdict. 


The jury then retired, and after the accused had been 
taken below Mr Justice Shearman adjourned the Court till 
2.15 p.m. 

At 3.53 p.m. the jury returned to the Court, and Mr. 
Justice Shearman took his seat. 

The Hon. StepHen Coueripen, Clerk of Arraigns—Gentle- 
men of the jury, have you agreed upon your verdict? 

The Forrman—Yes. 

The Hon. StepHen Cotertp¢s—Look upon the prisoner at 
the bar and say whether he is guilty or not guilty. 

The Forrman—Not guilty. 

[There was an immediate demonstration at the rear of the 
Court. | 

Mr. Justice SHaarMAaNn—If there is any demonstration, and 
if I see anybody making any noise, I shall at once commit 
him. 

Gentlemen, I can only thank you for the care and attention 
you have given to this case. I also wish to thank the sheriff 
and the under-sheriff for their attention to myself; and I 
have no doubt they have extended the same to you whilst 
you have been detained. 

One of the jurymen asked if they could be relieved from 
attendance for some years. 

Mr. Justice SHzaRMaN—There is a mistake. You assume 
that I have the power to do that, but I have no power to 
make such an order. But you are relieved from further 
attendance at this assize. (Zo the warders)—Discharge the 
prisoner. 


The accused was then discharged. 


265 


APPENDICES. 


APPENDIX I. 


PROCEEDINGS AT THE CORONER’S INQUEST. 
First Day—Friday, 16th April, 1920. 


At the opening of the inquest the coroner, Mr. J. W. 
Nicholas, in an explanatory statement to the jury, announced 
that on 25th March he received a report containing circum- 
stances which pointed to certain suspicions attending Mrs. 
Greenwood’s death. The report raised the point whether it 
was necessary to issue an order for exhumation, and he 
communicated with the Secretary of State. In due course 
such an order was issued, and it had been carried into effect. 


Second Day—Tuesday, 15th June, 1920. 


Mr. Pearce, Assistant Director of Prosecutions, represented 
the police; Mr. T. R. Ludford, solicitor, Llanelly, appeared 
for Mr. Greenwood, who was not present. 

The Coroner, addressing the jury, said—I have now addi- 
tional evidence to place before you, having now received 
the report of the Home Office analyst. In the first place, I 
propose to call, in order to take this matter step by step, 
Sergeant Hodge Lewis, who will speak as to the taking of 
the organs from Kidwelly to London, handing them over to 
the Home Office analyst, and getting his receipt for them. 
Then Mr. John Webster, analytical chemist and analyst to 
the Home Office, will be called and will give details of the 
analysis of the organs submitted to him. I propose to recall 
Dr. Griffiths, of Kidwelly. The fact that he was the medical 
attendant on the deceased is, of course, important, and he 
will give fuller details now than when asked of him at 
the previous hearing. The evidence of the nurse will also 
be taken. We have also present Dr. Willcox, the eminent 
authority on these matters. A number of witnesses have 
been warned to appear, most of whom will be called. Pos- 
sibly the inquest will last over two days, and I hope it will 
not be necessary to adjourn. 


Hovce Lewis, police sergeant, said he was present at 
the exhumation on 16th April. He received three sealed jars 
from Dr. Dick. He conveyed them on 17th April to St. 
Mary’s Hospital, London, and handed them to Mr. Webster, 
the Home Office analyst, for which he produced a receipt. 

269 


Appendix I. 


Joun Wesster, official analyst at the Home Office, said he 
received the three jars from Police-Sergeant Lewis on 17th 
April at St. Mary’s Hospital. He analysed the organs and 
found arsenic present in all of them. 

That is the result of your analysis ?—Yes. 

Have you anything to add!—No, except that I found no 
other poison. 

Examined by Mr. Pzarce—Have you heard of a prepara- 
tion called Cooper’s weedicide?—Yes. 

Does it contain a considerable proportion of arsenic ?—Yes. 

Is it marked poison /—Yes. 

Examined by Mr. Luprorp—Do you think it would be 
possible to obtain arsenic from these preparations !—What 
do you mean by “‘ obtain ’’? 

We are talking about arsenious oxide. Would it be possible 
to extract that from the weed-killer !/—Possibly, yes. 7 

Would it be possible to extract it from the preparation 1— 
It could be done. 

Would it be difficult?—It would not be difficult for a 
chemist to extract arsenious oxide from these preparations, 
but it would be difficult for a layman. 


Dr. T. R. Grirrirus said he had been medical attendant 
to the deceased lady, whom he had been attending for about 
sixteen years. He had now retired from practice. 

Up to within a few months of her death how would you 
describe the deceased’s health !—She was in fairly good health. 

You attended her in her last two confinements !—Yes. 

Were they quite normal ?—Yes. 

Some time before her death had she desired to consult you 
as to her condition !—Yes. 

What did she complain of —She complained of weakness 
and hemorrhage. 

To what did you ascribe this?!—To change of life or some 
organic trouble. There was uterine trouble also. I pre- 
scribed for her and made up a preparation. 

Did such a condition as you describe cause you any appre- 
hension !—Yes. 

Was it a natural condition?—No; it was either a change 
of life or something growing. 

; ae you continue to give her medicine up to 14th June?— 
id. 

Now, I bring you to Sunday, 15th June. When did you 
first know that there was something the matter with Mrs. 
Greenwood /—Some time between 6 and 7 o’clock in the even- 
ing. Mr. Greenwood called in and said that his wife was 
not feeling very well. I went over to see her. I found 
that she was vomiting. I took her temperature, and examined 
her heart, and ordered her to bed. She complained of a 

270 


Coroner’s Inquest. 


certain amount of pain in the upper part of the stomach. 
I was not told that anything had been given to her before 
I came, except a little brandy. 

Did they say when !—TI took it to be a few minutes before 
I arrived. Mr. Greenwood then asked me to come out to 
the garden, and I remained with him for nearly an hour, 
to 7 or 7.30. When I again saw Mrs. Greenwood the vomit- 
ing had ceased and she seemed a little better. Her pulse 
was weak from the commencement. I thought she was getting 
better. I left Rumsey House, and sent over a bottle of 
medicine containing a bismuth mixture to act as a gastric 
sedative. 

Wess was the next summons you had?!—About 10 that 
night. 

May it have been earlier? You stated before it was 9 
o’clock ?—No, it was somewhere about 10 o’clock. Mr. Green- 
wood came for me. He told me that Mrs. Greenwood was not 
very well again, and asked me to go over. I went, and 
found that she was still sick and in a very, very weak state. 
She was weaker than when I had last seen her. There was 
a nurse then in attendance. I saw Miss Phillips downstairs. 
I examined Mrs. Greenwood again and found the pulse and 
heart very, very weak. I prescribed two morphia pills, 
with the instruction that one was to be given immediately 
and one in half an hour’s time. I think Mr. Greenwood 
came across for them. That was at 10 o’clock on the 15th, 
but I did not anticipate anything serious, although I was 
afraid of the heart’s condition. About 11 o’clock I was 
going out of the house and I saw Mr. Greenwood standing 
at the gateway of his house. He told me that Mrs. Green- 
wood was much easier, and in view of that I did not think 
it necessary to go into the house. Something after 3 a.m. on 
the next morning I was called by Nurse Jones, who knocked 
at the door. I opened the window and spoke to her, and 
she told me that Mrs. Greenwood was in a very bad state, 
and asked me to come over. I went immediately. When I 
saw her between 3 o’clock and 3.30 she was in a moribund 
state, and she died a few minutes after I got there. I did 
not take her temperature, as she had gone past that. She 
died ten minutes after my arrival. 

Who were present when she died!/—Nurse Jones, Miss 
Greenwood, and Mr. Greenwood. 

Was her condition between 10 p.m. and 3 a.m. described 
to you by the nurse?—Yes, I was told she suffered from 
diarrhoea. The nurse also told me that I made a visit 
between 10 p.m. and 3 a.m., which I don’t remember. 

You have described all the other visits, but you cannot 
remember this one?—All the visits I remember I have 


described. 
271 


Appendix I. 


Is it possible that you made the visit you do not remember ? 
—I don’t remember. 

Was the diarrhea intermittent or continuous !—Towards 
the end it was uncontrollable. 

What about the vomiting?—That had ceased towards the 
end, but I did not see the excreta, and the nurse did not 
describe them to me. 

Between the hours of 10 and 8 is it your recollection that 
Mrs. Greenwood was without the attendance of any doctor? 
—Yes. 

Was the nurse agitated ?—Yes. 

Was any remark made by her as to its being a serious case? 
—No. 

You did not think it necessary to ask to see the excreta 1— 
I did not think so at the time. 

Do you think so now!/—Yes. 

You were in Court when the analysis was read? You gave 
a certificate that she died of valvular disease of the heart. 
Had you been aware of what you know now would you have 
given a similar certificate ?—No. 

When did the nurse first refer to the 1 a.m. visit?—In my 
house some weeks ago. 

Did she say anything about the 1 a.m. visit when you 
visited the house after 3 o’clock !—No, 

Was it within the last three weeks?—Yes. I asked her 
to enumerate the visits I made, and she then told me of the 
1 o’clock visit of which I had no recollection, and I told 
her so. 

Examined by Mr. PrEarce—Did any of the medicine pre- 
scribed contain arsenic?—Not a trace. 

With regard to the 3 a.m. visit, had the nurse, so far as 
you know, any difficulty in rousing you?—Not as far as I 
know. 

Can you hear the knocker /—Yes, I rely on the knocker. 

When you heard the nurse, were you surprised that she 
had left the patient?—No; it did not strike me as peculiar 
at the time. 

Had the deceased much pain before she died?—No, not 
much. I arrived at the conclusion that what pain she had 
was a colic pain. 

Examined by Mr. Luprorp—Did you send in your resigna- 
tion as medical officer for the borough in March, 1919 ?—Yes. 

How long had you attended Mrs. Greenwood ?—For sixteen 
years. 

You always found Mr. and Mrs. Greenwood on most affec- 
tionate terms !—Yes. 

Did Mrs. Greenwood know that she was suffering from 
an internal complaint ?7—Yes. 

Did she know her heart was in a bad state ?—Yes. 

272 


Coroner’s Inquest. 


Have you ever kept what is known as white arsenic?—No, 
never. 

Did the nurse ever hint at anything strange having taken 
place?—I am positive she did not, else I would have investi- 
gated matters. 


Fiorence Lorraine PuItuirs, a single woman, living at 
The Cottage, Kidwelly, said—I had known the Greenwood 
family for some time, and was very friendly with them. On 
Saturday, 14th June of last year, I saw Mrs. Greenwood at a 
tennis party, and found her in good spirits and very bright. 
I next saw her the following Sunday about 1 o’clock in the 
afternoon, and she looked very, very ill, and her voice was 
low and uneven. On Sunday evening Mrs. Greenwood asked 
me to supper, and I went there about 7.15 p.m. I went 
straight upstairs and saw Miss Irene Greenwood coming out 
of the bedroom. She told me her mother was very ill, and 
I went for a nurse of my own accord. People were coming 
out of chapel at the time. The nurse came very quickly, 
reaching the house about 7.45 p.m. Pending the arrival 
of the nurse I went to the kitchen for some hot-water bottles. 
At this time Mr. Greenwood was in the garden with Dr. 
Griffiths. A few minutes afterwards the nurse asked for a 
doctor to be sent for, and Mr. Greenwood volunteered to go 
for him. We waited for some time, and the nurse came to 
the bedroom door to ask if the doctor were coming. Miss 
Irene was getting very anxious, and she went over to the 
doctor’s house herself. It was about an hour before the 
doctor came; and when he did come he was accompanied 
by Mr. Greenwood. That would be about 9 o’clock. I went 
into the room later on and saw Mrs. Greenwood, who was 
too ill to speak. The nurse asked me to stay with Mrs. 
. Greenwood while she went home to fetch some things. All 
the time Mrs. Greenwood was sort of dozing. Mr. Green- 
wood came in once or twice and sat down a few minutes. 
The nurse returned a little after 10, and, as Mrs. Greenwood 
told her that I had better not stay, I reluctantly left. Mrs. 
Greenwood was always very considerate of other people. It 
was after 11 o’clock when I left the house. I met Mr. 
Greenwood at the gate, and he noticed that I was looking 
worried. He said, ‘‘ Oh, she will be quite all right by the 
morning,’’ and added that he had seen her much worse and 
that I was not to worry. About 3 a.m. I was called to 
Rumsey House, but Mrs. Greenwood was dead before I arrived. 
When I got into the room I found that the nurse was very 
upset, too agitated to talk, and crying. Mr. Greenwood 
was also walking about the room crying. 

Was there anything said about the sickness and diarrhoea? 
—No. The nurse spoke to me about that before I left about 

T 273 


Appendix I, 


11 o’clock, and said she would have to speak to the dootor 
about it. She said it was of a very peculiar nature, and 
she had never seen anything like it before, She was very 
worried about it. 

Did she describe how it was peculiar?—I did not know 
whether she meant the vomit or not, but she said it was a 
peculiar sort of white, flaky sickness, 

When Mrs. Greenwood’s sister, Miss Bowater, came down 
on Monday evening, did you ask her to go to the doctor's 
house to see if Mr, Greenwood was there !—I do not remember, 

You had supper at Rumsey House on the Sunday night 
before the death. Did you see any wine there!—No. Mrs. 
Greenwood usually drank burgundy, but at her end of the 
supper table that night there was a brandy flask, and at 
Mr. Greenwood’s end there was whisky. 

Was there any conversation between you and Mrs, Green- 
wood about the wine’—Yes. She told me that she could not 
drink it because it was nasty, and that she thought the 
maid had been tampering with it. Because of this the whole 
bottle of burgundy was thrown away. 

How long was that before the death ?—About three or four 
weeks, 

Did you hear any conversation between Miss Bowater and 
Mr. Greenwood about Dr. Griffiths!—Yes; Mr. Greenwood 
said how splendid the doctor had been. 

Examined by Mr. Luprorpn—Did you know that there was 
a maid at Rumsey House who had a partiality for burgundy ? 
—No. 

Did you ever speak to the doctor about what the nurse 
said about Mrs. Greenwood’s vomit being peculiar }—No. 

IT am asking you that question because I suggest that it 
was never said to you {—It was said. 


Nurse Exrzanpra L. Jones said—I had known Mrs. Green- 
wood for four or five months, and had attended her eldest 
boy. I found Mrs. Greenwood about 8 p.m. in a state of 
collapse. She had been vomiting slightly. Her pulse was 
very weak. She had diarrhea, which was practically con- 
tinuous up till midnight. 

Did she complain of pains in the abdomen ?—Yes, but not 
much. Mrs. Greenwood was not one to complain much. She 
was conscious up till 1 a.m. About that time she asked me 
to tell Miss Bowater if she did not get well again to mother 
her children and bring them up in the way she would have 
wished. Mr. Greenwood kept asking her how she was, and 
she kept replying that she was very, very ill. 

You sent for the doctor at 1 o’clock —Yes. 

Have you seen a case of this sort before ?’—No. 

274 


Coroner’s Inquest. 


At 2 a.m. you said you were satisfied that she was dying? 
—Yes; she went to sleep after the morphia pills were given 
her by the doctor. 

Did she wake?—No, she did not wake again. 

That was about 1 o’clock!—Yes. I thought she was sleep- 
ing, and I did not disturb her. Soon after 3 o’clock she 
died in her sleep. 

A maid who was sleeping above the sickroom said that 
Mrs. Greenwood was groaning very audibly ?’—She was not. 
She only moaned occasionally. 

The servant girl says she could not sleep because of the 
groaning ?—I cannot understand that. 

Were you there between 6.30 and 7.30, when the doctor 
came ?—No, I came after that. 

The doctor says he attended between 9 and 10. Were you 
present then?—No, sir, I was not. 

You were in attendance from about 8 o’clock?!—Yes. 

Do you remember telling Miss Phillips that you wished 
the doctor would come, soon after you got there, owing to 
the condition of Mrs. Greenwood, and that Mr. Greenwood 
went for the doctor?!—But the doctor did not come then. 

I know he did not, but did you express the wish that he 
would come ?—Yes. 

And did you know that Miss Phillips or Miss Greenwood, 
or both of them, had sent for the doctor?—No, I did not; 
but the doctor did not come until after 11 o’clock. 

The doctor says he came a long time before that?—I did 
not see him before that. 

How was the patient when you came back at 10 o’clock !— 
Very bad. 

Did you ask the reason ?—No. 

She was in your charge, you know?/—Yes; and I asked 
Miss Phillips immediately on my return to send for the 
doctor, and she asked Mr. Greenwood to go. That would 
be about 10 o’clock. 

You think Mr. Greenwood went about 10 o’clock?—Yes, 
I am sure of that. 

When did the doctor come?—About 11 o’clock. 

He lives opposite ?—Yes. 

You sent him a summons at 10 o’clock !—Yes. 

When about an hour had elapsed were you getting anxious 
about his not coming ?—Yes; but I thought that Mr. Green- 
wood was waiting at the doctor’s house for him to come. 

It was a long wait with a patient in that condition 1—Yes. 
it was, sir. I was attending to her as best I could, much 
desiring the presence of the doctor. 

At the end of the hour did you tell the doctor that he 
had been a long time?—No, sir. 

275 


Appendix I. 


The continuous diarrhoea and sickness were active then !— 
The diarrhoea was bad, but the sickness was not so bad then. 
Did he prescribe anything then ?—Sips of brandy often. 

He said on that occasion that he prescribed morphia pills? 
—Not on that occasion. 

I know you want to assist me to get at the truth in this 
matter. The doctor says that when he came at 10 o’clock— 
and you say it was 11 o’clock—he prescribed two morphia 
pills?—No, he did not; only frequent sips of brandy. 

The doctor says that the next time they summoned him 
‘was shortly before the death?—No; I sent Mr. Greenwood at 
the 3 o’clock visit, and he could not make the doctor hear, 
so I went. 1 

The doctor says you went?—No, I sent Mr. Greenwood. 

You say there was a visit at 1 o’clock, when you went to 
the doctor yourself, and another at 3 o’clock?—Yes. 

Did you tell him at the 3 o’clock visit something about 
the 1 o’clock visit ?—No. 

You say the doctor is mistaken when he says he was 
not there at 1 o’clock, that he prescribed those pills at 10 
or 11 o’clock?—Yes. He prescribed after the 1 o’clock visit. 

Do you know that a maid, Hannah Williams, who was 
kept awake by Mrs. Greenwood’s groans, says that no doctor 
came between 10 and 11 o’clock and 3 o’clock?—Yes, the 
doctor came at 1 a.m. 

We are told that between 10.30 and 11 Mr. Greenwood 
told the doctor that Mrs. Greenwood was much easier ?—I 
cannot understand how he could say such a thing. 

Why did Miss Phillips go?—Miss Phillips told me that 
Mrs. Greenwood told her to go. 

Did Mrs. Greenwood tell you to tell Miss Phillips to go?— 
I do not remember that. 

After Miss Phillips had gone, were there only you and 
Mr. Greenwood still up ?—Yes. 

And Mrs. Greenwood was very ill?—Yes, very ill. 

And you told us it was an unusual case!—It was an 
unusual case for me. 

te it occur to you that there was an irritant in the case? 
—No. 

Did you not say to Sergeant Lewis and Superintendent 
Jones later that what was vomited was of a yellowish-green 
colour ?—I do not remember saying so. 

Do you say it was not said by you?—Yes, I do. 

You say, then, that the two officers put the words down 
of their own accord ?—It’s such a long time ago. I may have 
said so. ; 

You were undoubtedly a great deal agitated about this 
death ?—I was very upset. 

Why !—Because I was very fond of Mrs. Greenwood. 

276 


Coroner’s Inquest. 


Did you go to the Vicarage at 7 o’clock the following 
morning and see the vicar !—Yes. 

Did you make a statement to him?—I only stated that Mrs. 
Greenwood had passed away. 

Did you make a statement to a Mrs. Meredith!—I merely 
asked her if she had heard of the death. 

You have been discussing this case a good deal round 
Kidwelly ?—No, I have not. 

Did you say to Sergeant Lewis, ‘‘ You can look through 
me, sergeant; I am telling the truth. I have had many cases 
like this. There is nothing unusual about the death ’’ ?— 
I could never have said that. 

Did you say at another interview with him, ‘‘ I will not 
tell you any more unless I am compelled. I have never had 
a case like that before ’’ !—No. 

You are a district nurse/—Yes. 

Did you tell Mrs. Smart, the chairman of the Nursing 
Association, ‘‘ The case has worried me a lot. I did not 
understand it. I had never seen anything like it before. 
I wish I had my time over again. I would insist upon a 
post-mortem, but I don’t like them ’’!—No; I did not say 
‘“ T would insist upon a post-mortem.’’ 

Did you say any of that?—-Yes; with the exception of the 
words about the post-mortem, I said that. 

Did you tell the vicar that it was a pity they did not 
have a post-mortem before the body was buried ?—Yes; but 
I did not say that to Mrs. Smart. 

Did you tell Miss Phillips that the vomiting and diarrhea 
were not like anything you had seen before!—No. 

Might you have said it?—I cannot remember saying that, 
sir. 
Were they, as a matter of fact, like you had seen before ?— 
No, they were not, 

And it is, therefore, quite possible that you may have 
said so to those people?—Yes. 

You saw the vicar at seven o’clock in the morning ?—Yes. 

What for’—To tell him that Mrs. Greenwood had passed 
away. She was a great friend of mine. 

Did you say to the vicar—he is going to be called—‘“‘ I 
think there ought to be a consultation. I think another 
doctor ought to be called in ’’!—I might have said something 
of the kind. 

Did you say to the police, ‘‘ There is one thing I’ll never 
tell—it is a private matter ’’ ?—No, sir. 

Did you tell Sergeant Lewis what the private matter was? 
—] didn’t say I’ll never tell. 

Did you say those words, or words to that effect, to Ser- 
geant Lewis!—Yes, I suppose I did. = 


Appendix I. 


What was the one thing that you would never tell?—About 
what Mr. Jones, the vicar, had asked me in confidence, 
whether I was suspicious of foul play. 

That was what you meant ?—Yes. 

There was a good deal of gossip about the place, and 
there was nothing very private about that. Are you sure 
there was no statement made to you by Mrs. Greenwood !— 
Yes, 

It seems as if the events of that night were weighing very 
heavily upon your mind?—I was very fond of Mrs. 
Greenwood. 

But you had not known her very long personally !—No, only 
a short time. : 

Did you say anything to the doctor about the unusual 
diarrhea and sickness about 3 in the morning of Mrs. 
Greenwood’s death ?—I told the doctor it was continuous. 

Did you convey a letter from Mr. Greenwood to Miss 
Griffiths the day before Mr. Greenwood’s second marriage ?— 
I don’t remember. 

Were you with Mr. Greenwood the night before the second 
marriage ]—Yes. 

Only you and he?—Yes. 

Up to what hour in the night?—Up to 10 o’clock. 

I put it to you 11.30? do not remember. 

May it have been 11.302—No. 

Do you deny on oath that it was 11.30?—I went to him 
on business, and I don’t remember the time. 

I think you tell fortunes ?—Yes. 

Have you told Mr. Greenwood’s fortune!—Yes, once. 

And at other times!—I may have done so. 

Did you tell him that if he knew what people said about 
him his hair would stand on end?—wNo, sir, I didn’t. 

Have you ever told Sergeant Lewis that you said that to 
him ?—No, I didn’t say that. 

Did the sergeant say, ‘‘ You will stand by me, nurse ”’ 7— 
No, I never said that. 

Was Mr. Greenwood present through the whole illness, off 
and on ?—Yes. 

Was he upset by it?—No; he did not seem upset. 

Examined by Mr. Pzarce—When did you come to the con- 
clusion that the patient was seriously ill?—About midnight. 

After 11 p.m. was there any stage of the illness when there 
would be justification for telling the doctor that the patient 
bie easier, and that there was no necessity for him to call? 
—No. 

After the death of Mrs. Greenwood did you have any 
uneasiness in your mind as to the circumstances surrounding 
the death —What do you mean? 

278 


Coroner’s Inquest. 


I was going to ask what you mean. What was it that made 
you feel uneasy ?—I can’t express it. 

There was the uneasy feeling 7—Yes. 

Something that you could not fathom?—I cannot say. 

Do you mean to say that you will not tell me, or you 
cannot tell me!—I can’t say what it was. 

And no amount of pressure from me would induce you 
to say more?—I can’t say more. 

Examined by Mr. Luprorp—How long have you been a 
district nurse at Kidwelly!—For a year. 

Had the doctor seen Mrs. Greenwood before you arrived 
that night /—Yes. 

Your only anxiety was to see that the instructions of the 
doctor were carried out ?—Yes. 

Did you ask Mrs. Greenwood what she had been taking 1— 
Yes. She said that she had eaten gooseberry pie, and I at 
first thought that she had a bad attack of indigestion as a 
result. I thought it was the pain set up by indigestion that 
Mrs. Greenwood was suffering from. 

Did you ever mention anything about a yellowish-green 
vomit 1—No. 

Is it your recollection that this suggestion came from the 
superintendent of police and Sergeant Lewis?—Yes. 

And were they trying to get you to say that ?—It must have 
been them. 

You have no recollection of making such a statement to 
Miss Phillips!—No. 

How long have you been a nurse ?—Twenty-three years. 

If anything unusual had occurred in one of your cases, 
what would be the first thing you would do!—I would tell 
the doctor. 

Have you made any sort of complaint about this case to 
the doctor?—No. I am not supposed to say what is wrong 
with patients. 

If the symptoms were unusual you would have told the 
doctor ?—Yes. The only thing I thought abnormal was the 
diarrhea. 

Was it the vicar who suggested to you something about 
foul play 7—Not then, but later on. 

Was everything possible done for Mrs. Greenwood in the 
house that night?—Yes; and I did all I could. 

By the Coroner—You admit that it was part of your duty 
to have reported anything unusual in the case to the doctor? 
—Yes. 

You have admitted saying that you had never had such a 
case before. How is it that you did not tell the doctor ?—It 
was simply the diarrhcea that 1 thought was abnormal. 

279 


Appendix I. 


Miss Bowater, a sister of the deceased, said—I had been 
at Kidwelly six weeks before my sister’s death. I came back 
by the afternoon train on Monday, 16th June, after hearing 
of the death. I was told that the doctor had been in attend- 
ance in the house for the greater part of the night. Mrs. 
Greenwood left no will. The principal part of her property 
was in trust for her children, except a small sum left to 
her by her mother. I do not know whether administration 
has been taken out. 

Examined by Mr. Luprorp—Has any one in your family 
ever committed suicide?—An uncle of mine. 


Dr. W1tLcox, consulting medical adviser to the Home Office, 
said—The statements in this case by Mr. Webster have been 
submitted to me. I have also listened to the evidence of the 
doctor and the nurse in the case to-day. The report of 
the analyst shows that arsenic was present in all the organs, 
the total amount found being .28 grains. The amount of 
arsenic found in the organs indicates that at the time of 
the exhumation there must have been nearly one-half a grain 
in the body. The amount of arsenic in the gullet, stomach, 
intestines, and rectum was 6.1 milligrams—nearly one-tenth 
of a grain. This indicates that the poison was taken by the 
mouth. The fact that the poison was distributed widely 
in all the organs of the body shows that it must have been 
taken several hours before death. The fact that very little 
was found in the stomach—about one-hundredth of a grain 
—shows that no arsenic was taken within three hours of death. 
From the evidence of Dr. Griffiths and of Nurse Jones it is 
clear that Mrs. Greenwood suffered from severe vomiting 
and diarrhoea for some hours before death—from 6 p.m. until 
midnight approximately. This would cause the elimination 
of a considerable quantity of arsenic if it had been taken 
by the mouth. 

From the result of the analysis, and what you have heard 
in evidence to-day, what do you say’—From the result of 
the analysis and the symptoms I have heard described I 
think the cause of death was acute arsenical poisoning. If 
the arsenic is in solid state the onset of the symptoms will 
be delayed. In this case the wide distribution of the poison 
indicates that it had been readily absorbed, and had prob- 
ably been taken in a dissolved state. 

What would be your view as to the time?—Taking into 
account the symptoms and the analysis the arsenic was prob- 
ably taken between 1.30 p.m. and 12 midnight. Most likely 
it was taken between 1.30 p.m. and 6.30 p.m. From the 
evidence of the doctor and nurse it is clear that Mrs. Green- 
wood suffered from abdominal pains, severe vomiting, and 
diarrhoea, after which severe heart failure and collapse 

280 


Coroner’s Inquest. 


occurred, death resulting within about ten hours from the 
onset of the symptoms. The symptoms are typical of acute 
arsenical poisoning. 

After the organs were forwarded to be analysed, did you, 
at Mr. Webster’s request, examine the organs !—Yes. 

With what object !—To see if there was any sign of disease 
present. 

From natural causes!—Yes. The organs were well pre- 
served considering the time that had elapsed since burial— 
about ten months. 

Were there any signs of disease!—No; I found no signs of 
disease present. [ examined the heart specially. I found 
no disease of the valves of the heart. The muscle wall of 
the heart had undergone changes due to putrefaction, so that 
had any disease of the muscle wall been present at the time 
of the death it would not have been observable at the time of 
my examination. Is that quite clear? 

Yes, I think so. Please go on?—On the uterus there was 
a small fibroid tumour attached to the upper and posterior 
part. It was about the size of a thrush’s egg, and was of a 
simple nature. 

Anything malignant about it?—No. 

With regard to this arsenious oxide, what is it exactly 1— 
It is a white, solid substance, and if powdered it forms a 
white powder rather like flour or powdered sugar. 

What about its solubility in cold water?—It is readily 
soluble in cold water. 

Are you able to tell us what ordinary weed-killer is com- 
posed of /—Yes; solutions of arsenic in alkali, such as caustic 
soda or carbonate of soda. They commonly contain a large 
amount of arsenic, 20 per cent. or more. 

And can this weed-killer be added to food in poisonous 
doses !—Yes ; likewise arsenic. 

Give the symptoms again, shortly, of acute arsenical poison- 
ing ?—If the poison is taken in a soluble form the symptoms 
usually commence within an hour. They are nausea, 
abdominal pain, vomiting, and diarrhcea, often of a severe 
type, usually occurs. These symptoms are sometimes asso- 
ciated with cramp in parts of the legs, but this symptom is 
often absent. 

What follows the symptoms!—Collapse and heart failure 
are likely to occur after the severe vomiting and purging, 
and, if the person was previously suffering from a weak heart, 
the collapse and heart failure would be likely to occur earlier 
in arsenical poisoning, and it would be a more severe type. 
The stools are thin and watery, and they often have flakes 
of mucus presentinthem. Inacutearsenical poisoning inflam- 
mation of the stomach and intestines occurs, and, if death 
results, signs of this inflammation, such as redness and con- 

281 


Appendix I. 


gestion, are found if the post-mortem examination is made 
soon after death. If, however, several weeks or months elapse 
between the death and the post-mortem examination, these 
signs will disappear owing to the putrefactive changes. 

What is the ordinary medicine dose!—One-sixtieth of a 
grain to one-fiftieth of a grain. 

Are you quite clear that this woman died from acute 
arsenical poisoning!—I have no doubt about it. 

Examined by Mr. Luprorp—It would take very little weed- 
killer containing 20 per cent. of arsenic to be fatal. A 
poisonous dose could be readily dissolved in a cup of tea. 

Will you say in this case whether one or several doses were 
given within a short period?—I am not prepared to say 
definitely, but possibly it might have been one dose. 3 

Is your evidence really conjecture about 2 grains being 
probably taken ?—No, deduction. 

Next door to conjecture!—Deduction from experience. I 
have experience to guide me, and I can give you reasons if 
you wish. 

Two grains would be the smallest killing dose ?—Yes. 

In a good many recorded cases there have been about 80 
grains !—I could give you a list of several cases. In two cele- 
brated cases which come to my mind 2 grains were found in 
one of them and a third of a grain in the other. 

Is it a favourite poison for suicide?—I should say it was 
not. It is taken by suicides moderately frequently. Carbolic 
acid and prussic acid are just as common. 


Hannan Maceir Wi.uiaMs, a domestic servant employed 
as a house parlourmaid by Mr. and Mrs. Greenwood, said— 
I left after the burial of Mrs. Greenwood. I remember the 
Sunday Mrs. Greenwood was taken ill. I laid the table for 
dinner that day, with which whisky and port wine were 
served. These were kept in the cupboard in the dining-room. 
The bottle of port wine was about three-quarters full. Mrs. 
Greenwood took some of the port wine, and Mr. Greenwood 
took whisky. I did not see any other members of the family 
taking port wine. After dinner was over I replaced the 
wine bottle and the whisky bottle in the cupboard in the 
dining-room, and for supper the same evening I replaced the 
bottles on the dining-room table and left the house at a 
quarter-past 5. When I returned the supper table had been 
cleared. I next had occasion to go to the cupboard next 
day; the wine bottle was missing. The empty bottles were 
placed in the cellar. On the last night Mrs. Greenwood was 
alive I went to bed at 11.30, but I could not sleep because 
of Mrs. Greenwood groaning in her bedroom below. I do 
not know whether a doctor was called. On the morning of 
the Sunday of the death Mr. Greenwood was in the garden, 

282 


Coroner’s Inquest. 


and from there he went to the china pantry, where he re- 
mained a quarter of an hour, and from there he went to 
the dining-room, where he remained about five minutes. I 
had never known him do that before, and I had to wait 
for him to come out. The wine was kept in the sideboard 
of the dining-room. Mrs. Greenwood was quite well that day. 

By a Juryman—Did you leave Rumsey House of your own 
accord ?—Yes. 

Examined by Mr. Prarce—The wine bottle was labelled 
““ Port Wine.’”’ There was burgundy in the pantry as well. 

Examined by Mr. Luprorp—TI saw Mrs. Greenwood taking 
one wineglassful of the port wine. I am quite sure that I 
could not sleep that night because of Mrs. Greenwood’s 
groaning. 


MarcarRet Ann Morris, cook at Rumsey House, said she 
cooked the midday meal at the house on the Sunday. All 
partook of it, and no one was ill after it. 

Examined by Mr. Luprorp—Was the previous witness under 
notice to leave Rumsey House at the time Mrs. Greenwood 
died !—Yes, for staying out late. 

Did you have any difficulty in getting to sleep on the 
Sunday night?—Well, I did not sleep very well because of 
a gathered finger, but the other two maids slept all night. 

Hannah Williams says she could not sleep because of Mrs. 
Greenwood’s groaning/—She was groaning, but not enough 
to keep us awake. 

Mrs. Greenwood was not very well on the Saturday night, 
was she !—No. 
Adjourned. 


Wednesday, 16th June, 1920. 


Dr. Wiuucox (recalled) said that the signs during life of 
heart disease were very similar to those of valvular disease of 
the heart. The symptoms that had been described would be 
similar to those in a case of cholera or ptomain * poisoning, 
but in the latter case several persons were generally affected 
by some contaminated food. In the present case the presence 
of arsenic in the body placed the matter beyond doubt. 


Marcaret Ann Morris (recalled) said that Mrs. Greenwood 
had given Hannah Williams notice. 

I have been told since yesterday that Hannah Williams told 
a different story to the police?—I know that Mrs. Greenwood 
had given her notice. 


* See note on page 150. ae 


Appendix I. 


Examined by Mr. Luprorp—Was Hannah Williams tamper- 
ing with the wine?—Yes, she was. : 

And drinking it?—I have not seen her. The other maid 
has seen her. 

Have you seen her after she has been taking wine?—Yes, 
in the kitchen. 

What happened then !—She was sick. 

Did you know how that was caused?!—I did not know then, 
but I knew two or three months after that. 

On the Sunday that Mrs. Greenwood was taken ill, you 
were in the kitchen all day ?/—Yes. 

You were not working because you had a bad finger 7—No, 
I was not working. 

Is the door of the china pantry right opposite the kitchen? 
—Yes. 

Did you see Mr. Greenwood go into the pantry /—No. 

Examined by Mr. Psarce—Was there anything in the con- 
duct of Williams to call for her instant dismissal ?—No. 

If it was known that she had been tampering with the 
wine, that would be a cause for instant dismissal ?—I did not 
see her. 

You told us yesterday that the real reason why Mrs. 
Greenwood gave her notice—assuming that she did so—was 
that she stayed out late?—Yes. 

As far as you know, Hannah Williams may be speaking 
the truth when she says that she gave notice?—As far as I 
know, but Mrs. Greenwood told me she gave her notice. 

Will you swear that Mr. Greenwood did not go into the 
china pantry that day?—I did not see him. I was in the 
kitchen that day and not feeling very well. 

Was it possible for him to have gone in without your seeing 
him /—Yes. 


By the Coronzer—I am in service there now. I was there 
last night. 


Mary ADELINA GRIFFITHS, sister of Dr. T. R. Griffiths, said 
—I was on good terms with the Greenwood family for some 
time. On the Monday before Mrs. Greenwood died we were 
together at a tea in the castle, and Mrs. Greenwood was then 
quite well. I never heard Mrs. Greenwood say that she 
thought she was not going to live long. On the Sunday that 
Mrs. Greenwood was taken ill Mr. Greenwood called at the 
house. My brother was in the surgery, and Mr. Greenwood 
was shown into the drawing-room, where I remained with 
him for a few minutes. He said he had come for the doctor 
to see his wife, who was very ill. 

In what frame of mind was he?—His usual frame of mind. 

Was he in high or low spirits!—In ordinary spirits. 

Was he jocular?—He is usually jocular. 

284 


Coroner’s Inquest. 


Was he more or legss- jocular then!—Just as jocular as 
usual. 

Did he say his wife was worse than usual?—Yes, sir. 
He said, ‘‘ I don’t think she will get over it this time. She 
is worse than usual,’’ or something of that kind. 

And he was in his usual jocular spirits?/—Yes, just his 
usual. 

Did he dance or jump about the room !—No. 

Have you used the expression that he was perfectly happy? 
—He seemed to be quite all right. 

He said he was going for a trip ?—Yes. 

And you spoke together about Ramsgate /—Yes. 

Did he say something about a trip being his honeymoon? 
—Something of that kind. 

What did you understand by that?—I think he talked 
about some fortune-telling, and that the fortune-teller had 
said something of the kind to him. 

He had been married for twenty-three years, you know !— 
I know. 

Did you say that it was a curious thing for a fortune- 
teller to say!—He went out just then, and that was the last 
thing he said. 

Did he say where the fortune-teller had said this trip was 
going to be?—No. 

Was a motor car mentioned /—No. 

Miss Phillips says that when Mr. Greenwood was away 
fetching the doctor he was an hour away ?—He was only with 
us a short time. 

It was not a long time?—No. 

Did his daughter come for him ?—No. 

How long were you with Mr. Greenwood!—About ten 
minutes. 

How long did Mr. Greenwood remain with the doctor before 
he went out with him to Rumsey House?—A few minutes. 

When Miss Greenwood came over to your house to hurry 
up your brother, you and he were in the drawing-room !— 
The doctor was with us then. 

You were talking about fortunes. Do you tell fortunes ?— 
No. 

You have no skill in that?—No. 

Did he tell you who had told him his fortune?—He said 
it was at Swansea recently. There are several fortune- 
tellers in Swansea. 

There are some in Kidwelly, are there not? Did he say 
it was Nurse Jones who had told his fortune?—No. 

When did the doctor pay his second visit to the patient ?— 
I could not say. I went to bed. 

Did you know about the 3 o’clock call?!—Yes, I heard the 


knock. 
285 


Appendix I. 


Was there any call between the time that Miss Greenwood 
came and the 3 a.m. call when Mrs. Greenwood died ?—I did 
not know of any. 

I do not want to be offensive, but you were on pretty inti- 
mate terms with Mr. Greenwood. You were on friendly 
terms ?—Yes, on friendly terms. 

Was he what one might call something of a flirt !—Always 
very pleasant. 

To one sex more than another !—Always very pleasant to 
the ladies. 

Did you have a conversation with Mrs. Greenwood in his 
presence about his weakness, and so on?—Mrs. Greenwood 
was teasing him that he liked ladies’ company. 

Am I correct in saying that she said before him in your 
presence, ‘‘ That is Harold’s weakness. He is too fond of 
the ladies ’’ ?—She might have done so, but I cannot remember 
it in detail. 

Mr. Greenwood used to visit you frequently before his 
wife’s death 1—Yes. 

Does he visit you now!—He has not come often since Mrs. 
Greenwood’s death. 

Were you in the habit of receiving telephone messages for 
Mr. Greenwood !/—Yes. 

There was no telephone in Rumsey House ?—No. 

How long had this gone on ?—Since he came to live there. 

Has there been a particular voice on the telephone asking 
him to come over !—There was the same person once or twice. 

Was the message always the same, ‘‘ Will Mr. Greenwood 
come to the telephone? ’’—He told me once it was a woman 
who cleaned the office, but I happened to know it was a Milks 
Jones. 

Did he say who Miss Jones was?!—He said it was a Miss 
Jones of the Llanelly Mercury office. 

Was that the person he subsequently married?—Yes, I 
understand so. 

On 17th June, the Tuesday after the day of the death, did 
oS same person ask for Mr. Greenwood on the telephone ?— 

es. 

You sent for him and he came!—Yes. 

Did you eventually stop this practice of calling him to the 
telephone?—Later on I did. 

It has not continued since!—No. 

I want to be quite correct. When the telephone went did 
you say, ‘‘ Oh, it is the woman who cleans the office, is it? ”’ 
and the voice replied, ‘‘ No, it is Miss Jones ’? ?—Yes, some- 
thing of that kind. 

Examined by Mr. Prarcp—When Miss Greenwood called 
for the doctor, did she complain of the delay ?—No. 

286 


Coroner’s Inquest. 


Did you go to the drawing-room, where the doctor was 
talking to Mr. Greenwood, and hurry your brother up !—Yes. 

Were there two attempts to wake the doctor about 3 a.m. 1— 
I did not hear two. 

If there had been, would you have heard!—I think so. I 
am a light sleeper. 

Was there a call for your brother at 1 a.m.?—I did not 
hear any. I am sure he did not go out then. 

Was Mr. Greenwood distressed after the death of his wife? 
—I have been told he was not. 

Examined by Mr. Luprorp—Might it happen that your 
brother had been called up during the night without your 
hearing it!/—It might, but it is very improbable. 

There is no truth in the suggestion that Mr. Greenwood 
was dancing, but he is always inclined to joke, and is 
friendly with the ladies 1—Yes. 

As a matter of fact, he is always on good terms with the 
ladies 1—Yes. 

Are you quite sure about the honeymoon conversation 7— 
Yes; it arose out of fortune-telling. 

Had you been speaking to him on other occasions about such 
things !—About fortune-telling, you mean? 

Yes. Have you not confused the occasions!—No, I do 
not think so. 


Hannan Macoig Wiiuiams (recalled), examined by Mr. 
Luprorp, again said that she placed a bottle of port wine 
on the dining table. 

You knew it was port wine because of the label on the 
bottle /—Yes. 

I suggest to you that there never was a bottle of port wine 
on the Greenwood table at all?—Yes, I saw the label. It was 
a red label. 

Did you read the label?—Yes. 

On the Sunday /—Yes. 

Had you ever seen a bottle of port wine before?—No. 

It was not a new bottle/—No, it was three-quarters full. 

It had been used before?—Yes, the day before. 

Was that the day you were drunk in the kitchen!—I was 
never drunk. 

I suggest that it was because you were drinking the wine 
that Mrs. Greenwood accused you of tampering with it!— 
No, it is not true, and the truth will stand. 

And that was one of the things that led her to give you 
notice !—-She never gave me notice. 

Is it true that you were so late one night that you came 
in by the window!—Yes, only one night. 

Why did you come in through the window?—Because the 
cook had gone to bed. 

287 


Appendix I. 


I put it to you that on the Sunday there was not a bottle 
of port wine on the table?—Yes, there was. i 

I suggest that it was a bottle of burgundy?!—No, it was 
port wine. 

Miss Irene would very frequently take burgundy with her 
mother ?—I never saw her do it. 

If Miss Irene swears that there was no port wine on the 
table that Sunday, and only burgundy, would she be wrong? 
—Yes. 

If the other maid said that you were continually taking 
wine from the bottle and decanter 1—Well, she is a liar. 


Rev. D. Amsprosz Jones, vicar of Kidwelly, said—On- the 
Saturday preceding Mrs. Greenwood’s death I accompanied 
her to a business meeting of the tennis club at Ferryside. 
She took a lively part in the discussions, and we came back 
together to Kidwelly in the evening. That was the last time 
I saw her alive. 

Did you hear of the death from Nurse Jones between 7 
and 8 on the Monday morning?—Yes. I asked her the 
symptoms prior to the death 

Mr. Luprorp—lI object to this. It is absolutely contrary to 
the laws of evidence. 

The Coroner—I must have this evidence in view of what 
Nurse Jones said yesterday. (Z’0 Wuitness)—You saw Mr. 
Greenwood that morning, and went with him to fix the site 
of the grave. Was any reference made by Mr. Greenwood 
as to the symptoms before death ?—As far as I can remember, 
no. 

Was anything said about suicide?—No, most certainly not. 

Well, you had another conversation with him on the day 
of the exhumation. Was anything said then?’—Mr. Green- 
wood said he wondered how the whole thing arose, and 
added, ‘‘ I wonder if she took something herself? There was 
nothing here. She was fond of staring at the water.” 

Personally, did you find Mrs. Greenwood cheerful and 
genial ?—Yes. 

What did you think of the suggestion of suicide ?—I cannot 
but regard any suggestion of that kind from whatever quarter 
it comes as an infamous slander on the character and 
memory of a deceased lady who is not here to defend herself. 

Examined by Mr. Luprorp—Do you suggest that it is an 
infamous slander to say that a person is depressed 7—I never 
said that. 

By what right do you say that it is an infamous slander 
to say that a person is depressed?—I never said that. I 


said that the suggestion that she took her own life would be 
an infamous slander. 


' 288 


Coroner’s Inquest. 


Were you talking to Mr. Greenwood about it?—No, he 
was talking to me. 


Mrs. Anniz Groves said she was caretaker of Mr. Green- 
wood’s office at Llanelly. 

In June last year Mr. Greenwood used to come to his office 
every day ?/—Yes. 

You knew the first Mrs. Greenwood !—Yes. 

Did she sometimes visit the office ?—Yes, occasionally; but 
not often. 

You also knew the present Mrs. Greenwood ?—Yes. 

Did she work for her father or relatives at the Mercury 
printing office ?—Yes. 

Where was Mr. Greenwood in the habit of taking his lunch? 
—Up to two years ago, at his office. 

And where afterwards !—lI believe he used to take it at the 
Mercury office. 

On what terms was he with them !—They were very friendly, 
and his present wife used to come to see him at his office. 

Were they alone !—Yes. 

Had you seen any familiarity between them?—No. 

I don’t mean anything improper !—I have seen him kissing 
her. 

Well, I call that undue familiarity. Did she seem to object 
to it?—No, sir. 

They were on good terms ?—Yes, sir. 

You recollect Mrs. Greenwood dying a year to-day ?—Yes. 

On the Wednesday morning before her death she called at 
the office and you saw her coming ?!—Yes, sir. 

Where was Mr. Greenwood then?—Upstairs in the back 
room in his office. 

Who was with him?—Miss Gladys Jones. 

You knew it?—Yes. 

In view of that fact, what did you do?—Seeing Mrs. 
Greenwood going upstairs, when I knew that Mr. Greenwood 
was there with Miss Jones, I told her that Mr. Greenwood 
was out. She asked me if I knew where he was, and I said 
I did not think he would be long. When Mrs. Greenwood 
was going downstairs she noticed Mr. Greenwood’s coat 
hanging on the peg. 

Did you think it best that Mrs. Greenwood should not see 
them together?!—That must have been my reason, must it 
not, sir? 

Then Mrs. Greenwood saw the coat?—Yes, saw his coat 
through the glass panel of the door, and then said that she 
would wait. 

Where did she go?—Into one of the rooms in the front. 

And Mr. Greenwood and Miss Jones were in the room at 
the back ?—Yes. 

U0 289 


Appendix I. 


Did you see any more that happened !—Nothing whatever, 
sir. 
Later on, did you see Mr. Greenwood in the office?—Yes, 
the same day in the afternoon. 

He was alone then. Mrs. Greenwood had gone?—Yes, sir. 

What did you tell him?—I told him I was sorry I had 
told an untruth to Mrs. Greenwood. 

What did he say ?—He answered, ‘‘ It is all right.”’ 

Did Miss Jones continue to come to the office the same as 
before 7—Yes. 

On the Monday morning that Mrs. Greenwood died did Mr. 
Greenwood come to the office ?—Yes, sir. 

What did he say ?—He asked me if there were any letters, 
and I handed him some. He then told me if anybody called 
he would not be in the office till the following Friday. 

What further did he tell you?—He told me that Mrs. 
Greenwood had died. I said, ‘‘ Oh, God, don’t tell me that.”’ 

Do you know that he married again?—Yes, on Ist October, 
LOLS 

To Miss Gladys Jones ?—Yes. 

Do you know anything about his honeymoon ?—I only know 
that he had a motor for a tour. 

How long were they away ?!—About a month. 

Did he say anything to you about the exhumation !—Yes, 
he said they were going to raise the body. 

Just look at this paper [handing the following receipt], 
“15th July, 1919, Bot..of Hurcomb & Co., London. H. 
Greenwood, Esq. Diamond cluster ring, £55. Cluster and 
patterns enclosed herewith. Receipted, 15th July, 1919.’” 
Did you find that paper in the fireplace in Mr. Greenwood’s 
office at Llanelly 7—Yes. 

Examined by Mr. Luprorp—Did you know that the Green- 
wood family and the W. B. Jones family, Llanelly, were 
related 1—Yes. 

He was on exceedingly friendly terms with the whole 
family ?—Yes. 

They were going to his office, and he was going to their 
office continually !/—Yes. 

You saw Mr. Greenwood kissing Miss Jones?—Yes. 

Was that before or after the death?—After the death. 

You did not see him kissing her before the death ?—No. 

By the Coronrr—After his return from the honeymoon did 
you make any statement to Mr. Greenwood ?—Yes. 

What did you say?—I said that I had heard rumours that 
the body of his late wife was to be exhumed. 

What did he say to that ?—Nothing. 

From whom had you heard that?—I do not remember. 

You said there was no kissing between those people before 
the death?—No. 

290 


Coroner’s Inquest. 


Only sitting together in the room !—Yes. 

I ask you these questions because, in your statement to the 
police, you did not draw that distinction?—I did not know 
what to think about it. 

By Mr. Luprorp—You told Mr. Greenwood that Miss 
Bowater had said to you that she was going to have the 
body of her sister exhumed !—Yes. 


Joun Cuirrorp Jonzs, assistant to his father, Lewis Jones, 
chemist, 19 Bridge Street, Kidwelly, said that on 8th June, 
1917, he sold to Mr. Greenwood two tins of ‘‘ Cooper’s Weedi- 
cide.’? They were quart tins, and he produced a record 
of the sale. It was a record in the ‘‘ Book of Poisons Sold.’’ 
Mr. Greenwood signed the book for it. Witness saw him 
sign it. He accepted the statement of Mr. Pearce that his 
father had purchased the weedicide in 1916. 


Dr. Cart Bastin Epwarps, B.Sc., chief technical chemist 
of Cooper’s Technical Bureau, said—‘‘ Cooper’s Weedicide ”’ 
is manufactured by my firm, and tins can be bought at any 
chemist on carrying out the necessary condition of signing 
for the purchase. ‘‘ Weedicide ’’ contains 36 per cent. of 
arsenious oxide combined with soda. There is a possible 
variation of not more than 2 per cent. either way from 
36 per cent. 

Is the weedicide highly poisonous to animal life if taken 
internally /—Most highly poisonous. 

Does the amount of a fatal dose depend upon any circum- 
stances!—A fatal dose of arsenic depends upon the constitu- 
tion of the person, the method of administration, the state 
of the stomach, and many other factors. I should be very 
gravely doubtful of the issue if 2 grains were taken in 
solution. 

Thé weedicide was bought by the chemist from your firm 
three years ago. Would there be any variation in the 
strength of the preparation in consequence !—No; it has been 
standardised at 36 per cent. for at least ten years, and it is 
invariably put to analysis, and, therefore, determined. 

What does weedicide weigh to the gallon?—It would weigh 
15.7 lbs. to the gallon, and there would be about 54 lbs. 
of arsenious oxide in every gallon of it. 

Examined by Mr. Pzarce—Your weedicide is, substan- 
tially, colourless?—Before the war weedicide was coloured 
with aniline dye, which produced a vivid green colour. This 
wags done in order to avoid misuse of the preparation. When 
the war broke out my firm was unable to obtain that par- 
ticular dye, and some time during 1915 the use of the colour 
was dropped, and after that it was substantially colourless. 

How many drops of concentrated solution of weedicide 

291 


Appendix I. 


would it require to produce half a grain of arsenic ?—Two 
single drops. 


Epwarp Roperts—I am a motor garage proprietor carry- 
ing on business at Vaughan Street, Llanelly. On 19th May 
last I received a telephone message from Mr. Greenwood stat- 
ing that his car had broken down and that he wanted to get 
back to Kidwelly, as his wife was very ill. I proceeded with 
a car to Pontardulais, and found there Mr. Greenwood, Miss 
Jones, and her brother, Mr. Llewellyn Jones. I tried to put 
Mr. Greenwood’s car in order, but failed, and pushed it into 
the edge of the road. Mr. Greenwood told me to go to 
Kidwelly. I drove them in my car as far as Llanelly, and they 
then went to Tyrfran, where Miss Jones left with her brother. 
At Tyrfran they held a conversation, which I did not hear, 
and as a result the whole party then went on to Kidwelly. 
On approaching Kidwelly I received instructions to drive 
through Kidwelly, and I did so, driving about three- 
quarters of a mile beyond Kidwelly. I then stopped and 
received instructions from Mr. Greenwood to turn round 
and return home. I was instructed by Mr. Greenwood to 
drive past Rumsey House on the way back. We passed 
beyond Mr. Greenwood’s house on the way back about a 
quarter of a mile, and Mr. Greenwood alighted there and 
went in the direction of his house. 

You had in the car all the time Mr. Jones and his sister, 
the present Mrs. Greenwood? What did you do with them ?— 
I took them to their residence at Tyrfran. 

What time was that?—I put it down in my book as 1.30 
a.m. 

Examined by Mr. Luprorp—Did you personally receive the 
call from Pontardulais?—Yes. 

Did you make the entry yourself ?—Yes. 

You receive dozens of calls every day ?—Yes. 

ee know it is important as to what you heard that day? 
—Yes. 

Are you going any further than to say that Mrs. Green- 
wood was either very ill or dying ?—No, it was either the one 
or the other. 

As you are not certain, does it not indicate that your 
memory may be rather indistinct?—Not having regard to 
the time. 


Did you have any conversation with them?—None other 
than orders. 

Was not the object of your going beyond Rumsey House 
to enable you to turn the car round?—No. 

Could you have turned the car round at Rumsey House ?— 
I could have done so. There was no suggestion made to me 
about turning round. I was working under instructions 

292 


Coroner’s Inquest. 

Do you remember any other instructions from Mr. Green- 
wood !—No. 

Did you receive any instructions from Mr. Llewellyn Jones? 
—No; that particular order was given me by Mr. Green- 
wood himself, 

By the Coroner—But you have told us that you went three- 
quarters of a mile beyond Rumsey House ?—Yes. 

If you had simply to turn round you would not have 
found it necessary to go that way !—No. 


Gwynetn Davin, Tyrfran, Llanelly, said—In May, 1919, 
I met the present Mrs. Greenwood at Llanelly, and was 
told by her that the late Mrs. Greenwood had been uncon- 
scious for a week, and was as low as she could possibly be. 
That same morning I had a letter from Miss Greenwood, and 
she did not say anything about her mother being ill. I then 
made inquiries, and subsequently I received the following 


letter from Mr. Greenwood :— 

5th June, 1919. 

Dear Miss David,—I am indeed very much surprised to hear 

that you told Miss Alice Jones yesterday that Mrs. Greenwood 
was not ill, and that her brother had not been to see her. Why 
and what is your object in telling her these deliberate lies? Your 
only object that I can see is that you, for some unknown desire, 
wish to attempt to break my friendship with the Jones family, 
which I feel happy to say is more than your flippant tongue can 
achieve. I must ask you in future to please let me and mine alone, 
unless you can speak the truth concerning them, but I must call 
for an explanation of the innuendo you suggest by making the 
false statement you have.—Yours truly, 

H. Greenwoop. 


To Miss Gwyneth David, Llanelly. 


Examined by Mr. Luprorp—Has your friendship with the 
Jones family been broken off?—No, it has not. 

Did Miss Jones accuse you of telling untruths?—Yes. 

Were you trying to make mischief !—No, I was not. 

Were you stopped going to the Jones family because you 
were telling untruths!—No. 

Did the same thing happen with you in regard to the 
Morgan family ?—Something did happen. 

It is true, therefore, that you were stopped going to the 
Morgans because of your habit of telling untruths?—No, 

I have to put it to you that the present Mrs. Greenwood 
never said anything to you about the low condition of the 
late Mrs. Greenwood ?—I will swear to that. 

Did you reply to that letter ?—Yes. 

Have you a copy of your letter 7—No. 

The Coroner—I call Mr. Harold Greenwood. 

[Police-Sergeant Hodge Lewis left the Court, and returned 
to say that he had called Mr. Greenwood’s name, but there 


was no answer. | a 


Appendix I. 


Lity Gwynerra PowrLti said—I was a maid at Rumsey 
House at the time of Mrs. Greenwood’s death. I had the 
same food as everybody else in the house on the Sunday 
before Mrs. Greenwood’s death, and I did not feel any ill 
effects. I was not disturbed by Mrs. Greenwood groaning on 
Sunday night. 

Examined by Mr. Luprorp—What wine was served for 
dinner on the Sunday?—It was burgundy. 

Have you ever seen port wine in the house?—Very seldom. 

Have you ever seen Mrs. Greenwood faint?—Yes, in May, 
1919. 

Can you say that Mrs. Greenwood was in a delicate state 
of health?—I would not say that. : 

Are you still in Mr. Greenwood’s service ?—Yes. 

Examined by Mr. Prarce—Is it true that groans could 
be heard in the room that you and Hannah Williams occu- 
pied 7—Yes. 

Do you know the difference between port wine and bur- 
gundy in a glass?—No, I don’t think so. 

There was red wine in the house on 15th June of last 
year /—Yes. 

Was it used at table?—Yes. 

Are you still at Rumsey House ?—Yes. 

How do you know it was burgundy on 15th June?—I knew 
it was burgundy she always used to take. 

Who is she?—The late Mrs. Greenwood. 

You were not waiting at table on 15th June?—No. 

So you do not know what was taken on that day ?!—No. 


MarrHa Morris, Station Road, Kidwelly, said—I have 
known the Greenwood family for twenty-two years, having 
been in service with them before marriage. So far as I know, 
Mr. and Mrs. Greenwood lived on good terms. Mrs. Green- 
wood gave me a pound of butter every week, which she paid 
for. On the Saturday before she died Mrs. Greenwood called 
to see me and paid me for doing some sewing and washing. 
She seemed very weak, and sat down on the sofa. I had 
no butter that week from Mrs. Greenwood, and I went to 
Rumsey House later in the evening. I saw Mrs. Greenwood 
and Miss Phillips between 9 and 10 p.m., and the former 
said that she could not give me any butter that week, but 
Miss Irene would give it to me the following week. 

Examined by Mr. Luprorp—Have you ever seen Mrs. 
Greenwood faint ?—Yes. 

Several times ?—Yes. 

When was the last time you saw her faint before she died? 
—About six weeks before. 

Was she in very low spirits the week before she died ?—Yes. 

294 


Coroner’s Inquest. 


The Coronsr, addressing the jury, said—No doubt you are 
well acquainted with the people in this case. So far as the 
evidence goes, there was no particular disagreement in the 
Greenwood family. Dr. Griffiths has spoken of Mrs. Green- 
wood as a somewhat delicate, frail woman, whose health was 
fairly good up to a few months prior to her death. She was 
going on apparently as usual, taking her usual part in the 
social functions in the district, and she seems to have been 
a kindly, considerate woman in every respect. 

So things went on till Saturday, 14th June of last year. 
On that day there was a tennis party at Ferryside, which 
she attended, taking part in the discussions at the club 
meeting. She came back to Kidwelly with the vicar, who 
left her at the station, and he never saw her again. Miss 
Phillips saw her on the Saturday evening, and she said she 
was very bright, but that her voice was rather low. Miss 
Phillips saw her again on the Sunday and noticed that her 
voice was lower still. Mrs. Greenwood was at home all day 
on Sunday, was taken ill about 6 p.m., and died soon after 
3 on Monday morning. The doctor certified that death was 
due to valvular disease of the heart. In consequence of cer- 
tain suspicions the body was exhumed, and the result of the 
analysis of the organs was the conclusion of Dr. Willcox 
that there was no doubt that Mrs. Greenwood died from acute 
arsenical poisoning. Dr. Griffiths says in evidence that if 
he had known what he knows now he would not have given 
the certificate he did, but that it would be in accordance with 
Dr. Willcox’s opinion. Dr. Willcox has elaborated the matter, 
saying that a dose of at least 2 grains of arsenic is possibly 
a fatal dose for an adult. He has told you that the wide 
distribution of the poison indicates that it had been readily 
absorbed, and very probably given in a dissolved state. All 
these are indications given by the best-informed experts on 
those subjects. Dr. Willcox also examined the organs to see 
if there were traces of diseases from natural causes, and 
found none. He says that the poison was taken by the mouth, 
and it is for you to consider carefully how it came to be 
taken by Mrs. Greenwood. 

There are three alternatives—either she must have taken 
it herself accidentally; or she must have taken it inten- 
tionally with the object, if you like, of taking her own life; 
or some one must have administered it to her. As regards 
the first and second alternatives, I do not think there is 
the slightest evidence to support them; and there is nothing 
to support the idea that she had in her mind any intention 
to commit suicide. The crucial question is: was the poison 
administered to her, and, if so, by whom? Dr. Willcox 
gives the opinion that the poison was administered some 
time between 1.30 p.m. and 12 midnight on the Sunday, and 

295 


Appendix I. 


more probably between 1.30 and 6.30 p.m. The only people in 
the house were the children, the servants, and the husband. 
You can eliminate the servants and children, and therefore you 
have to consider, in view of the evidence, the circumstances 
in connection with the movements and actions of the husband. 
You will have to say whether those circumstances are merely 
of a suspicious character, or whether they are of such a 
character as to lead you to the conclusion that the poison 
was administered by Mr. Greenwood. 

With regard to the visits of the doctor, and the contra- 
dictions in the evidence regarding them, I might just point 
out that when he was sent for the doctor Mr. Greenwood was 
away for about an hour, and his daughter, Irene, had to 
go after him to hurry up the doctor. Miss Griffiths, the 
doctor’s sister, says that he was only there for a quarter of 
an hour. This was a curious thing for a husband to do when 
his wife was in such a serious state, and the circumstance 
is rendered still more odd when you come to the evidence 
of Miss Griffiths as to his demeanour and his words and 
actions when he came into the doctor’s house. She says that 
he was in his usual good spirits, as jocular as usual, and that 
he said to her, referring to his wife, ‘‘ She is worse than 
usual, and I do not think she will get over it this time.”’ 
There was some conversation afterwards—an allusion to his 
next trip being his honeymoon. This was an observation 
made by a fortune-teller at Swansea, and you may attach 
whatever importance you think fit to it. It. may mean 
nothing to be in good spirits. Some men even in the very 
darkest hour are in good spirits—it is a matter of tempera- 
ment to a great extent. I must, however, call attention to 
it and couple it with the fact that the husband was so long 
in taking the doctor back to the patient. 

Coming to the incident of the bottle of wine, Hannah 
Williams has stated that it was in the sideboard in the dining- 
room, and that she placed it on the dining-room table near 
where Mrs. Greenwood sat; that she helped Mrs. Green- 
wood to a glass of it, and afterwards she cleared the table, 
and put the wine bottle in the sideboard. She then laid 
the table for supper before she went out. When Miss Phillips 
was at supper with the family, there was in front of Mrs. 
Greenwood’s place, not the wine, but a cane flask containing 
something. On the following day, when the servant went 
to the sideboard for the bottle of wine to place it on the 
table, the bottle was gone. Then there is the somewhat curious 
and important evidence that on the Sunday morning Mr. 
Greenwood spent about a quarter of an hour in the china 
pantry, where he had never been in the habit of going 
before. It is true that another witness, who was in the 
kitchen all day Sunday, states that she did not see Mr. 

296 


Coroner’s Inquest. 


Greenwood going into thé china pantry, which was opposite 
the kitchen door, but it is for you to decide whether she 
was paying sufficient attention to Mr. Greenwood’s move- 
ments to be able to negative the statement that Mr. Green- 
wood was in fact in the china pantry. If he were there, 
you cannot say what he was doing there. That is only a 
matter of inference and surmise. The important thing is 
that this wine was apparently the only thing Mrs. 
Greenwood took that the others did not take, and that, 
coupled with Mr. Greenwood’s going into the pantry and 
the disappearance of the bottle, are circumstances that must 
be brought to your notice for you to attach such weight 
as you think proper. 

Two sorts of evidence have been called, dealing, first of 
all, with Mr. Greenwood’s acquaintance and familiarity— 
not improper familiarity ; far from it—with his present wife 
during the lifetime of his late wife. You will recollect the 
evidence of his office caretaker, Mrs. Groves, as to Mrs. 
Greenwood’s visit to the office, when the caretaker said that 
he was not there. Subsequently the caretaker told Mr. Green- 
wood that she was sorry she had told a lie to Mrs. Green- 
wood, and he replied, ‘‘ Oh, that is all right.’? You must 
remember also the evidence of Miss Griffiths with regard to 
the telephone. Do not lose sight of that. There seems to 
have been a number of messages constantly passing between 
him and Miss Jones on the telephone in the doctor’s house. 
One day Miss Griffiths asked him, ‘‘ Who is the person who 
is calling you up so often? ’’ And he replied that it was his 
caretaker, whereupon Miss Griffiths said, ‘‘ No, for she told 
me she was Miss Jones,’’ and to that Mr. Greenwood gave 
no reply. All those things indicate that at the time he was 
on familiar terms with his present wife. Then there is the 
receipt spoken of by the caretaker as having been found by 
her in the office. It is dated 15th July, 1919. 

Another feature of the case, which has been pointed out 
by Miss David, was that Mr. Greenwood seemed to have a 
desire to create the impression that his wife was ill. Except 
on that inference, it is very difficult to explain what his 
letter to Miss David means. 

The only other item I need call your attention to is the 
question of the weed-killer. In June, 1917, Mr. Greenwood 
bought two one-quart tins of weedicide, which a Kidwelly | 
chemist had purchased from the manufacturers on 31st July, 
1916. You have had evidence that two drops of this liquid 
weed-killer amounted to about half a grain of arsenic, so 
that the mere putting in of a very small amount—a very 
few drops—would be sufficient. The minimum fatal dose is 
2 grains, so that it required very little of that weed-killer 
placed in liquid or solid to bring about the fatal dose. 

297 


Appendix I. 


You have to remember also that, according to the evidence, 
the weedicide, when combined with any other substance or 
liquid, is very nearly tasteless. It is clear that death was 
due to arsenic. You have material containing arsenic in 
solution purchased in 1917 by the husband. To some extent 
you have had evidence of a motive. I do not lay too much 
stress on that, but to some extent there is a motive—there 
was, undoubtedly, the familiar terms on which the man was 
at the time with another woman when his wife was alive. 
Between that and the coming to the conclusion that the 
arsenic was administered by Greenwood there is a consider- 
able gap that requires other evidence to fill, but that there is 
evidence of a grave suspicion is undoubted, and the responsi- 
bility is now upon you as men of common sense to say whether 
it points to Mr. Greenwood as the person who had adminis- 
tered the poison. 

You are not undertaking the trial of Mr. Greenwood. 
You are not a jury in a Criminal Court where these matters 
have to be dealt with according to the strict rules of evidence. 
In this Court we have considerably more latitude, because 
there is no one charged at this moment. It is true, however, 
that if you return a verdict that Mr. Greenwood was the 
person who administered the arsenic, it will be my duty to 
issue a warrant for his apprehension. 

[The jury then retired. After 35 minutes they sent in a 
request for a private consultation with the coroner, and they 
remained in his private retiring room for 15 minutes. 
Shortly afterwards they returned to Court. | 

The Coronser—Concerning the death of Mabel Greenwood, 
are you agreed upon your verdict? 

The Forreman—That is the verdict of us all (handing a 
paper). 

The Coroner (reading)—‘‘ We are unanimously of opinion 
that the death of the deceased, Mabel Greenwood, was caused 
by acute arsenical poisoning as certified by Dr. Willcox, 
and that the poison was administered by Harold Greenwood.”’ 


- 298 


APPENDIX II. 


POLICE COURT PROCEEDINGS. 
Thursday, 17th June, 1920. 


CHARGE. 


Haroip GREENWOOD is charged for that he, the said Harold 
Greenwood, on the 16th day of June, 1919, at the borough 
of Kidwelly, in the county of Carmarthen, murdered Mabel 
Greenwood, against the peace of our Lord the King, his 
Crown, and Dignity. 


Ernest Haicu, on his oath, saith—I am chief inspector 
of the Criminal Investigation Department of Scotland Yard. 
At 4.30 p.m. on 16th June, 1920, I went to the house of 
Police-Sergeant Lewis at Kidwelly. In the back room there 
I saw the prisoner, detained by Sergeant Lewis and another 
officer. I said to him, ‘‘ I am Chief Inspector Haigh. You 
know me. The coroner’s jury have just returned a verdict 
of murder against you. It is my duty to arrest you and 
charge you with the wilful murder of Mabel Greenwood on 
16th June, 1919. You will be taken to Llanelly, where you 
will appear before a magistrate to-morrow. I have to caution 
you that anything you say will be written down and may 
be used in evidence.’’ He said, ‘‘ All right.’? A minute 
afterwards he said, ‘‘ What was the actual verdict? ’’ and I 
said, ‘‘ The jury unanimously found that your late wife 
died from acute arsenical poisoning, and that the poison 
was administered by you.’’ He said, ‘‘ Oh, dear!’’ I was 
present at the police station, Llanelly, later the same day 
when the charge entered in the station charge book was read 
over to the prisoner by Superintendent Samuel Jones. He 
was again cautioned by the superintendent, and he replied, 
**T understand.”’ 


Friday, 25th June, 1920. 


SAMUEL JONES, on his oath, saith—I am the superintendent 
of police at Llanelly. I apply for a further remand to 


Thursday next, the Ist of July. 
299 


Appendix II. 


First Day—Thursday, 1st July, 1920. 


Mr. Sewarp Prarce (Deputy Director of Public Prosecu- 
tions) stated that he would call evidence which was available 
for the prosecution in support of the charge which had been 
made against the accused. That charge was that he was 
guilty of the wilful murder of his wife, Mabel Greenwood, 
on 16th June, 1919. The case for the prosecution was, 
shortly, that the murder was committed by the administra- 
tion on the day before the death of poison known as arsenic. 
Before he called the witnesses it was desirable that he should 
give an outline of the main outstanding facts of the case 
which the prosecution relied upon to support the charge. 

The accused was a solicitor who had for some years prac- 
tised in Llanelly and had resided for the last few years at 
Rumsey House, Kidwelly. He had been married for over 
twenty years and had four children, the eldest of whom was 
twenty-two years of age, and would probably appear during 
the course of the proceedings. The deceased, the wife of the 
accused, was a woman who, unfortunately, did not enjoy 
robust health. Perhaps she might be said to be delicate, but 
in spite of that as far as she was able to follow the ordinary 
occupation of life in the social scale she did. Then they came 
to an important date—14th June of last year—the date pre- 
ceding the day on which she was taken ill, the fatal illness. 
On that date she was sufficiently well to attend the tennis 
meeting at Ferryside, which involved a short train journey. 
She was able to make the journey unaccompanied. On the fol- 
lowing day, Sunday, 15th June, she was home at Kidwelly 
and was taken ill some time between 6 and 6.30 in the 
evening, and she died between 3 and 4 o’clock on the fol- 
lowing morning, 16th June. The doctor who was in attend- 
ance, acting on the information he was in possession of 
at that time, certified that the cause of death was valvular 
disease of the heart. A few days later the deceased lady 
was buried at Kidwelly, and there the matter remained for 
some months, until, in fact, April of this year, but for 
reasons which he was not able to say, or it was not necessary 
that he should trouble the bench, the coroner for the district 
ordered an exhumation of the body, and a post-mortem 
examination which followed revealed that death, so far from 
having taken place from valvular disease of the heart, was, 
in fact, due to acute arsenical poisoning. 

Certain organs of the body were removed at the post- 
mortem and submitted to the Homa Office analyst, and they 
were also examined by Dr. Willcox, the eminent physician, 
who was medical adviser to the Home Office. Dr. Willcox 
would tell them that the death was from acute arsenical 

300 


Police Court Proceedings. 


poisoning, and that there was found in the organs examined 
a considerable quantity of arsenic. He would tell them that 
a fatal dose was two grains, and that the symptoms from 
which the dead woman suffered, namely, sickness and 
diarrhoea, would account for the balance between the amount 
of arsenic found and the fatal dose. The arsenic, in the 
doctor’s opinion, would be tasteless if taken in such liquids 
as wine or tea, and it would not discolour the beverage, and 
he was further of the opinion that, judging from the wide 
distribution of the poison in the organs, the fatal dose, or 
a sufficient dose, was taken several hours before death. From 
his examination the doctor placed the hours that the fatal 
dose was taken as between 1.30 and 6.30 p.m. on Sunday, 
15th June. The actual symptoms of the lady’s illness were 
diarrheea and sickness, with additional abdominal pains. 
That being the case, it became necessary to give further 
details of some of the events that took place on 15th June. 
The accused, his wife, and two of their children had lunch 
about 1.30 p.m. The only difference with regard to the 
food and drink between Mrs. Greenwood and the others was 
that she took some wine, which was either port or burgundy 
—at any rate, it was a red wine, and some of the contents 
of the bottle had been used before the lunch on the 15th, 
with, so far as he knew, no unfortunate results. The par- 
lourmaid would state that she poured out the wine for Mrs. 
Greenwood while she was sitting at lunch. The next meal 
was tea, and that was taken somewhere between 4 o’clock and 
4.30, and the same members of the family partook of it. 
Mrs. Greenwood was taken ill about 6 o’clock or 6.30, and 
the accused at once went for Dr. Griffiths, whose house is 
immediately opposite Rumsey House. The doctor came 
shortly afterwards and found the patient very ill. About 
7.15 or 7.30 he paid her another visit. In the meantime 
Miss Phillips, a great friend of Mrs. Greenwood, had called 
and, realising the necessity of the position, she immediately 
went for the district nurse, Miss Jones, who resided in close 
proximity to the house. The nurse came, and about 9 o’clock 
the accused went again for the doctor, who came and pre- 
scribed two pills containing morphia, but no trace of arsenic. 
The next incident was that the doctor, taking his usual walk, 
went out of his house a little after 10 p.m., and the accused 
happened to appear at his own door (on the opposite side 
of the street) about the same time, and from what he was 
told the doctor did not think it was necessary to pay another 
visit to his patient at that time. The patient died between 
3 and 4 a.m. : 
Having established that the cause of death was poisoning, 
the question arose as to how it was administered. Three 
301 


Appendix II. 


possible suggestions were—suicide, accident, and adminis- 
tration of set purpose by another. ; ; ; 

He thought they would have no difficulty in disposing of 
the two first alternatives, and there was no evidence pointing 
in that direction; and, as far as the prosecution was con- 
cerned, it had to consider the evidence available to support 
the charge against Greenwood that he had administered the 
poison. 

There was no eye-witness of the crime, if crime there were, 
therefore it became necessary to fall back on what was known 
as presumptive or circumstantial evidence. They would 
possibly look upon the circumstantial evidence from the 
point of view of opportunity of administering the poison. 
They would also look for the means of procuring the poison 
found in the organs by Dr. Willcox. They would also look 
for motives. Finally, in all probability, they would, after 
considering these points of view, bear in mind another 
point of view that overlapped all others, namely, an 
examination of the accused’s conduct throughout. 

With regard to opportunity, there was evidence that the 
deceased was the only one who took the red wine on the 
Sunday. On the following day, the 16th—and this was 
important—the bottle and the remainder of the wine were 
missing. In regard to the question of means, there was 
evidence that in 1917 Greenwood purchased a weed-killer 
from Mr. Jones, a chemist at Kidwelly, and he signed the 
poison book which had to be provided under the Pharmacy 
Act. 

But, of course (said Mr. Pearce), you will realise that the 
purchase was some time before the death of the deceased, 
and therefore I do not rely on that as the means used in 
this case, because I am in a position to-day to prove a later 
purchase made on 2nd May, 1919. On that date, 2nd May, 
1919, there was delivered at Rumsey House a consignment 
of weed-killer which would be described in more detail by 
witnesses. The purchase was not made at Kidwelly, but 
the accused went as far afield as Edinburgh. Whether that 
was a matter of moment or not remained to be seen, but, at 
any rate, it was a fact of such significance that it called for 
some explanation. The circumstances were that in February, 
1919, Greenwood ordered some seeds from Messrs. Dobbie & 
Co., seedsmen, Edinburgh, and sent an additional order for 
£1 worth of Eureka weed-killer, which would mean a 14-lb. 
tin. For some reason or other the weed-killer was not sent 
with the seeds, possibly because Messrs. Dobbie were not the 
manufacturers of it. On 14th April, 1919, the accused again 
wrote to the firm as follows :—“‘ I shall be obliged if you will 
let me have 20s. worth of the weed-killer I ordered some 
months ago.—Yours faithfully, H. Greenwood.”’ 


In con- 
- 302 


Police Court Proceedings. 


sequence of this Messrs. Dobbie & Co. communicated with the 
makers of the Eureka weed-killer, Messrs. Tomlinson & Co., 
who have a factory at Lincoln, and in due course the con- 
signment mentioned reached Rumsey House on 2nd May. 
So that at any rate, said Mr. Pearce, I am entitled to say 
that was the means that was employed. 

With regard to motive, there was available some evidence 
on that point, sufficient in his judgment for the purpose. 
Mrs. Greenwood died on 16th June. Before four months had 
elapsed the accused was married to a Miss Gladys Jones. 
There was some evidence available of familiarity between 
the accused and the lady who has now become his second 
wife during the lifetime of the deceased lady. There was 
evidence also that so soon after his wife’s death as 4th July 
Greenwood wrote a letter to a firm of London jewellers order- 
ing a lady’s diamond marquise ring. In this he stated that 
the ring should be somewhere between £30 and £40, and 
“*T want one worth the money.’’ This order was afterwards 
changed to one for a diamond cluster ring, the accused 
writing, ‘‘ A good cluster ring will suit just as well, if the 
stones are large. I don’t want a lot of small stones.’’ He 
(Mr. Pearce) thought there was sufficient evidence to show 
that the ring came into the possession of the second wife. 

With regard to accused’s conduct, he was entitled, of 
course, to full credit for having gone for the doctor at 6.30, 
but the question was whether his subsequent conduct with 
regard to the medical attendance did not counterbalance the 
earlier visit which was possibly in his favour. There was 
evidence that he remained a considerable time at the doctor’s 
house when it was obvious that the doctor should have been 
brought over at once, and there was evidence that he knew 
the urgency of the case. Later on he saw the doctor in the 
street and told him the patient’s condition was easier, with 
the result that the doctor did not call to see the patient that 
time, although from what was known now it was of the 
utmost importance that the doctor should have been with the 
patient. She was im extremis at about 3 a.m. Shortly 
before her death the accused was asked to go for the doctor. 
He went, and said he had failed to rouse the doctor. The 
nurse, seeing the urgency of the case, said she would go 
herself for the doctor. She did go, and she had no difficulty 
whatever in rousing the doctor and bringing him with her 
to the sick room. 

Another fact in regard to his conduct which had a material 
bearing was that the accused for the first time—the only 
time as far as was known—on the morning of the 15th was 
in the pantry doing something which the servant girl, who 


spoke about the incident, could not see. 
303 


Appendix II. 


[An argument then arose between Mr. Pearce and Mr. 
Ludford (for the accused) as to whether at this stage the 
former could read the statement made by Greenwood to Super- 
intendent Samuel Jones. Eventually it was admitted, and 
Mr. Pearce read a lengthy statement* in which Greenwood, 
in his conversation with the superintendent, detailed signs 
of illness shown by Mrs. Greenwood whilst with him in the 
garden before she went to the house on the Sunday after- 
noon, and also gave his version of the circumstances in the 
sick room after Mrs. Greenwood’s death at 3 o’clock the 
following morning. Mr. Pearce said the statement was made 
after the superintendent had cautioned Greenwood. The 
superintendent remarked that as there were rumours con- 
cerning the death, there would probably be an application 
for the exhumation of the body, to which Greenwood replied 
that that was just the very thing he would like to see done. 

In conclusion, Mr. Pearce said the interesting question 
would be, what had become of the weed-killer? It might be 
that those who were able to answer that question would offer 
some information. | 


Evidence for the Prosecution. 


WittiamM Tuomas Moraan, undertaker, Station Road, 
Llanelly, said that, together with his father, he had charge 
of the arrangements of the funeral of the late Mrs. Mabel 
Greenwood in June, 1919. On 16th April, 1920, he was 
present at the exhumation of the body at Kidwelly. The 
coffin was in a brick grave. 


Dr. AwEexanpeR Dick, Llanelly, said that he lived at 
Llanelly, and was a registered medical practitioner. On 16th 
April, 1920, he conducted a post-mortem examination on the 
body of Mrs. Mabel Greenwood. Dr. Griffiths, of Kidwelly, 
and two other medical men were also present—four in all. 
He removed some of the organs, placed them in jars, which he 
sealed and packed in paper, and handed them to Police- 
Sergeant Hodge Lewis. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Luprorp—Are you quite certain 


that none of the soil got into contact with the body ?—Quite 
certain. 


You are quite satisfied as to that?—Yes. 
Where did you get the jars from?—I had them from a 
chemist. They were unused. 


How do you know that!—I know they were. I asked the 
chemist. 


*For statement, see page 76. 
304 


ee ee ee eee eee 


OVE ee 


 —Ves, p satitied They were perlectly sterilised ond e 


You cannot say that, Who was the chemist1—Mr. Gower, = 
A Uandly, = Ja: a 
How long betore you used them did you buy then t—About cas 


Where were i timet—During thet time I 
 ~ Was preparing px Lisint  te c ing them. iy me a 
Ou are 


Sf 


satished that these jars were clean jars? 


The heart had gone rather bad, had it nott—I did not : 
exainine her heert. ; 


 ~‘Beexemined—There was 2 double lid tw the afin. The 


inside of the ein was periectly Gry. 


Police-Sergeant Hovoz Lewis, Kidwelly, said he was 
present at the disinterment of the - The jars were sealed 


frail, and not by any means robust. During the two or 
three years telore her death he attended her st least siz 
times. On Sunday, 15th June, 1919, he remembered the 2 


had takent—Nothing, except that she had taken gooscherry 
pie, and that he had given her sane brandy. - 
you tld that there was any disrrkecst—No, not 


Appendix II. 


Witness ordered her to bed, and remained in the house 
with the accused for about an hour. He visited her before 
he left at 7.30 p.m., and sent across a bottle of medicine— 
something to allay the sickness. The sedative medicine he 
gave her did not contain any arsenic. He was sent for 
again about 10 o’clock. The accused came over to the house, 
and witness was in the surgery, and his sister opened the 
door. The accused asked him to come over, that Mrs. 
Greenwood was not feeling very well. When he went over 
he found the nurse in the house. This was the first time 
he had seen the nurse in the case. He found Mrs. Green- 
wood’s pulse very weak and her heart very bad. He pre- 
scribed two morphia pills, one to be taken immediately 
and the other within an hour or so afterwards. They were 
sedative pills. 

And they contained no arsenic?!—No arsenic. 

Did you say anything to the accused as to the heart ?—I 
told him that the heart was in a very bad state. I gave the 
pills to the accused. 

Would it be correct to say that the pills were too strong? 
—That would be quite incorrect. They were not at all too 
strong. 

Did they have any injurious effect?—None at all. 

Did the accused tell you afterwards that since his wife 
had had the pills her pulse had stopped?—I don’t remember 
him saying that. 

Witness said it was customary for him to take a walk 
about 11 p.m., and on this night the accused was standing 
at his door when witness passed. He asked the accused how 
Mrs. Greenwood was, and he replied that she was easier. 
At 3 a.m. he was called up by Nurse Jones, and went imme- 
diately. He found that Mrs. Greenwood was practically in 
a dying condition. She died about ten minutes after 
he arrived. The nurse did not at that time describe 
to him the stages of the illness. It was at this 3 o’clock 
visit that he first learned of the diarrhoea. He attended the 
post-mortem examination. 

From your present information, what is your opinion now 
as to the cause of death ?—Arsenical poisoning, 

Witness said that he attended the patient six or seven 
weeks before her death, and during this time she was under 
a course of medicine. She suffered from biliousness. She 
was in a very weak state, but was able to go about. 

Did the medicine you supplied during the six or seven 
weeks contain any arsenic!—None at all. 

With regard to the 3 a.m. visit, did you have any diffi- 
culty in hearing the nurse’s call!’—None at all. She knocked 
at the door and I was aroused at once. There is a bell to 
my sister’s room, and I cannot hear that. 

306 


Police Court Proceedings. 


Is the bell a kind of second security for people to arouse 
you !—They have the option of either ringing or knocking. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Luprorp—I had been attending 
the Greenwood family for about sixteen years, and I had ex- 
ceptional opportunities of knowing on what terms they 
were. 

And were they a family living on exceedingly happy terms? 
—Most happy terms. 

I think it is correct to say that you had been attending 
Mrs. Greenwood for the last two years!—Off and on. 

And during the three months before she died she was fre- 
quently calling to see you in relation to her health?—She 
was coming back and fore. 

Was it evident to you that she was failing in health ?— 
Yes. 

And it was evident to you that she realised it?—I cannot 
say that she did realise it. 

Witness described the medicine which he prescribed as 
“tonic medicine.’’ He never gave her any liquor. She was 
under the impression that she had an internal growth, but 
whether it was a malignant growth she could not tell. She 
had been obliged to consult a specialist for catarrh in the 
throat. 

Was she in your opinion showing any signs of breaking 
up?—Yes. That would be in June, 1919. I was not, there- 
fore, surprised to get this call from the accused on the 
15th. I had a call somewhere about 6.30 p.m. I fix the time 
about half-past 6 because the church bells were ringing. Mrs. 
Greenwood was vomiting then, but I could not say whether 
she had been vomiting previously. 

If the Eureka weed-killer had been taken by Mrs. Green- 
wood it is quite possible that the green colour of it would 
be shown by the vomit, you say ?—Yes. 

And there were no traces of colour of any kind?!—None 
at all. 

Can you tell me how long the accused had been in the 
house on the occasion of the 10 o’clock visit before you saw 
him’—He could not have been more than ten or fifteen 
minutes. I am perfectly certain that I did not pay a visit 
to Mrs. Greenwood at 9 o’clock that night. 

That is rather important, and I want you to be absolutely 
clear that there was no visit by you at 9 o’clock !—There was 
no visit by me between 7.30 and 10 o’clock. Miss Green- 
wood came over for me at the 10 o’clock visit. 

Do you know of a visit of hers to your house about 9 
o’clock ?—No. : 

Did you go out about 9 o’clock to see a patient !—It is 
quite possible. It would be wrong to say that Miss Phillips 
saw me with the accused outside the house about 10 o’clock. 

307 


Appendix Il. 


There was a conversation between the three of us, but that 
happened about 11 o’clock. Witness said he was _unde- 
cided about the 1 o'clock visit. He remembered saying at 
the inquest that he might have made the visit, and he had a 
recollection that the visit was made at 1 a.m. 

What do you think of the 1 o’clock visit?!—Well, I don’t 
remember it. I leave it open. 

Witness added that each of the two pills he gave con- 
tained half a grain of morphia. 

Do you know that the defendant has stated that the two 
pills were given at the same time?—I have heard of it. 

In the condition you found her at 10.30, would you have 
given her a grain of morphia?—I would. 

It would have been perfectly safe, you think ?—Perfectly 
safe. 

In other words, it would have been quite safe to have given 
two pills at once?—Yes. 

She had a very bad heart !—Yes. 

How long had she been suffering from fainting fits?—For 
some years. 

In your opinion, due to the heart ?—Yes. 

A dilated heart ?7—Yes. 

Did she know that her heart was bad?—She had an idea. 

Was she uneasy about the growth?—She did not worry 
much about that. 

You know that women always do. They are afraid of 
cancer 1—Yes, 

Did she complain to you time after time that she was 
getting thinner !—Yes. 

Would you describe her during the three months before her 
death as being in a depressed state?—Yes; she was in a de- 
pressed state. 

You were told, and you believed, that it was a case of gas- 
tritis 7—Yes. 

Brought about by eating gooseberry pie!—Yes; it was at 
the beginning of the illness. 

And during the whole illness did you find anything incon- 
sistent with an attack of acute indigestion ?—Nothing at all. 

Would you expect to find a patient improve after having 
taken a killing dose of arsenic ?—No. 

Would you not expect to find after arsenic severe pains in 
the abdomen ?—That is usually the case. 

There was none in this case!/—-Not very much. 

Nor any cramp ?—None. 

Nor was there any thirst, which is one of the marked 
symptoms !—None. 

Are you still in doubt as to whether she died from heart 
disease 1—I would not like to give an opinion on that. 

308 


Police Court Proceedings. 


By the MagrstratEes’ CLerK—But you have said it was 
due to arsenical poisoning !—I stand by that. 

Cross-examination continued—In Taylor’s ‘‘ Medical Juris- 
prudence ’’ it is put down: ‘‘ It cannot be said that death 
has occurred from arsenical poisoning unless there is an 
unequivocal proof that a grain or a greater part of a grain 
was found in the body after death ’??—That is the opinion 
of a great authority. 

And there is very much less arsenic in it in this case than 
Taylor put as the minimum{!—Yes. 

Bearing in mind the small quantity of arsenic found in 
the body, and Taylor’s opinion, are you now still in doubt as 
to whether death took place from arsenic or from the irri- 
tation she told you of, resulting in heart failure? Is that a 
difficult question!—Very difficult. 

Leaving you really in doubt about it?—Yes, in doubt. 

You found nothing approaching colour in the vomit!— 
Nothing at all. 

Does the absence of the colour in the vomit exclude the 
possibility of the patient having burgundy or port for lunch ? 
—No. It does not exclude that possibility. 

Is the explanation that because the colouring matter might 
have been discharged on previous or subsequent vomits !— 


Yes. 


Fiorence Lorraine PuiLuips, examined by Mr, PEARCE— 
I reside at The Cottage, Kidwelly. I saw Mrs. Greenwood 
after she had been to a tennis meeting on the Saturday after- 
noon, and she appeared to be in very good spirits. I saw 
her again on the Sunday morning, and she looked very ill 
and seemed to speak in a low sort of voice. 

Was she cheerful or otherwise?—No; I do not think she 
was cheerful. She seemed to have difficulty in speaking. I 
was invited to supper to Rumsey House that evening, and 
arrived there soon after 7.15. When I arrived at the house 
Mr. Greenwood informed me that his wife was ill and asked 
me to go upstairs. I did so, and met Miss Greenwood, the 
daughter, coming out of her mother’s bedroom. In conse- 
quence of what Miss Greenwood told me I went for the nurse. 

Did any one ask you to go for the nurse 1—No. 

Did the nurse come practically at once!—Almost at once. 
It was about 7.30 p.m. when I returned to Rumsey House. 

And Mr. Greenwood was with Dr. Griffiths in the garden? 
—Yes, playing clock-golf. 

Some time afterwards did Mr. Greenwood volunteer to go 
for the doctor?—The nurse asked for the doctor, and Mr. 


Greenwood volunteered to go for him. 
309 


Appendix II. 


Did he go for him?—He went downstairs. That was about 
8 o’clock. 

Was there some delay?—The doctor was rather a long 
time. It was about an hour. It was a little after 9 o’clock 
before the doctor came. 

In the meantime did you go to Mrs. Greenwood’s bed- 
room?—No, I did not go in at all. I stayed with the little 
boy. Before the doctor came Miss Greenwood went for him. 
It was nearly 9 o’clock, and practically at once the accused 
and the doctor came together. 

Did the nurse go home after this?—Yes; about half an 
hour after the doctor’s visit, I think. 

Did you stay with Mrs. Greenwood?!—Yes. The nurse 
asked me to stay with her while she went home. That was 
about 9.30. I am not quite sure of the time of the nurse’s 
return, but I think it was after 10 o’clock. I left about 11 
o’clock. The accused showed me out. He said to me that 
he thought Mrs. Greenwood would be better in the morning. 
I was sent for about 3 o’clock in the morning. 

Did Miss Bowater (Mrs. Greenwood’s sister) usually live 
at Rumsey House?—Yes, she did. 

Do you know she was away at this time?—Yes, she was 
away. She had been away about six weeks. 

Was she expected back?—Mrs. Greenwood was to go for 
a holiday, and she was expecting to meet her. I think she 
intended going away the following week or the week after. 

Do you know Mrs. Greenwood’s handwriting ?—Yes. 

[Shown signature on a railway document |]—That is Mrs. 
Greenwood’s handwriting. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Luprorp—For ten or eleven years 
I was in and out of Mr. and Mrs. Greenwood’s house. 

And therefore you had ample opportunity of seeing upon 
what terms Mr. and Mrs. Greenwood were?!—I do not know 
exactly how to answer that question. 

What is the difficulty?—I was not always there, for one 
thing. 

I am not asking you when you were not there but when 
you were there. Did you not have excellent opportunities 
of seeing on what terms Mr. and Mrs. Greenwood were ?— 
I had opportunity sometimes, of course. 

And the result of that is that they were on good terms or 
not /—Sometimes. 

Sometimes. Does that mean that sometimes they were 
not on good terms!—Yes. I suppose it does mean that. 

When was the last time you saw any difference at all be- 
tween them{?—I cannot remember. 

But you have a wonderful memory, and when it comes to 
time you are absolutely perfect, so try to remember when was 

310 


Police Court Proceedings. 


it you saw any difference between them!—I am not going to 

answer the question. 

. What do you say? You refuse to answer the question !— 
es. 

Is that your attitude?—It looks like it. 

An unpleasant one, is it not?—(No answer). 

Now, I challenge you to bring forward one single incident 
of any difference between them known to you. Can you do 
it —(No answer). 

Can you do it, madam{?—I am not going to do it. 

May I suggest to you that you do not do it because you 
cannot ?—I can do so. 

Then why don’t you do it?—That has nothing to do with 
you. 

Will you please answer my question now? When was the 
last time you saw any difference between Mr. and Mrs. 
Greenwood ?—(No answer). 

Are you thinking!/—No, I am not thinking. 

Then, what are you doing now?!—Well, I have seen so 
many differences between them that it is rather difficult to 
give one. 

Give me one in your experience of over eleven years!—(No 
answer). 

You either do not do it or you cannot do it; which is it? 
—(No answer). 

Then it comes to this, that you cannot recall any single 
instance of difference?—Oh, I can do that, but I do not 
wish to do it. Mr. and Mrs. Greenwood used to have 
“tiffs and brawls ’’ about women. 

You call them tiffs. How long ago did they occur?—I do 
not think it fair that Mr. Greenwood should keep putting 
you up to the questions you are asking me. 

You are not doing yourself justice, you know. When was 
the last tiff of this kind? Was it about ten years ago!— 
No. Possibly a few months before Mrs. Greenwood died. 

Possibly a few weeks!—Possibly a few months. 

Where was it that this happened!—In Rumsey House. 

Where?—In the sitting-room. 

Were you there ?—Yes. 

How long ?—I could not tell. 

Can you give me a date?!—It is impossible to keep dates. 

Can you recall any other incidents of that nature1—Yes, 
many. 

Going back three or four years!—Yes. 

You were present, were you!—Not always present. Mrs. 
Greenwood did not want to quarrel in front of people. 

I am suggesting to you there is not a word of truth in 


this. Do you still say it happened 1—Yes, I do. 
311 


Appendix II. 


Did you see them the next day!—Yes, I saw Mrs. Green- 
wood. 

Was she all right the next day?—She appeared to be all 
right. 

Vas it anything more than a tiff?—What do you mean? 

A slight domestic disturbance!—There were a good many 
slight disturbances. 

Nothing more than that?—I do not know exactly what 
you mean. 

More than slight?—I didn’t say they were slight. 

Did Mrs. Greenwood!—I don’t think so. 

After these tiffs were both on the most affectionate terms? 
—I should not call it affectionate terms. 

What terms would you apply?—I don’t know exactly. 

Too difficult to find one?—Well, no. : 

You went there about 12.20 on Sunday?!—Just before 1 
o’clock. 

You didn’t go into the dining-room !—No. 

You had supper there that night. Was there any wine 
on the table ?—No. 

No wine! Any whisky?—Yes; there was a flask where 
Mrs. Greenwood usually sat. 

What kind of a flask?—A sort of straw. 

Were you there on Monday to lunch or supper ?—I had no 
meal there. 

When you were there on Sunday Mrs. Greenwood looked 
very depressed?!—No; she did not look depressed, but very 
ill. 

Her voice was low ?—Yes. 

She was not in good spirits!—I did not say that. 

You said a minute ago that she was in low spirits?—I 
don’t think I said that. I said she was very low. 

Are you actually saying now that you did not say in 
evidence that she was not cheerful?—No, I did not. 

You did not go for the nurse at the request of Mr. Green- 
wood ?—No, I did not. 

Who was it first asked you about these things ?—Sergeant 
Hodge Lewis. 

Do you know when you were asked about this?—After 
Mr. Greenwood’s marriage. 

Can you tell me how many times he saw you?—I do not 
know. 

Did you give him a written statement /—Yes. 

Did he give you a copy of it?—No. 

Did you see any other police officer besides Sergeant Lewis? 
—Yes, Superintendent Jones and Detective Haigh. 

You made three statements?—I do not think I made a 
statement to Superintendent Jones. 

You signed two statements ?—Yes. 

312 


Police Court Proceedings. 


You never had a copy of either ?—No. 

On Sunday, when you’ got to Rumsey House, was the 
doctor there !—Yes. 

Did you see him?—No; he was in the garden. 

How long after the doctor left did Mr. Greenwood volun- 
teer to go for the doctor !—About half an hour. 

So, according to you, it was about 8 o’clock when Mr. 
Greenwood volunteered to go for the doctor?—The nurse 
asked for the doctor, and he went. 

I am suggesting to you that you never hinted at the 
inquest that the nurse asked Mr. Greenwood to go for the 
doctor !—Yes, I did suggest it. They did not take every- 
thing perfectly at the inquest. 

Do you know that the doctor has sworn that no such state- 
ment was made by him!—No, I do not. 

Was the nurse there when the doctor came?—Yes, in the 
bedroom. 

The doctor swears that the first time he saw the nurse 
that night was after the 10 o’clock visit?—I cannot under- 
stand that. The nurse was in the bedroom. 

If I tell you that the nurse has sworn that she never saw 
the doctor until after 10 o’clock 1—She must have been 
hiding. 

The doctor must have been hiding, too ?!—Yes. 

Do you know the nurse went away after 10 o’clock!— 
No; she went away after 9 o’clock. 


EvizaBetH Lewis Jones, examined by Mr. Prarce—I am a 
district nurse, and I reside at Whinstone House, Kidwelly. 
On the night of 15th June of last year Miss Phillips came for 
me, and, proceeding to Rumsey House, I found Mrs. Green- 
wood in a state of collapse. There was slight vomiting and 
frequent diarrhea. The colour of the vomit was whitish. 
The doctor came about 11 o’clock. I went home about 9 
o’clock and returned about 10 o’clock. Soon after 10 o’clock 
Mr. Greenwood went for the doctor. 

So there was an interval of an hour before the doctor 
came !—It was not quite an hour. 

Did you tell Mr. Greenwood that Mrs. Greenwood had a 
diseased heart?—I did not tell Mr. Greenwood that she had 
a diseased heart, but that she had a weak heart. When I 
returned to Rumsey House about 10 o’clock the patient was 
very ill. Mr. Greenwood went for the doctor at 1 o’clock 
at my request. He returned saying that he had failed to 
rouse him, and then I went for the doctor. Mr. Green- 
wood also went for the doctor at 3 a.m. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Luprorp—Did you see the doctor 
when he arrived !—No. 

313 


Appendix II. 


Did you know he had been there !—Yes; because there was 
medicine left to be given. 

Are you sure about the doctor’s visit at 1 o’clock?—Yes. 
It was then the morphia pills were obtained. E 

Did Mrs. Greenwood complain of pains!—She complained 
several times, but not of violent pains. 

When were the morphia pills given !—Both pills were given 
at 1 o’clock. 

Was there cramping of the legs?—No. 

Did she make any complaint about the medicine !—She 
complained that it caught her at the back of the throat. 

Which medicine was it?—The bismuth. . 

Who gave you the pills?—Mr. Greenwood. 

Did you read the directions on the box ?—No. 

Did you see the box?—No. 

What colour were they ?—Brown pills. 

After she had taken them, what happened ?—She got quieter 
and went to sleep. She remained like that until she died. 

Before June had you attended anybody at Rumsey House? 
—yYes, the boy Kenneth and the elder boy. I always found 
Mr. and Mrs. Greenwood: on very good terms. 

Re-examined—She moaned several times. 


Mary ADELINA GRIFFITHS, examined by Mr. PEaRcE— 
I live with my brother, Dr. Griffiths, at Kidwelly. I 
remember Mr. Greenwood calling on Sunday evening, 15th 
June, of last year. I do not exactly remember the time, but 
it was after 9 o’clock. Our house was _ practically 
opposite Rumsey House. I opened the door for Mr. Green- 
wood, who told me that he wanted my brother to come over 
to see his wife as she was very ill. I asked if it was one of 
the usual fainting attacks. He said that it was worse than 
the usual ones, and that it was possible she would not get 
over it this time. 

What was Mr. Greenwood’s demeanour at this time ?—I 
think he was the same as he usually was. 

Was he in low spirits?—His usual manner was not low. 

What was his usual manner ?—Bright spirits, as a rule. 

Was the subject of holidays mentioned ?!—I mentioned that 
I was going away for a holiday, and he mentioned some- 
thing about going for a trip and a fortune-teller. 

What kind of a trip?!—He said something about honey- 
moons in a kind of joke. 

Continuing, witness said she answered her brother’s door 
when Miss Greenwood called. Miss Greenwood waited for 
her father, and they both went across to Rumsey House with 
the doctor. She did not hear her brother come back; she 
went to bed soon after 10. About 3 a.m. she heard another 

314 


Police Court Proceedings. 


knock and a ring at the front door. Her brother answered 
it at once. ‘ye 

Is your house on the telephone ?—Yes. 

Was the telephone used by Greenwood shortly before Mrs. 
Greenwood’s death?—I do not remember if it was shortly 
before the death. It was after Mrs. Greenwood’s death. 

Did you speak to him on the subject of some one calling 
him up !—Yes. 

Was there some one in particular calling him up ?—Yes; 
I asked him who it was ringing him up, and he said it was 
the woman at his office. 

You took him to mean the charwoman?—yYes; but I told 
him that on one occasion she gave the name of Miss Jones, 
and I used to send for him when she asked for him. When 
Miss Greenwood came for her father she seemed in a bit of 
a hurry, but not very excited. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Luprorp—I knew that Mrs. Green- 
wood suffered from fainting fits and had them pretty fre- 
quently. 

When Mr. Greenwood came to your house about 10 o’clock 
could you see he was in a hurry?—Yes; he seemed in a 
hurry. 

At that moment your brother was not in the house?—No; 
he was not in the house. 

And then followed this conversation you have spoken of !— 
Yes. 

You were first asked as to your recollection of this con- 
versation five months afterwards!—About that. 

The police and the detectives came to you and asked you 
to remember the conversation you had had five months before? 
—Yes. 

You have been asked about Mr. Greenwood’s demeanour. 
He was always in a jocular mood, was he not !—Yes. 

That was his temperament!—I always found him so like 
that. 

You were there five or ten minutes with him?—Yes, about 
that. 

Your brother had not come back to the house, so you 
fetched him from the surgery !—Yes. 

Have you any recollection of Miss Greenwood coming over 
about 9 o’clock?—No, I have not. 


Hannan Maceiz Wiuuiams, examined by Mr. Puxarcz, 
said she was employed at Rumsey House in June, 1919, as 
house-parlourmaid, and was there altogether about eight 
months before that. Margaret Ann Morris was cook, and 
Gwyneira Powell was looking after the little boy. On the 
Sunday in question at lunch witness put port wine before 
Mrs. Greenwood’s seat. Port wine and whisky were kept in 

315 


Appendix II. 


the cupboard in the dining-room. She remembered pouring 
out wine into a wineglass for Mrs. Greenwood when she was 
seated at the table. Some of the port wine had already been 
used, and it was not a full bottle. Mr. Greenwood had 
whisky. Miss Greenwood, the daughter, and the little boy 
drank water. After lunch witness put the wine and whisky 
back into the cupboard. There was no other wine bottle in 
that cupboard. She prepared the tea, and about 5.30 she 
went out, and on her return she laid the table for supper. 
At about 9.30 the supper table had been cleared in her 
absence. When she laid the supper table she had again put 
the port wine and whisky on the table, as she had done for 
lunch. She did not see the bottle of wine again, although 
she particularly looked for it in the cupboard on the fol- 
lowing day (Monday). 

Where were the empty bottles usually placed?—In the 
cellar. 

On the Sunday morning did you see Mr. Greenwood 
about /—Yes. 

Where did you see him?—In the china pantry. 

How long was he there!—About a quarter of an hour. 

Have you ever seen him there before?—Not to my know- 
ledge. 

Had you occasion to go to the china pantry yourself !—Yes, 
to fetch the silver basket. 

What did you do when you saw him there?!—I went into 
the kitchen until he came out. 

Where did he then go!—He went to the dining-room. 

Was there a sink in the china pantry ?—Yes. 

Did the family and the maids have the same food that 
day ?—Yes. 

Did you have some gooseberry tart ?—Yes. 

And the other maids ?—Yes. 

And did all the family have it?—They all had a helping. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Luprorp—I never spoke to any 
one of what had happened on that Sunday. 

You never thought any more about it?—No. 

Until November, when Sergeant Hodge Lewis came to you, 
five months afterwards !/—Yes. 

And then you remembered that the bottle was three-parts 
full ?—Yes. 

You had kept it in your mind for five months without any 
one having jogged your memory in the meantime ?—Yes. 

And you remembered it was port wine because five months 
before you had read the label on the bottle ?—Yes. 

And you remembered the colour of the label, didn’t you? 
—Yes. It was a red label. 

316 


Police Court Proceedings. 


And it had ‘‘ Port Wine ”’ printed in letters !—Yes. 

Perhaps you remember whether the lettering was in black 
or red ink?—It was in black. 

Has any one shown you a bottle like it lately 1—Yes. 

Who showed it to you!—Mr. Haigh. 

Oh! He took it out of his pocket, did he? Was it a 
bottle of burgundy he showed you?’—I do not know. 

When did he show you the bottle?—Last Thursday. 

If you are not shaky about the bottle, why should Mr. 
Haigh show it to you!—I told him it was a bottle like it. 

Were the police visiting you often!—Yes, very often. 

But not before last November?—No; perhaps not before 
November. 

Who has been visiting you most frequently from the police 
force1—Sergeant Lewis, about once a month. 

I suppose he asked you about the bottle every time he 
called?—No, not always about the bottle. 

Did he give you a copy of your evidence, and did he re- 
commend you to study and learn it?—I never had a paper 
from Sergeant Hodge Lewis; I have it in my head. 

Was there a towel behind the door of the china pantry !— 
Yes. 

Who was that put there for!—I don’t know. 

Was the sink in the china pantry the only place down- 
stairs where one could wash one’s hands!—No; there was a 
sink in the scullery. 

But I mean for members of the family. I suggest to you 
it was a frequent occurrence for Mr. Greenwood to come from 
the garden and go to the china pantry and wash his hands 
there before going for a meal!—No. 

What would you say if the other girls said that he did go? 
—I do not know what the other girls will say. 

Do you still say that he was not in the habit of going there? 
—Yes. 

Was the towel frequently changed?—No. 

Was the same towel there the whole time you were there ?!— 
Oh, no. 

I am going to suggest to you that you never at lunch on 
the Sunday in question, nor on any other day, poured out 
wine for Mrs. Greenwood!—That was the only time I did 
it. I only waited on them on Sundays. Mrs. Greenwood 
asked me that day to do it. 

If Miss Greenwood says you did not pour the wine, what 
would you say?—Well, I did. I am here to tell the truth. 

Is it not a fact that Miss Greenwood was taking wine with 
her mother before that Sunday?—Not to my knowledge. 

I say it was not port wine to start with that Sunday, 


but burgundy!—No; it was port wine that Sunday. 
317 


Appendix II. 


I say that Mrs. Greenwood took burgundy from that bottle? 
—No; she took port wine from me. 

And that Miss Greenwood took some of the wine with her 
mother /—No; she took water. 

The next day you went to look for that port wine bottle 
to put it on the table, although you say there was nobody 
who usually took port wine!—I had to put the wine on the 
table. 

Did you think it strange ?—Yes. 

Thinking it strange, did you say a word to the cook about 
it?—No; I did not say a word to anybody about it. 

And then it went completely out of your head?—Yes, for 
the time being. 

Were you under notice then?—Yes, I was. 

Had Mrs. Greenwood given you notice!—No; my aunt had 
given my notice in for me to Mrs. Greenwood. She wanted 
me for haymaking. 

When was that?—In June. 

I am suggesting that the day you were given notice by 
Mrs. Greenwood you ran away in the morning and you 
were brought back by your aunt?—No; I did not have 
notice. One night I did go in through the window because 
it was late. Gwyneira Powell was with me on that occasion. 

And because of that conduct, and because you were tam- 
pering with the wine, Mrs. Greenwood dismissed you?!—No; 
she never told me a word about the wine. 

Or the whisky?—No. I had whisky with Mr. Greenwood 
once when I was ill. 

Is that the time you had taken more whisky than was good 
for you!—No. 

Were you sick?—No, I was not sick. If I have had the 
name that I was drunk, I am not drunk to-day. 

I suggest you were in the kitchen in that condition, and 
ultimately had to be taken to bed?—No, I was not. 

By the Magistrates’ CierK—Were you ever drunk ?— 
No, I was never drunk. 

Ig it true you were under the influence of drink in the 
kitchen?—No. I only had whisky on one occasion, when I 
was ill, and Mr. Greenwood gave it to me then. 


Rev. Amprose Jones, Kidwelly, said that when Mrs. 
Greenwood attended the tennis club meeting at Ferryside 
on the Saturday previous to her death she did not look well, 
but she did not complain, and she seemed cheerful. Witness 
saw the accused on the day of the exhumation at the latter’s 
house. The accused said he wondered how the whole thing 
had arisen. He said he wondered whether his wife had taken 
anything herself, as she was often depressed, and stared at 
water, and witness added, ‘‘ I expressed a strong hope that 

318 


Police Court Proceedings. 


nothing would be found, that the whole thing would be 
cleared up.” a 


Gwrneta Davip, Penybryn, Tyrfran, Llanelly, said 
she received a letter from the accused, dated 5th 
June, 1919.* Witness had a conversation with Miss Jones 
on 4th June, 1919, and later she had a conversation with 
Miss Jones’s sister. The second conversation was followed 
by the letter from Mr. Greenwood. 


Joan Cuirrorp Jones, Morfa House, Kidwelly, said he 
assisted his father in his business as a chemist. On 2nd 
June and 8th June, 1917, he sold some weedicide to the 
accused, and the latter signed the poison sale book, which was 
produced on both occasions. He bought two one-quart tins. 
Each quart tin made 25 gallons apiece of weed-killer. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Luprorp—My father bought the 
weedicide from the manufacturer on 3lst July, 1916. I knew 
the grounds at Rumsey House were overrun with weeds. 


Adjourned. 


Second Day—Friday, 2nd July, 1920. 
Evidence for the Prosecution—continued. 


Marcaret ANN Morris, examined by Mr. Purarce, said 
she was cook at Rumsey House, Kidwelly, at the time in 
question. On Sunday, 15th June, 1919, the day on which 
the late Mrs. Greenwood was seized with her fatal illness, 
she cooked the midday meal, which consisted of vegetables, 
gooseberry tart, and custard. Witness and the other maids 
partook of it and suffered from no ill-efiects. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Luprorp, witness said she had 
been at the house for two years. 

During that time on what terms were Mr. and Mrs. Green- 
wood ?—They seemed all right. 

Quite happy ?—Quite happy. 

Was it altogether an affectionate family /—Yes. 

Mrs. Greenwood was not very well, and latterly her con- 
dition was worse, and now and again she would complain of 
her health. On the Sunday morning, the 15th, Mrs. Green- 
wood did not look very well, and was depressed. Witness 
did not lay the lunch that day. : 

Do you know what Mrs. Greenwood was in the habit of 
drinking !—Burgundy. 


* See page 73. 319 


Appendix II. 


Do you know whether Miss Irene Greenwood was in the 
habit of taking burgundy !—Sometimes. 

It was part of your duty to wash the glasses!—Yes; but 
I did not wash them that morning. 

How many glasses did you find used for wine ?!—Some- 
times two or three. 

When Miss Bowater (deceased’s sister) was there it would 
be three ?—Yes, sometimes. 

And when Mrs. Greenwood and Miss Irene were there it 
would be two ?—Yes. 

By the Cierc—Wineglasses /—Wineglasses. 

Cross-examination continued—Have you ever seen port 
wine /—No. 

Did Hannah Williams ever tell you that she had lost or 
missed a bottle of port?—No, never a word. 

When did Hannah Williams leave?—The week following 
Mrs. Greenwood’s death. 

Was she under notice?—Mrs. Greenwood told me that she 
gave her notice. 

Do you know what for?—Because she was out late at 
nights. 

Any bother about the wine?—I did not hear her say that. 

Did you hear any bother about the whisky ?—I heard two 
months later that she was helping herself to the wine and 
whisky. 

Did you ever see her under the influence of drink 1—I 
never saw her, but I was told 

Did she go to bed one day?!—Yes, for about an hour. 

And was sick after the drink?—Yes. Witness added that 
she had seen Hannah Williams get in through the kitchen 
window when she came in late at night. Witness explained 
that there was a sink in the china pantry, and she had seen 
members of the family washing their hands there and using 
the towel there. 

Have you seen Mr. Greenwood going into the china pantry 
for that purpose?—Yes, he was very often washing his hands 
there. There was no other place downstairs for the purpose, 
and it would be some distance to the bathroom. 

Now, Hannah Williams has sworn that she had never seen 
Mr. Greenwood in the china pantry before 15th June. Have 
you seen him go there hundreds of times?—Hundreds of 
times and more. 

Was Mrs. Greenwood fond of gardening !—No, she did not 
do gardening very much. 

But she was often in the garden 7—Yes, often in the garden. 

By Mr. Pearce—I did not see Mr. Greenwood in the china 
pantry on the morning of the 15th. 

320 


Police Court Proceedings. 


Lity Gwyrnerra PowELL, examined by Mr. Prarcn, said 
she was in the employment of Mr. Greenwood, and had been 
there for over two years. On 15th June, 1919, she acted in 
the capacity of nurse and assisted generally. She had her 
meals with the other maids on 15th June. She did not feel 
ill afterwards. She had nothing to do with the serving of 
the lunch, and did not notice the glasses as they came out. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Luprorp—Mr. and Mrs. Greenwood 
were living on very happy terms. She did not lay the table 
on the Sunday, but had done so on other occasions. On 
Sundays they had dinner at midday. There was never port 
wine on the table. Mrs. Greenwood always had burgundy, 
which was kept in a decanter. Mrs. Greenwood poured out 
the wine herself. Miss Irene Greenwood was also taking 
some of the burgundy. When Miss Bowater was there three 
persons would have burgundy. Witness did not lay the table 
on the Sunday, Monday, and Tuesday, and never heard 
Hannah Williams say that she had missed a bottle of wine. 
Miss Bowater was at the house for dinner and lunch on the 
Tuesday, and always took burgundy. There was a sink in the 
china pantry, and it was a common thing for Mr. Green- 
wood to go and wash his hands at the sink after being in the 
garden. She had seen him do it scores of times. 


Mrs. Annre Groves, examined by Mr. Puraron, said she 
was caretaker of the office occupied by Mr. Greenwood. In 
June, 1919, Mr. Greenwood had no clerk. Witness knew the 
late Mrs. Greenwood, and she was also acquainted with the 
present Mrs. Greenwood. Before the death of the first Mrs. 
Greenwood she saw Miss Gladys Jones at the office. Witness 
could not speak as to the relationship between Mr. Green- 
wood and Miss Gladys Jones. She had not seen anything 
pass between them. Miss Jones was often alone with Mr. 
Greenwood in the office. So far as she could tell, the only 
relationship was such as would ordinarily occur as between 
solicitor and client. There was no kissing between them 
prior to the death of Mrs. Greenwood in witness’s presence. 
She did see incidents of that kind a month after the death 
of Mrs. Greenwood. She was certain she saw no kissing 
before the death of: Mrs. Greenwood. On the Wednesday 
before her death Mrs. Greenwood called at the office. Miss 
Gladys Jones was there. Mrs. Greenwood came into the 
passage, and witness told her that she thought Mr. Green- 
wood was out. She then inquired if Mr. Greenwood would 
be long. As a matter of fact, Miss Jones and Mr. Green- 
wood were in the back room together. The office consisted of 
three rooms. Witness went out then. After a conversation 
with Mrs. Greenwood she went into the kitchen. She saw 
Mr. Greenwood later in the evening and told him that she 

x 321 


Appendix II. 


was sorry that she had told Mrs. Greenwood an untruth. 
He said it was quite all right. Mr. Greenwood came to 
the office on Monday, 16th June. There was a letter for 
him in the handwriting of a lady. Witness believed that 
it was in the handwriting of Miss Jones, and it was marked 
‘* Urgent ’’ or ‘‘ Private.’’ ; 

Mr. Luprorp raised objection to the evidence; he said 
he was going to object to the contents of the letter being 
disclosed. 

Examination continued—Witness said she saw the letter 
later in an envelope on the desk, and later it was lying in 
the grate in a burned state. She recognised it by the corner 
of the envelope which had not been burned. She saw the 
words, ‘‘ It will be nice when I am your wife,’’ or words 
to that effect. The Jones family and the Greenwoods were 
very friendly, and were connected by marriage. Some of 
the members of the Jones family were in the habit of coming 
to the office, Mr. Arthur Jones in particular. 

Re-examined by Mr. Pzarce—She remembered Mr. Green- 
wood’s second marriage on 18th October, 1919. (The certifi- 
cate of the marriage was put in.) Some time last year she 
found, in the wastepaper basket, a receipt for a diamond 
ring from Messrs. Hurcomb, goldsmiths, London. 

Further cross-examined by Mr. Luprorp—That receipt was 
dated 15th July, 1919. 

Was it a good many weeks after that that you saw this 
letter that you speak of!—I have an idea that I found the 
letter about the same time that I found the receipt. 

So that the expression which you cannot quite remember 
was made some time after the death of the late Mrs. Green- 
wood!—That is what I thought. 

And that about the same time when the engagement ring 
was being purchased !—Yes. 


Police Superintendent Samugrt Jonus (recalled), examined 
by Mr. Puarosn, said that on 24th October last he visited Mr. 
Greenwood at his office and told him he was making inquiries 
about Mrs. Greenwood’s death. He cautioned the accused, 
who made a statement. (Statement produced.) Mr. Green- 
wood did not sign the statement. 


Mary Morris, examined by Mr. Prarcr, said that she 
resided at 2 Rock Terrace, Tenby, and was a daughter of a 
lady who kept the telephone exchange at Kidwelly. From 
March to June, 1919, she lived at home with her mother. 
The exchange was at her home. Between the dates men- 
tioned witness attended most of the telephone calls for her 
mother, who was in charge of the exchange, and witness some- 

322 


Police Court Proceedings. 


times stood by Mr. Greenwood when he was speaking. She 
remembered the death 6f the first Mrs. Greenwood, being 
home at the time. Witness did the ringing up for him. 
She remembered one of the numbers which Mr. Greenwood 
gave. It was to Llanelly. There was a ‘‘3’’ in the 
number. 

Do you remember the place?—All I can say is that there 
was a ‘‘3”’’ in the number. 

Do you know the address of the number ?—Mr. Greenwood 
did ask me for the Mercury office, but I cannot remember 
the number. 

You did not speak to the number?—I asked if it was the 
number. 

Could you tell if it was the voice of a female ?—It was the 
‘voice of a lady, mostly. 

Could you hear what Mr. Greenwood said?!—I did hear 
something, but I took no notice of it. Mr. Greenwood asked 
the lady over the telephone if she had enough chocolates over 
Easter. 

Do you remember a Saturday when Mr. Greenwood came? 
—He came nearly every Saturday. 

Did you hear Mr. Greenwood say anything about a holi- 
day?—I heard Mr. Greenwood say that if everything went 
on all right he hoped to go for a holiday. 

Was that before or after Mrs. Greenwood’s death ?!—I 
should say that I left when Mrs. Greenwood died. I left for 
Tenby on the 24th, and was in Whitland a few days before 
that. 

Did the conversation to which you refer take place after 
Mrs. Greenwood’s death?—I never put Mr. Greenwood 
through on the phone after the funeral of Mrs. Greenwood. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Luprorp, witness said she attended 
the phone from March to June, and also occasionally when 
at home. All she could say was that the voice was that of a 
lady. On the second interview she remembered there was 
something said about Mr. Greenwood going for a holiday if 
everything went all right. She did not know that arrange- 
ments were being made for Mr. and Mrs. Greenwood to go 
for a holiday. 


James Bruce M‘Puee, examined by Mr. Pzarcz, said he 
was in the employment of Messrs. Dobbie & Co., seed mer- 
chants, Edinburgh, and he produced an order from Mr. 
Greenwood for seeds and weed-killer in February, 1919. 
His firm did not make the weed-killer. Mr. Greenwood had 
been a customer since 1917. 


CHARLES JoHNSON, examined by Mr. Pzarcz, said—TI reside 
at 27 Alexander Terrace, Lincoln, and am a foreman in 
323 


Appendix II. 


the branch works of Messrs. Tomlinson & Hayward. A tin 
of 100 gallons Eureka weed-killer powder was sent by me to 
H. Greenwood, Esq., Rumsey House, Kidwelly, on or about 
23rd April, 1919. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Luprorp—It is coloured red. The 
colouring is mixed in during the process of manufacture. It 
would be impossible to take the colour out of it. 


Wituram Epwarp Bru, examined by Mr. Parcs, said he 
had been manager and chemist to Messrs. Tomlinson & Hay- 
ward for some time previous to June, 1919. He described 
the constituents and colour of Eureka weed-killer. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Luprorp, witness thought it would 
be practically impossible to get the colour out after it was 
once mixed without a chemical process. Just over 3 grains 
of the powder would contain 2 grains of arsenic. In reply 
to the bench, witness said that if 3 grains of the powder 
were dissolved in a wineglassful of liquid it would require 
some one with a knowledge of arsenic to detect it. The 
quantity of powder necessary to make 100 gallons of weed- 
killer was 10% Ibs. 


Joun LLEWELLYN WILD, examined by Mr. Parcs, said he 
lived at the Railway Inn, Kidwelly, and delivered goods 
from the railway station. On 2nd May, 1919, he delivered 
a parcel of weed-killer for H. Greenwood, Esq., from 
Lincoln. 


JoHN SHarFF, examined by Mr. Prarcn, said that on 
20th May, 1920, he bought 75 dozen empty bottles from Mr. 
Greenwood. They were all kinds of bottles, including port 
wine and burgundy. 


Henry GEORGE Harrison, examined by Mr. Prarcz, a 
partner in the firm of Hurcomb & Co., London, said that on 
12th July, 1919, his firm received a cheque for £55 from 
Mr. Greenwood in payment for a diamond ring. Witness 
identified two letters and a receipt shown to him. 


Wiuu1am Goup, examined by Mr. Prarcz, said that he had 
been a gardener with Mr. Greenwood since March, 1919. 
During the time he had been in Mr. Greenwood’s employ 
he had neither used nor seen any weed-killer. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Luprorp, witness said that a man 
named Ben Williams used to do odd jobs after he (witness) 
was gone, and might be asked about the weed-killer. There 
were hundreds of yards of paths at Rumsey House. 


Adjourned. 
324 


Police Court Proceedings. 


Third Day—Saturday, 3rd July, 1920. 


Evidence for the Prosecution—continued. 


Tuomas Epwarp Evans, examined by Mr. Prarcn, said 
he was a saddler, and he sold fancy leather goods. On 13th 
December, 1918, the accused came to his shop, accompanied 
by his present wife, who was then Miss Gladys Jones, and 
he made a purchase of a lady’s dressing case. The selection 
of the article was made by both together, and the accused 
paid £15 for it. The bag was discussed between them 
quietly. He only overheard the last word or two, but he 
could have heard much more if he had cared to listen. 

What did you hear!—Mr. Greenwood asked her, ‘‘ Do 
you like that? ’’ and she said ‘‘ Yes.’”’ He told me to send 
the bag to the Mercury office. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Luprorp—He was quite sure the 
es was paid for at the time, and not later on the same 

ay. 

Did you hear a conversation to the effect that this was a 
presentation bag!—Not a word. 

A presentation bag from the staff of the Mercury office 1— 
Not a word. 

Did you find out afterwards that it was!—Not a word. 

Re-examined by Mr. Prarce—The accused left the shop 
and brought back the money in his hand and paid for the 
bag there and then. 


Epwarp Rosperts, examined, said he knew the accused. On 
19th May, 1919, he received a call on the telephone about 
10.30 at night from Pontardulais. Acting on the message 
he received, he proceeded by car to Pontardulais where he 
found the accused waiting for him, also Mr. Llewellyn Jones 
and Miss Jones. The telephone call was given by a man’s 
voice, and the name given was Greenwood. 


Jonn WessteR, pathological chemist at St. Mary’s Hos- 
pital, London, examined by Mr. Praron, said that on 17th 
April, 1920, he received from Sergeant Hodge Lewis, of 
Kidwelly, three jars. Each jar was labelled. He made an 
analysis of their contents. He analysed all the organs, and 
found arsenic present in all of them. The total amount of 
arsenic calculated as arsenious oxide found in the organs 
submitted to him was 18 milligrams, or rather more than a 
quarter of a grain. On 28th June he analysed a sample of 
Haywood’s Eureka weed-killer submitted to him by Chief 
Detective Inspector Haigh. Arsenic was found in it in 
large quantities. It was a pink-coloured powder, and he 

325 


Appendix II. 


produced a tin containing a quantity of the powder. It was 
easily soluble in water, and gave a clear rose-pink solution. 
The solution itself was slightly alkaline, and in contact with 
acid the rose-pink colour was completely destroyed, and it 
became almost colourless—something of a pale straw-like 
colour. 

Have you tasted the powder in solution ?—I have. _ 

With what result?—With the addition of two grains of 
arsenic—which would be about four grains of Eureka weed- 
killer—to a wineglass of port it made practically no 
difference to the flavour of the port. 

Do you produce two bottles?—Yes, one labelled ‘‘ Port ”’ 
and the other labelled ‘‘ Port containing four grains of Hay- 
wood’s weed-killer.’’ There is one fluid ounce in each bottle, 
and they are my samples. 

Have you made any test in the case of tea?—I have. In 
the case of tea arsenic in the form of weed-killer to the extent 
of two grains in an ordinary cup of tea will make practically 
no difference in the taste. 

What of the colour !—The colour of the tea was very slightly 
darker, but this would not be noticed unless it was care- 
fully compared. The difference was very slight. 

From your judgment, there is no appreciable difference in 
the colour of the port either?’—Hardly any, and it would 
not be noticed except when comparing the two samples. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Luprorp—The examination for 
poison in the organs commenced four days after their de- 
livery. It was difficult to fix the time necessary to com- 
plete such an examination. It might take two or even four 
or five weeks, because of the nature of the tests. In the 
present case the examination was rather long, but it was 
unavoidable. He used the modified ‘‘ Marsh ”’ test. When 
dealing with the stomach he first of all destroyed all the 
organic matter, then took portions of the stomach and put 
them in the hydrogen apparatus used in the ‘‘ Marsh ”’ test. 
If arsenic was present it came off as a gas, and if the tube 
through which the gas was passing was heated, the gas de- 
composed and formed a black deposit, which was called the 
arsenic ‘‘mirror.’? He checked the test in various ways. 
Witness produced some ‘‘ mirrors’’ used in the test, and 
showed them to the bench. He said he judged the weight 
of arsenic by the eye. That was to say, he compared his 
‘mirrors ’’? with a standard ‘‘ mirror ’’ which he knew con- 
tained a certain known amount of arsenic. It was com- 
putation by resemblance. 

The ‘‘ mirror ’’ from the liver of the late Mrs. Green- 
wood was handed to Mr. Ludford, who compared it with a 
standard ‘“‘ mirror.’? Mr. Ludford, referring to the Green- 
wood ‘‘ mirror,’’ said—It is like the smoke on a chimney 

326 


Police Court Proceedings. 


glass?’—Yes, somewhat. -In the heart and spleen and other 
smaller organs he found the arsenic in unweighable quanti- 
ties, and had to compute it by comparison in resemblances. 
The stomach weighed 44 oz., and he found about one-fifth 
of a grain of arsenic in it. Witness gave minute details of 
calculations made in his tests. 

That only illustrates the extreme necessity of absolute 
accuracy, does it not /—Yes. 

A very minute difference would make a very great differ- 
ence in the amount of arsenic found in the body?—lIf the 
multiplying factor is very great. 

r And the multiplying factor here would be very great !— 
es. 

Where a mistake, if made, would be magnified so much, 
don’t you think it would be better to have another person 
with you in making such a delicate analysis!—If any mistake 
were made, and the multiplying factor would be large, it 
would be checked by another method. Where the arsenic is 
weighable I check it by another method. 


Dr. Winiuram Henry Witicox, Home Office Pathologist, 
examined by Mr. Pzarcy, said that from 19th to 23rd April 
he examined the organs in the possession of Mr. Webster. 

Did you find any disease of the organs!—Nothing definite. 

With regard to the valves of the heart?—I could find no 
disease present, 

What is the conclusion you have formed from your 
examination and from what you have heard of the evidence? 
—Taking into account the symptoms of the case, and the 
examination of the viscera and the results of the analysis, I 
am of opinion that the cause of death was arsenical poison- 
ing. 

Can you tell from your experience the time it takes for 
the symptoms to appear after the taking of the arsenic?— 
That depends on the condition in which the poison is taken, 
whether in solution or in solid form, and also upon the state 
of the stomach, as to whether it is full or empty. If the 
poison is in solution, and taken on an empty stomach in 
sufficient quantities, the symptoms would commence within 
an hour in all probability. | When the stomach was full 
there would be a further delay; and likewise, if the poison 
was in solid form, there would be delay on that account. 

What in your experience is the minimum fatal dose of 
arsenic!—About two grains. 

In this case would you describe the poison as being widely 
distributed !/—Yes, it was present in all the organs, I believe. 

Do you draw any conclusion from that fact?—Yes, that 
the poison must have been taken several hours before death. 
In my opinion the poison was taken through the mouth, 

327 


Appendix II. 


because the arsenic was found in the stomach and intestines. 
The symptoms of arsenical poisoning were plain in the 
stomach—nausea, vomiting, and afterwards probably some 
diarrhea, and possibly griping pains. These symptoms, if — 
severe, are likely to be accompanied or followed by collapse 

and heart failure, sometimes cramp in the legs occurs, but 
this is by no means a constant symptom. Those symptoms 
are the symptoms of acute arsenical poisoning. In the 
present case, according to the evidence as to symptoms, the 
taking of the poison was within twenty-four hours of the 
time of death, and probably between 1.30 and 6 p.m. I 
formed the opinion that the poison was taken in solution. 

Have you had acquaintance with some of the well-known 
forms of weed-killers?!—I have some acquaintance with them. 

And you are aware they contain a considerable amount of 
arsenic ?!—That is so. 

Some are in liquid form and others in powder form?— 
Yes. 

Could, in your opinion, the arsenic in this case have been 
administered by the use of a weed-killer?—Yes, I think it 
could. 

Do you agree with Mr. Webster as to the taste and colour 
of the arsenic ?—Yes. 

Is it possible for it to be administered in wine without 
it being detected 1—Yes. 

And that would also apply to other beverages and to solid 
food!—To solid food, and to certain other beverages if they 
are coloured. My remark as to colour refers to solids as 
well as to beverages. The normal quantity of hydrochloric 
acid in the stomach is between 1 and 2 per cent., and the 
effect of the acid would be to destroy the colouring of any 
weed-killer that entered the stomach. 

Is the quantity of arsenic found by Mr. Webster in this 
case consistent with the fact that a fatal dose had been ad- 
ministered ?—Yes, taking into account the history of the 
case. 

In your opinion a fatal dose was administered in this 
case 1—Yes. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Luprorp—Although there was no 
valvular disease of the heart, there might have been mischief 
with the walls of the heart. The heart muscle was decom- 
posed, so that one could not give an opinion as to whether it 
was healthy or not. The fainting fits and the general con- 
ditions, as described by Dr. Griffiths, would point in the 
direction that the valves of the heart were diseased. A 
flabby heart muscle might give rise to murmurs over the 
heart and simulate valvular disease. At the inquest at 
Kidwelly the prosecution were going on the lines of Cooper’s 
weedicide, and he was questioned about it. 

328 


Police Court Proceedings. 


Now they have dropped Cooper’s weedicide and they have 
gone on Eureka?—(Witness gave no answer.) 

Eureka is stronger than weedicide?/—So I understand. 
Witness added that if Eureka was mixed into a paste it 
would be very caustic, but if it were well diluted it would 
not be so. If a single dose containing two grains of arsenic 
or three grains of weed-killer were given in a wineglassful 
of wine, he did not think there would be any appreciable 
taste of it, and it would not cause a burning sensation in the 
throat. 

You would have to have your three grains of solid before 
you had your two grains of arsenic !—Yes. 

But you could not put your two grains of arsenic in one 
wineglassful of wine!—Oh, yes, you could. 

Without the burning sensation?—Yes. It would therefore 
require 36 grains of arsenic for a full bottle of wine in 
order to have the same proportion throughout, assuming 
that there were twelve wineglassfuls in the bottle. 

If done by design it would show rather skilful manipula- 
tion?—It would require careful measurement to get that 
amount. 

Having got it in the wine, do you think anybody else 
could take the same quantity without feeling any ill-effects? 
—Two grains would cause many marked symptoms in any 
person. 

So that if the arsenic had been administered in the wine, 
and a wineglass had been taken by anybody else, that person 
must have shown symptoms of arsenical poisoning !— 
I think so. 

Are you inclined to the opinion that the dose was taken at 
lunch?—It might have been taken at lunch. 

What is your real opinion!—That it was taken some time 
between 1.30 and 6 p.m. 

Are you inclined to the opinion that it was taken at lunch? 
—I am not prepared to say. So many factors influence the 
time of the onset of the symptoms. 

But do you gather that it is the theory of the prosecu- 
tion that the wine containing the arsenic was taken at lunch? 
—I really do not know what is the theory of the prosecu- 
tion; I think that is a matter of judgment. 

You would rather not state your opinion on that?—I 
would rather not. 

So it may have been at lunch, or it may have been at 
tea 1—Yes. 

Do you think that it is possible that she had a fatal dose 
at lunch ?—Yes, I think so. 

Do you think it likely, if she had a fatal dose at lunch, 
that she would have been able to sit down to afternoon tea 

329 


Appendix II. 


three hours afterwards’—If the fatal dose was taken on a 
full stomach the symptoms would be delayed some hours. 

Have you ever known of a case where the patient after 
taking a fatal dose sat down to a meal?!—I cannot recollect 
a case, but it is conceivable that that might happen. 

In any case the two grains of arsenic would be in the 
body some time between 1 and 6 o’clock?—Between 1.30 
and 6, assuming that the symptoms commenced at 6. 

We will assume that the symptoms commenced between 
6 and 6.30 o’clock. Can you recall any case where the 
patient, having had a fatal dose, has ever shown any signs 
of recovery from the time the symptoms commenced !—Yes. 

Not usually ?—It is not common. : 

I am afraid you do not agree with your colleague, Dr. 
Spilsbury?—I do not know. I can give you a case to illus- 
trate my opinion if you like. 

You know the Seddons case?—Yes, I gave evidence in it. 

Mr. Ludford read the answer of Dr. Spilsbury in the 
Seddons case to the effect that he did not think a patient 
would show any signs of improving after having taken a 
fatal dose of arsenic seventy-two hours before. 

Witness replied that whatever Dr. Spilsbury’s answer 
might have been in the Seddons case, he had known of cases 
of temporary improvement after the fatal dose had been 
taken. 

After a small dose?—No, a fairly large dose. 

Having heard the history of Mrs. Greenwood’s health, do 
you think it possible that if Mrs. Greenwood had had as 
much as two grains of arsenic at 1.30, she would be going 
about the garden, taking tea, and showing no signs of the 
symptoms of an irritant for five hours!—No, it is not likely. 

It would be somewhat extraordinary, would it not ?—lIt 
would be if the arsenic was taken on an empty stomach, that 
is early during lunch. If taken later during lunch it might 
be possible. 

Because the symptoms usually show themselves within two 
hours !—Usually they do. 

And sometimes within half an hour ?—yYes, sometimes, if 
the stomach is empty. 

Did you hear Dr. Griffiths say that about 7.45 p.m. he 
found the patient much easier and getting much better 7— 
I think I heard that. 

Is that not very unusual, doctor !—Not necessarily. 

If a person had not taken a fatal dose of arsenic, would 
you expect to find the usual symptoms of acute arsenical 
poisoning !—Yes, especially if it was a large dose, say, a 
grain. 

330 


Police Court Proceedings. 


Were there some of the usual symptoms absent in this 
case!—There was one symptom absent, namely, cramp in 
the legs. 

Was that the only one? Let me see, you have referred 
to pain, and I think you have gathered from Dr. Griffiths 
that the pains in this case were those usually associated with 
gastro-enteritis, but perhaps the pains in that complaint 
are severe !—Usually they are very severe. 

I think Dr. Griffiths said he thought they were the ordinary 
pains of indigestion. Would you have expected something 
more severe than that?—Not necessarily. 

Would there be any burning sensation in the stomach !?— 
There might be some. 

And would you expect the patient to develop a very great 
thirst ?—Not necessarily. 

There again you disagree with your friend Dr. Spilsbury? 
—tThere are no absolutely constant symptoms in arsenical 
poisoning. Any one symptom may be absent. 

All the authorities, however, seem to agree that a patient 
develops a great and insatiable thirst?—It all depends on 
how long the symptoms last. In a case where the symptoms 
lasted less than twelve hours I should not expect thirst. In 
the present case considerably more than half the arsenic 
taken would have been ejected by the vomiting and diarrhea. 
I do not consider a very large dose was taken in this 
case. 

Knowing your usual fairness in these cases, am I correct 
in saying it is very near the border line?—I think it might 
be very near the border line of two grains. 

There is not much of a margin for mistake, is there?—I 
think my previous answer is sufficient for that. 

Have you known the Crown in these prosecutions to attach 
the utmost importance to the finding of at least two grains 
of arsenic in the body at the time of death?—I have known 
cases where less than two grains were found. 

Do you know that there is more than one important case 
where the Crown have considered it of vital importance to 
prove or to show that there were at least two grains of arsenic 
in the body calculated at the time of death !—You are asking 
me if I know the thoughts of the Crown. 

You are sometimes the most important part of the Crown 
prosecutions. Was that not the object of the Crown in the 
Seddons case?—In the Seddons case just over two grains 
were found in the body. 

It was 2.01, was it not?—Yes, that is so. 

And you said there must have been between three and 
four grains taken?—I think I did. 

You said there you did not know for certain ?—Yes. 

331 


Appendix II. 


Coming back to my other question, was it not fully under- 
stood that in the Seddons case it was of the utmost import- 
ance to the Crown that it should be proved that at least two 
grains of arsenic were actually found in the body after 
death ?—No, I do not agree. What is of vital importance to 
prove in all these cases is whether, taking the whole case 
together, the analytical evidence as to quantity shows that 
arsenic was the cause of death. I agree that if one has to 
form an opinion on the analytical results alone, the finding 
of two grains is of great importance. 

Mr. Ludford then put to witness an extract from 
Taylor’s ‘‘ Medical Jurisprudence’? with regard to the 
quantity of arsenic that should be found in a body before 
it could be placed beyond doubt that death was due to 
arsenical poisoning, and witness said he agreed with the 
extract—which, however, was qualified—and he agreed with 
the qualification. 

If the body was not disturbed for a hundred or a thousand 
years in the grave the arsenic would be still found there?— 
The time referred to in the qualification is the time between 
the taking of the dose and the death and what happened 
within that time. In this case there was vomiting and 
diarrhoea, and that must be taken into consideration. 

Might there be arsenical poisoning without diarrhoea and 
vomiting ?’—There might be, but such cases are uncommon. 
In this case the vomiting and purging were excessive as 
compared with the usual run of arsenical poisoning. In 
some fatal cases the arsenic has been eliminated altogether. 

To be certain of death from arsenical poisoning, do you 
consider there ought to be a fatal dose in the body at the 
time of death!—Not necessarily. 

Can you give me a minimum !—It depends entirely on each 
case. 

Then you would not give a minimum !?—No. 

Do you think Eureka powder would lose its colour in five 
and a half hours?—It would lose its colour completely in five 
minutes after reaching the stomach, owing to the acid there. 
It is simply a question of acidity, and as soon as it comes 
in contact with the acid of the stomach the colour is 
destroyed. 

Re-examined by Mr. Pzrarce—He had heard Dr. Griffiths 
say at the inquest that the pains were of a colicky descrip- 
tion. That was a symptom of arsenical poisoning, and 
usually accompanied diarrhcea. In the case of a person 
with a weak heart, it would require a smaller dose of arsenic 
than in the case of a person with a normal heart. 

I will read extracts from Mr. Greenwood’s own statement 
to the police: ‘‘ We had gooseberry tart, and I told my 

B32 


Police Court Proceedings. 


wife not to have any, as ‘she had had diarrhea the previous 
Saturday, and she had it on that Sunday afternoon also. 
She went to lie down, and came to me again about 3 to 3.30 
while I was still in the garden, and she said she had had 
another attack of diarrhea. She complained of frightful 
’ pains in her heart, and said she was faint.’’ Another 
passage was: ‘‘ She had suffocating pains in her heart.’’ 
Do you find in these quotations symptoms of arsenical poison- 
ing?’—Those symptoms might have been due to arsenical 
poisoning. 

And does it appear from the statement that the symptoms, 
whatever they were, appeared before 6 and 6.301—Yes, 
before it, apparently. 

With regard to the supposed difference between you and 
Dr. Spilsbury in the Seddons case, did you work together ?— 
We co-operated together through the whole of the Seddons 
case. 

Have you any recollection of anything in which you dis- 
agreed?—I am quite sure there was not the slightest dis- 
agreement between us on any point through the whole case. 

Taking into consideration all the knowledge you have 
acquired in this case, have you any doubt that the cause of 
death was arsenical poisoning ?—No. 


The Chairman read out the charge and the usual warning, 
during which the accused rested on the handrail of the dock. 
Asked if he had anything to say, Greenwood replied in a 
clear voice—I am not guilty of this charge, and I reserve 
my defence. : 

Mr. Ludford said he did not desire to address the bench, 
and without a moment’s delay the chairman announced that 
the accused would be committed for trial at the next assizes 
at Carmarthen.* 


* After the close of the proceedings, Mr. Ludford was sraly 
congratulated by Dr. Willcox upon the masterly manner in whic 
he had dealt with the difficult points arising out of the medical 
evidence. 

333 


APPENDIX III. 


LIST OF EXHIBITS. 


1. Envelope addressed to Miss Gwyneth David, post- 
marked 5th June, 1919. 

2. Letter, H. Greenwood to Miss Gwyneth David, 5th 
June, 1919. 

3. Poison book of John C. Jones. 

4. Receipt for £55 given by Hurcomb & Co. to H. 
Greenwood, 15th July, 1919. 

5. Copy marriage certificate of Harold Greenwood and 
Gwladys Amelia Jones. 

6. Pocket-book. : 

7. Order from Greenwood to Dobbie & Co., Edinburgh, 
for Eureka weed-killer. 

8. Letter, Greenwood to Messrs. Dobbie & Co., 14th April, 1919. 

9. Great Western Railway delivery list, 2nd May, 1919. 

10. Letter, Greenwood to W. E. Hurcomb, 4th July, 1919. 

11. Letter, Greenwood to W. E. Hurcomb, 10th July, 1919. 

12. Letter, Greenwood to W. E. Hurcomb, 12th July, 1919. 

Tin of Eureka weed-killer. 

Small bottle labelled ‘‘ Port.”’ 

Small bottle labelled “‘ Port” containing Hayward’s weed-killer. 

Marsh test mirror from liver. 

Marsh test mirror (standard). 

Taylor’s Medical Jurisprudence. 


[Exhibit 2.] 


1 Frederick Street, 
Llanelly, 
Carmarthenshire, 
Dear Miss David, 5th June, 1919. 

I am indeed very much surprised to hear that you told Miss 
Alice Jones yesterday that Mrs. Greenwood was not ill and that 
her brother had not been to see her. Why and what is your 
object in telling her these deliberate lies. Your only object'that 
I can see is that you for some unknown desire wish to attempt 
to break my friendship with the Jones family, which I feel 
happy to say is more than your flippant tongue can achieve. 
I must ask you in future to please let me and mine alone 
unless you can speak the truth concerning them. But I must 
call for an explanation of the innuendo you suggest by 
making the false statements you have. 

Yours truly, 
H. GreEenwoop. 

Miss Gwyneth David, 

rfran, 
Llanelly. 
334 


Exhibits at Trial. 


LE LL LL SL 


‘poomuedly “A 


“‘pooMusely "EL 


*spoo AA Surfo1q8eq7 
‘spe AA Sutfo1480q 


‘SULT, “IO G 
“SULT, “90 Z 


‘aploipee AA 8,Jedo0g 
‘@Plorpee AA 8,19d009 


‘asnoy Assumy “rp Spoomues.sy 


‘asnoy Aesuny “A “IY ‘pooMueery 


‘roseyoing 
_ Jo ornyeusig 


‘ 


*‘pormnba st 41 
Yorys oF asodang 


"pos 
uOsIog Jo 
Aqiqguenty 


*pjos 
uoslog Jo owen 


‘IOSvyoINg JO sselppy pue oure Ny 


“T98 “se 
‘pug oun 


‘aqeq 


335 


ee ee 
‘aTOS NOSIOd JO UMLSIOAUY SaLSINAHO 


[‘g tiarxy] 


Appendix III. 


‘MOsIeg poslioyyny ‘SNVAW NHOP 


‘0Z6I ‘eung jo ep OT SIy puey Au ssouqT AA 


“£poqsno Aux ur AT[esay ou st Yoog s0ysiFey Yous yeyy pur ‘Burpling peureu-aaoqe ay} Jo seSvrarepY Jo Yoog 104s1Fey ey ut 
9 ‘ON Argug oy Jo Adoo onsy & st styy Geyy Ayy4100 Aqar0y op “gEgt “oy eselzIepY 04) JapuN uossieg pestIoyINy ‘sueAy UYOL ‘T 


‘yedeyQ udkag 10; uosscd postaoyny 
‘suvaq uYyor 
“SS0U4I MA “SOUL OO1TW 


jo 
goueserd 
ey} ul pue 


‘souor “, ‘'W 
‘sou0p ‘yy, ‘MOTT 


‘sn Jo 


eoueseid 


oy Ur 


‘souor “y sX{pe[ My 


poomusely) plOoleyy 


‘sousory Aq syuepuedepuy ey} Jo seruoutore() pur soqry 044 09 Surpsoooe podeyy uArg oy4 Url peleyy 


‘sn u99M4eq 
PeZLUUIE]OS SBAL 
OSeILIV SIU, 


‘sour ‘Ajjoueyy ‘werpady, | ‘savok *‘souor 
‘posvaooq | urwelueg ure Ay ‘apiskuung | _ ‘Joqsurdg 1g elpoury spray 
*poomusery “ATPOMPTYy | ‘svak 
*‘poseooeq, UBULION WRITE AA ‘ssnoy, Aesuny *104LOT[O “TOMOPI MA CP ‘poomusery plorey 
‘1eyye,q Jo E * ; ‘ “UOISsojoIg 
Gace 8 Wee aks ee ies aba Reape tte Bi) ‘uoryIpuogn | ‘esy | ‘oueuIng pue oueyy 
Io yueyy é : : yuey 


“6161 
£19Q049Q, 
{EEUNE 


*pollreyl 
wey MA 


‘ON 


EE Se ee 


‘UBBIOUIe[) pu UoYZAeUITED Jo SeryUNOD oY} ur ‘ATToWRLT Jo gorgstq oy9 Ur ‘JedeyH usig 4%e poztumezos oSvImIY “IGT 


‘dV 
“9202 “W 


‘pouugsug Uuounwugsibay 


"S681 °F OS8I ‘SLOW GOVINUVIY HHL OL LNVaSUag 


‘AOVICAVN HO AMLNA NV JO AdOO GHIALLaHO 


('¢ wiarxy] 


‘PS6FS 


336 


Exhibits at Trial, 


[Exhibit 4.] 


8 Cullum Street, 
City, 
London, E.C.3, July 15, 1919. 
Hurcoms & Co. 
H. Greenwood Esq., 
Diamond Cluster Ring, - - - - . £55. 
Received 
15 July, 1919, 
with thanks. 
Cluster and pattern enclosed herewith. 


[Exhibit 7.] 


Dobbie & Co., The King’s Seedsmen, Edinburgh. 
From: Name—H. Greenwood. 
Address: Rumsey House, Kidwelly, Carmarthenshire. 
Post Town: Kidwelly. 
Railway Station: Kidwelly Line, G.W.R.., 
County Carmarthen. 
Eureka Weed-killer, - - : - £1 40) 20 


[Exhibit 8.] 


Rumsey House, 
Kidwelly, 
Carmarthenshire, 
14th April, 1919. 
Dear Sirs, 
I should be obliged if you will let me have the 20s. worth 
of weed-killer I ordered some months ago. 
Yours faithfully, 
H. Greenwoop. 
Messrs. Dobbie & Co., 


Seedsmen, 
Edinburgh. 
[Exhibit 10.] 
1 Frederick Street, 
Llanelly, 
Carmarthenshire, 
4th July, 1919. 
Dear Sirs, 


I require a Diamond Lady’s Marquise Ring somewhere 
between £30 and £40. The size of the finger is enclosed here- 
337 
Z 


Appendix III. 


with; you will see it is rather small. I want one worth the 
money. You have my bankers reference some 18 months 
ago when I bought a Diamond Horseshoe pin from you which 
gave every satisfaction. Do you wish me to send on cheque, 


or will you send on approval. 
Yours faithfully, 


H. GREENWOOD. 


W. E. Hurcomb, Esq., 
170 Piccadilly, 
W.1. 


[Exhibit 11.] 


1 Frederick Street, 
Llanelly, 
Carmarthenshire, 
10th July, 1919. 
Dear Sirs, 

Your letter of the 8th inst. duly to hand. A good Cluster 
ring would suit quite as well—if the stones are nice and 
large; I dont want a lot of small stones. I have a Diamond 
ring which I would like made into a horseshoe Pin. If I 
sent the same on to you would you convert same. It is a 
ring that belonged to my late wife. 

Yours faithfully, 
H. Greenwoop. 
Messrs. Hurcomb & Co., 
8 Cullum Street, 
London, E.C.3. 


[Exhibit 12.] 


1 Frederick Street, 
Llanelly, 
Carmarthenshire, 
12th July, 1919. 
Dear Sirs, 

Herewith I return the rings and have kept the £55 one 
for which I enclose cheque. Also a cheap ring I bought to-day 
giving the exact size of the ring required, so please have same 
altered and let me have it back as soon as possible and oblige. 

Yours faithfully, 
H. GREENWoop, 
Messrs. Hurcomb & Co., 
City, E.C.3, 


338 


Exhibits at Trial. 


[Exhibit 13.] 


(1) R/ Acid Hydrocyan Dil M1 
Liq Bismuth et Amm Cit MX 
Pepsin Gr V 
Tinct Nuc Vom MV 
Sp Chloroformi MX 
Aq ad dil 


Two teaspoonfuls every two hours. 


(2) Tonic. 
R/ Sod Bicarb gr X 
Tinct Nuc Vom MV 
Sp Am Aromat MV 
Inf Gent Co Cone MX 
Aq ad 3 OZ 


One tablespoonful three times a day. 


(3) Pil Opii gr 4 


i statum other one hour afterwards. 


June 9/20. (sd) T. R. Grirrirus, 
LRP, 


339 


APPENDIX IV. 


INTERVIEWS WITH MR. GREENWOOD. 
From the South Wales Daily Post, 10th June, 1920. 
Kidwelly, Wednesday Night. 


The developments which have occurred in connection with 
the mystery of the exhumation of the body of the late Mrs. 
Mabel Greenwood have thrown this peacful country district 
into a ferment of excitement. Since Mrs, Greenwood’s 
grave in Kidwelly churchyard was opened on 16th April, 
the report of Mr. Webster, the Home Office expert who has 
been making an examination of certain organs of the body, 
has been awaited with the keenest interest. The result of 
this examination was first indicated in the Daily Chronicle 
on Tuesday. 

A further sensation has now been caused by the arrival of 
Scotland Yard detectives in Llanelly, following the completion 
of Mr. Webster’s analysis. I learn to-night that the evidence 
at the resumed inquest, which is to be opened at the Kidwelly 
Town Hall next Tuesday morning, will be startling and 
dramatic. It is expected that the proceedings will last at 
least two days. 

Chief Inspector Haigh and Detective Sergeant Helbey, the 
Scotland Yard officers who are co-operating with the Llanelly 
police, have interviewed a number of prsons who will be 
called as witnesses when the inquest is resumed. But their 
other inquiries are being conducted with the utmost secrecy. 
I am able to state, however, that the police inquiries have 
been practically completed, and that attention is now con- 
centrated on clearing up certain minor points. 

It is many months since the Llanelly police first set on foot 
inquiries concerning the death of Mrs, Mabel Greenwood. 
It was not until investigations had reached an advanced stage 
that they applied to the Home Office for an exhumation order. 

This afternoon I saw Mr. Harold Greenwood at his office 
in Llanelly, where he carries on his practice as a solicitor, 
and drew his attention to the announcement concerning the 
results of the exhumation. 

“That beats me hollow,’’ said Mr. Greenwood, after he 
had read the statement, ‘‘I cannot understand how they 
have found poison.’’ 

‘““Have you been officially informed of the result of the 
Home Office analysis? ’’ I asked. 

340 


Newspaper Interviews. 


‘“ No, I have heard nothing,’’ he replied. ‘‘ Not a single 
word.’’ ; 

“* My wife was taking medicine before her death, but I 
don’t know what was in it,’”’ he said, alluding to a sugges- 
tion that had been made. 

**No,’’ he went on after a moment’s reflection, ‘‘ there 
could not have been that. If there had been she would have 
been writhing in pain, would she not? As it was, she died 
quite peacefully.”’ 

Previously I had interviewed Mr. Greenwood at his resi- 
dence in Kidwelly, where his first wife died. Rumsey House, 
as it is called, is a large three-storeyed house, situated on 
the bank of the River Gwendraeth, and commands a splendid 
view of the beautiful hilly country which encircles the village. 
Mr. Greenwood received me in the drawing-room, and his first 
words as he entered the room were: ‘‘ There is nothing at all 
that I can tell you—absolutely nothing.’’ 

Later, however, he began to talk about the matter, and 
he spoke with contempt in his voice, ridiculing the possibility 
of the exhumation analysis resulting in any startling dis- 
closures. A well-groomed, middle-aged man, rather short of 
stature, with a grey moustache, thick, bushy eyebrows, and 
a keen, alert appearance, he seemed surprised at the manner 
in which the authorities were treating the case, but declared 
his willingness to give them every assistance. 

‘‘ My position is the same as it has always been,’’ he said. 
‘7 welcome inquiry into the matter. As far as I am con- 
cerned, they are welcome to come here and make all the 
inquiries they like, for I have nothing to hide, but you can 
depend upon it that there isn’t anything to it. If there was 
they would have been here making inquiries among the maids 
and in the district, but nobody has been here at all. I don’t 
even think that Mr. Haigh has come down from London.”’ 

Mr. Greenwood said he did not know when the inquest 
would be resumed, and that no communication of any kind 
had been sent to him. ‘‘I do not know whether I shall be 
called at the inquest,’? he said, ‘‘ but I shall certainly 
volunteer to give evidence. 

‘* Ag to the report of the Home Office analyst, I have heard 
nothing about it, but I know there can be nothing wrong— 
or at least I shall be very much surprised if there is.’ 

In the narrow streets of this old-world village, rich in Welsh 
historical associations, many little groups are to-night dis- 
cussing the latest aspects of the drama. The death of Mrs. 
Greenwood came as a great blow to every member of the com- 
munity, many of whom have cause to remember her generosity. 

Mrs. Greenwood, who was a sister of Sir Thomas Vansittart 
Bowater, a former Lord Mayor of London, had a comfortable 
private income of her own, and much of this was dispensed 

341 


Appendix IV. 


in charitable gifts. She married in 1896, and she was forty- 
seven years of age when she died. A lady who knew her for 
many years told me that she was a keen churchwoman, 
interested in all the affairs of the parish, and ever ready to 
offer her money or sympathy to those in need. “* Mrs. 
Greenwood was the soul of kindness,’’ she said, ‘‘ and prob- 
ably nobody in the village was better liked.’’. 


From the Daily Mail, 12th June, 1920. 


I have had a talk with Mr. Greenwood and his present wife 
at their home, Rumsey House. ‘‘ What can I say?’’ asked 
Mr. Greenwood, “‘ except that the mystery appears to deepen 
every day? It is said that they have found arsenic in the 
body. That I cannot understand. I should not have been 
the least surprised to know that they found poison of some 
kind, for during the last two years of her life my wife took 
many kinds of medicine. 

““ They were treating her for catarrh, supposed cancer, 
her heart, and her nerves, and I understand that she had to 
take many kinds of medicine. 

‘““There is one very important point which must be con- 
sidered. Supposing I had bought arsenic anywhere, I should 
have had to sign the poison-book, and that would be traced 
at once. As a matter of fact, I have not been beyond Kid- 
welly and Llanelly since October, 1918, and then I went to 
Brecon on business for my present wife’s firm. My first wife 
had been ill for upwards of two years. She was wasting away, 
and she knew it. 

“She used to say, ‘I am dying on my feet,’ and to any 
one who was associated with her it was quite obvious. I 
know quite well what the suggestion is, but it was so clear 
that my wife was dying, and it was only a question of months 
at the outside that, even supposing such a preposterous thing 
as that I wished her to die, I had to wait only a few weeks.”’ 

Mr. Greenwood was much affected ag he discussed this phase 
of the matter. It was some moments before he continued: 
“As a matter of fact, we were very happy together. We 
were married for twenty-three years, and I can honestly say 
we never had a quarrel. It was always give and take 
with us.’’ 

““ And isn’t that by far the better way? ”’ interposed Mrs. 
Greenwood. 

‘““My wife was so good, so kind,’’ said Mr. Greenwood, 
“that it would have required a perfect monster to think 
harm towards her. She was very secretive, though, and 
many times I have come home from my office in Llanelly to 

342 


Newspaper Interviews. 


find her out. Usually she would wait tea for me, but on 
these occasions I had tea by myself. When she came in I 
would ask her where she had been, but she would never say, 
but turned it off with a laugh. I never pressed her for 
explanations, as I knew she had been up to no harm. I do 
not know to this day where she went on those occasions.”’ 

‘* She was always having fainting-fits, I am told,’’ re- 
marked Mrs. Greenwood. 

‘* Yes,’’ said her husband. ‘‘I would be sitting here, 
smoking my pipe, and on looking up would find that she had 
gone off in a dead faint, and it took a long time for her to 
come round.”’ 

Reverting to the allegation that arsenic had been found in 
the body, Mr. Greenwood pooh-poohed the suggestion that it 
may have been self-administered. ‘‘ I am sure she would not 
do it. She used to use a great many preparations for her 
face. Her drawer was full of cosmetics and face creams, 
but I am certain she never took any patent concoction to 
improve her figure or anything like that.” 

** Could paint have caused the poisoning? ’’ inquired Mrs. 
Greenwood. ‘‘ At the time of her death this house was being 
repainted with white paint.’’ 

“* Paint always upset her,’’ explained Mr. Greenwood. 
‘On one occasion she had to leave the house in which we 
were living while it was being redecorated, the paint had 
such an effect upon her.”’ 


d 


From the Daily Mail, 17th April, 1920. 


*“T am a victim of village gossip, of village scandal, and if you 
know Welsh village life you will know what that means. It all 
started from the fact that four months after my first wife’s death 
I married again. That started the gossip. It is only fair to me 
to say that my first wife had suffered in health for at least two 
years before her death. Not only was her heart bad, but she also 
suffered from an internal disease which caused her intense 
depression. It was, however, from the heart attack that she died 
on June 16. No one, not even the doctor, thought that that 
attack would be fatal.” 


From the Llanelly and County Guardian, 22nd April, 1920. 


Mr. Greenwood was seen by a press representative at 
Rumsey House, and referred once more to the lying slanders 
which, he said, had been the cause of the intervention of 

343 


Appendix IV. 


the police and the Home Office. He spoke with indignation 
of the rumour that he and his late wife had not lived 
happily. ? 

‘“ My neighbours know better than that,’”’ he said. ‘* They 
know how happy we were. They also know that for two 
years my wife was under the care of Dr. Griffiths, the family 
medical attendant, on account of an affection of the heart. 
During the last six months of her life,’’ he went on, “‘ I 
noticed that my wife seemed to be wasting away daily, and 
I put this down to the fact that she was suffering from an 
internal malady.’’ , 

In reply to a question by our representative, Mr. Green- 
wood gave an emphatic denial to the allegation that he had 
insured his late wife for £10,000. ‘‘ That is another 
malicious falsehood,’’ he said. ‘‘ She was not insured for 
a brass farthing, and, painful as the inquiry is to me and 
the family of my late wife, I welcome it as an opportunity 
to bring to an end once and for all the tissue of lies that 
has been circulated in Llanelly and Kidwelly for the past 
ten months. I want the whole thing cleared up, and I have 
no doubt at all what the result will be. 

‘Tf I had known that there was going to be this sus- 
picion,’? Mr. Greenwood stated, ‘‘I would myself have 
insisted upon an inquiry being held. Who the people are 
who have instituted this investigation, I cannot conceive. 
I would very much like to know. I have never been asked 
for a statement, nor has any member of my household, as far 
as I know. 

“In October last I saw the police superintendent for a 
few minutes when he came to inquire why the burial certifi- 
cate had not been sent to the vicar. I had told one of the 
servants to take the fees and the certificate to the vicarage. 
The servant took the fees, but left the certificate behind. 
The superintendent made notes in his book, and seemed to be 
quite satisfied, and I thought that was an end of the matter. 

‘““T heard nothing more till Tuesday last, when I received 
a notice from the coroner, informing me that the body of my 
first wife was to be exhumed. I went at once to the police 
to know what was the English of it, and I appointed Dr. 
Griffiths, the family physician, to represent me. 

‘“‘ She had been in very bad health for at least two years 
before she died, and had been subject to fainting fits ever 
since we were first married. She had also expressed fears 
that she had an internal complaint. 

““The Sunday she died we were taking our usual stroll 
together in the garden, when she suddenly exclaimed, ‘ Oh, 
my heart!’ and put her hand to her side. I thought it was 
another of her fainting attacks, and had no inkling that 
it would prove fatal,’’ 

344 


APPENDIX V. 


A/ BRIEF ACCOUNT OF THE JUDGE AND COUNSEL 
ENGAGED IN THE TRIAL OF HAROLD GREENWOOD. 
Sir Montague Suearman (Mr. Justice Shearman), son of 

Mr. Montague Shearman, a practising solicitor, of Wimbledon, 

was born on 7th April, 1857, and died on 6th January, 1930. 

He was educated at Merchant Taylors School and St. John’s 

College, Oxford. At the former he was captain of the foot- 

ball XV, and head monitor. He left with a scholarship at 

St. John’s College and the school tercentenary scholarship. 

At the Oxford and Cambridge Sports in 1876 he won the 

100 yards in 10 1-5 secs. 

He entered as a student at the Inner Temple in 1877, took 
his degree in 1879, and was called to the bar in 1881, joining 
the Midland Circuit and the Birmingham Sessions, and 
speedily obtaining a practice. He took silk in 1903, and 
in time became a prominent figure at the common law bar. 
He was raised to the bench in April, 1914. Amongst other 
important cases at which he presided as judge were the trial 
of Bywaters and Mrs. Thompson at the Central Criminal 
Court in 1922, and the trial the same year of the murderers 
of Field-Marshal Sir Henry Wilson. He retired in 1929, 
three months before his death. 

Sir Montague Shearman was a famous athlete, being a 
Rugger ‘‘ Blue,’ a keen oarsman, rowing in his college eight, 
and also a good long jumper and boxer. As a judge he was 
eminently fair, good-tempered, and moderate, seldom coming 
into collision with witnesses or opposing counsel. 


Sir Epwarp Maruay Samson, K.B.E., K.C., born 1869, 
was second son of the late Louis Samson, Esq., J.P., D.L., of 
Scotchwell, Haverfordwest, South Wales. He was educated 
at Harrow and Trinity College, Oxford; called to the bar at 
the Inner Temple in 1892. 

In 1893 he joined the South Wales and Chester Circuit ; 
he took silk in 1919; was recorder of Swansea from May, 
1918, to July, 1923; Chancellor of St. David’s Diocese, 1909 ; 
Chancellor of the Diocese of Swansea and Brecon, 1923-1930; 
chairman of Quarter Sessions for the county of Pembroke 
and for the town and county of Haverfordwest. Sir Edward 
Marlay Samson had a considerable practice in South Wales ; 
he acted as counsel for the Church in Wales at the Royal 
Welsh Commission, 1908; he led for the Crown in Rew v. 
Greenwood and Rex v. Jenkins at Carmarthen Assize in 1920, 

1A 345 


Appendix V. 


and had the unusual experience of opening the latter case 
on the charge of murder, while awaiting the jury’s verdict 
in the former. He led for the Crown in the South Wales 
Colliery Riot cases in 1921; he also appeared for ex-Arch- 
deacon Wakeford in the Consistory Court at Lincoln, in 
charges under the Clergy Discipline Act, and subsequently 
was led by Sir Edward Carson, K.C., in the unsuccessful 
appeal by the ex-Archdeacon to the Privy Council. Sir 
Edward Marlay Samson took an active part in the political 
and public life of South Wales, having unsuccessfully con- 
tested the county of Pembroke twice as a Unionist candidate, 
being a member of the Provincial Court of the Church in 
Wales, and of the representative and governing bodies. He 
also acted as chairman of the Wales and Mon. Advisory Com- 
mittee, Ministry of Pensions, and of the Association of War 
Pensions Committee for England and Wales. 

In July, 1923, he quitted the bar, and was appointed 
stipendiary magistrate of Swansea on the re-creation of that 
appointment. 


Witrrip Husert Poyrer Lewis, born 1881, eldest son of 
the late Arthur Lewis, Esq., of Henllan, Narberth, Pem- 
brokeshire. He was educated at Eton and University College, 
Oxford; was called to the bar at the Inner Temple in 1908, 
joining the South Wales and Chester Circuit. He was 
elected a bencher of the Inner Temple in 1929. 


Sir Epwarp Marsatut Hari (1858-1927) was a son of Dr. 
Alfred Hall, of Brighton, and the youngest of a family of 
ten children. He was educated at St. Andrew’s College, 
Chadstock, Dorsetshire, Rugby, and St. John’s College, Cam- 
bridge. In 1876 he entered the office of Shepherd & Co., 
tea merchants, London. He spent a year in Paris from 
1878-1879, and visited Australia. He returned to Cam- 
bridge, and took a pass degree in law in 1882. He was 
called to the bar in 1883, and joined the South-Eastern 
Circuit and the Sussex Sessions. In 1898 he took silk. In 
1900 he successfully contested Southport as Conservative can- 
didate. In 1910 he was elected a bencher of the Inner 
Temple. In 1916 he was made recorder of Guildford, a 
position which he occupied until his death eleven years later. 
He was knighted in 1917. 

Sir Edward Marshall Hall was a fine shot, an enthusiastic 
cricketer, an ardent collector of beautiful things, and a great 
dog-lover. A firm friend, he made many enemies, a fact 
which at one time hampered his career and even threatened 
to wreck it completely. His name was associated with a 
succession of celebrated trials from his first open success in 
his defence of Marie Hermann in 1894. Amongst others may 

346 


Brief Account of Judge and Counsel. 


be mentioned those of the Yarmouth beach murderer, Seddon, 
Madame Fahmy, Lock Ah Tam, George Joseph Smith, Robert 
Wood, and the ‘‘ Stella Maris’’ case. The year of his 
defence of Harold Greenwood he also defended Frederick 
Rothwell Holt, Ronald Light, of the ‘‘ Green Bicycle ”’ 
mystery, and Gray, one of the two Eastbourne murderers. 
His death in 1927 removed a great personality from the 
English bar. 


Trevor Havarp Hunter, born 1877, youngest son of 
William Havard Hunter, J.P., of Briton Ferry House, Briton 
Ferry, South Wales. He was admitted as a solicitor in 
1899, and was called to the bar by the Middle Temple in 
1911, joining the South Wales and Chester Circuit. He took 
silk in 1928. He became Chancellor of the Diocese of 
Swansea and Brecon in 1930. 


APPENDIX VI. 


List of Jurymen at the Greenwood Trial. 


Evan Benjamin, farmer, Laugharne, Carmarthenshire. 
Jacob Davies, grocer, Ammanford, Carmarthenshire. 


James Howells, farmer, Cefnfarchen, Llanfalteg, Car- 
marthenshire. 


John C. Jones, publican, Ammanford, Carmarthenshire. 
W. Tudor Jones, tailor, Ammanford, Carmarthenshire. 


E. Willis Jones, chemical manufacturer, 84 New Road, 
Llanelly, Carmarthenshire. 


D. H. Lewis, farmer, Mydrim, near St. Clears, Car- 
marthenshire. 


G. O. Lewis, farmer, Laugharne, Carmarthenshire. 
Thomas Lewis, farmer, St. Clears, Carmarthenshire. 


Richard Rees, retired bank manager, Llandilo, Car- 
marthenshire. 


Benjamin Salmon, milk contractor and butter merchant, 
St. Clears, Carmarthenshire. 


T. Eynon Thomas, agricultural engineer, Tremle, Llan- 
ybyther, Carmarthenshire. 


347 


