TRotable Bulttsb ^rtale 


Samuel Herbert Dougal 



NOTABLE BRITISH TRIALS SERIES. 

General Editor—lEiA.'R'B.Y HODGE. 

Dr, Pritciiatd, Edited by William Roughead. 
Xbe Stattntons* Edited by J. B. Atlay. 

Franz Mtiller* Edited by H. B. Irving. 

Tbe Annesley Case* Edited by Andrew Lang. 
Lord Lovat* Edited by David N. Mackay. 
Captain Porteotis, Edited by William Roughead, 
William Palmer* Edited by Geo. H. Knott. 
IS^s. Maybrick* Edited by H. B. Irving. 

Dr* Lamson, Edited by H. L. Adam. 

Mary Blandy. Edited by William Roughead. 
City of Glasgow Bank* Edited by W. Wallace. 
Deacon Brodic* Edited by William Roughead, 
James Stewart. Edited by David N. Mackay. 

A* J* Monson. Edited by J. W. More. 

Oscar Slater* Edited by William Roughead. 

E* M. Cbantrelle* Edited by A. Duncan Smith. 
The Douglas Cause* Edited by A. F. Steuart. 
Mrs. M^Lachlan. Edited by William Roughead. 
Eugene Aj*am. Edited by Eric R. Watson. 

J* A. Dickman. Ed. by S. O. Rowan-Hamilton. 
TTbe Seddons* Edited by Filson Young. 

Sir Roger Casement* Edited by Geo. H. Knott. 
Tlie Wainwrights* Edited by H. B. Irving. 

H* H. Crippen. Edited by Filson Young. 
Thurtell and HunL Edited by Eric R. Watson. 
Burke and Hare* Edited by William Roughead. 
Steinie Morrison* Ed. by H. Fletcher Moulton, 
George Joseph Smith* Edited by Eric R. Watson, 
Mary Queen of Scots* Edited by A. F. Steuart. 
Neill Cream. Edited by W. Teignmouth Shore, 
By waters and T hompson. Edited by Filson Y oung. 
Adolf Beck* Edited by Eric R. Watson, 

Henry, Fauntleroy. Edited by Horace Bleackley. 
Kate Webster. Edited by Elliott O’Donnell. 
Ronald T’ruc- Edited by Donald Carswell, 
Abraham Thornton. ELdited by Sir J. Hall, Bt. 
Katharine Naim* Edited by W. Roughead; 
Charles Peace. Edited by W. Teignmouth Shore, 
H* R* Armstrong. Edited by Filson Young. 
Madeleine Smith* Edited by F. Tennyson Jesse. 
Adelaide Bartlett. Edited by Sir John Hall, Bt. 
Duchess of Kingston. Edited by L. Melville. 

S. H, Dougal. Edited by F. Tennyson Jesse. 

IN PREPARATION 
Charles I. Edited by J. G* Muddiman. 

J. B. Rush, Edited by W. Teignmouth Shore. 
Queen Caroline. Edited by S. M. Ellis. 

J. P. Vaquier. Edited by R. H. Blundell. 

Dr. Dodd. Ed. by E. R. Watson and W. T. Shore. 
G. Chapman* Edited by H. L. Adam. 

John Donald Merrett* Ed. by Wm. Roughead. 

Wm. Hodge & Co., Ltd., Edinburgh and London. 




Samuel Herbert Dougal 



Trial of 

Samuel Herbert Dougal 


EDITED BY 

F. Tennyson Jesse 

AUTHOR OF “murder AND ITS MOTIVES,’' ETC. 


ILLUSTRATEI> 


AUSTRALIA NEW ZEALAND INDIA 

BUTTERWORTH & CO. BUTTERWORTH & CO BUTTERWORTH & CO. 
(AUST). LTD. (AUST.). LTD (INDIA), LTD. 

170 KING STREET 40/61 BALLANCE STREET 6 HASTINGS STREET 
SYDNEY. NSW. WELLINGTON CALCUTTA 



MADE and printed IN GREAT BRITAIN 
BT 

WILLIAM HODGE AND COMPANY, LIMITED 
GLASGOW AND EDINBURGH 
1928 



TO 

HARRY HOHGB 

“THE ONLIE TRUE EECJKTTER ” OF THE 
NOTABLE BRITISH TRIALS SERIES 



PEEFACE. 


Mt thanks are due to Mr. Gilbert Hair, who assembled the 
mass of material with which I had to deal in putting this 
case together, a difficult task, as there exists no shorthand 
report of the trial, and its compila’f'ion has meant the weigh- 
ing and comparing of dozens of different scraps of reports, 
of versions that varied in detail and which all had to be 
checked. My thanks are due also to Mr. H. L. Adam and 
Mr. Charles Kingston for various pieces of information and 
documents, and to Inspector Bower, late of the C.I.D., for 
the accurate version of the finding of the body. Mies Wisken, 
daughter of the witness for the Crown, was most helpful in 
telling me of the days in Saffron Walden 

F. Tenntson Jesse. 


Ap'i'iU 1928. 



CONTENTS. 


Introduction — page 

I. The Predestined Victim, 1 

II. The Professional Woman Hunter, --------- 5 

III The Wooing and Departure, 12 

IV. Miss Holland’s Three Weeks at the Moat Parm, - 17 

V. DougaTs Four Years at the Moat Farm, 23 

VI The Search, 34 

VII Dougal Awaiting Trial, - - - - 41 

VIII The Trial, 43 

IX. The End Of It All, - - - 49 

Leading Dates m the Samuel Herbert Dougal Case, 55 

The Trial — 

First Day — Monday, 22nd June, 1903. 

Opening Speech for the Prosecution, 61 

Emdence for the Prosecution 

Ernest Legrand Holland, - - 68 Mrs. Martha Havies, - - - 85 

Edmund George Holland, - 70 Charles Edwin Pryke, - - - 85 

Mrs. Florence Pollock, - - - 71 Wm. Thos. John Hewlett, ■ - 90 

Annie Whiting, - - - - 72 George May lam, - - - - 90 

Annie Louise Waddmgton, - - 73 John Turtle, 91 

Lysaght John Rutter, - - - 73 David Scott, 91 

Mrs. Henrietta Wisken, - - 74 Dr. Augustus Joseph Pepper, - 93 

Albert Lewis, - - - - 80 Dr. William C'arr Sprague, - - 97 

Sidney Butler, - - - - 80 Alexander Daniels, - - - 98 

Frank Whitmoie, - - - - 81 George Lee Mold, - - . . 98 

Mrs. Florence Blackwell, - - 81 


Second Day~Tubsday, 23rd June, 1903. 
Evidence for the Proseention (contiiiued). 


George Lee Mold, - - - - 100 i George Coote, - - - - 110 

Henry John Churchill, - - - 100 Francis Manley Bird Ashwin, - 112 

Philip Rowe, ----- loi Isaac Newton Edwards, - - 120 

Henry Pilgrim, - - - - 101 Charles James Dodd, - - - 122 

Alfred Law, 103 Edward Frank Gribble, - - - 123 

Emma Burgess, - - - - 104 John Vincent, - - - . 123 

Mrs. Frances Louise Morton, - 105 Charles Burgess, • - « . 123 

Lucy Pittman, .... 106 Thomas Gordon Hensler, - 124 

Edward Negus, - - - - 107 Thomas Henry Gurrin, - - - 127 

Robert Clay den, - . - . 107 Wm. Richard Percy Lawrence, - 130 

Kate CranweU, - - - - 108 Ronald Clement Geo. Dale, - - 131 

Eliza Cranwell, - ... 109 Henry Cox, 132 

Mary Elizabeth Nichol, - - - 110 | Alfred Marden, - - - - 132 


Closing Speech for the Prosecution, - 
Speech for the Defence, 

Charge to the Jury, - - . . 

The Verdict, - . . . 

The Sentence, 


135 

139 

146 

149 

149 



X 


CONTENTS. 


APPENDICES. 

I PROCEEDINGS BEFORE THE MAGISTRATES. 

Thuesday, 19th March, 1903. page 

Detective Marden, 153 

Friday, 27th March, 1903. 

Opening Speech for the Prosecution, . I53 


Evidence for the Prosecution 

Ernest Legrand Holland, I57 

Mrs Wisken, 157 

Police-Superintendent Pryke, . I57 

Lucy Pittman, - 158 

Mrs Morton, - I59 

Kate Gran we 11, I59 

Francis Manley Bird Ashwin, I59 

Thursday, 2nd April, 1903. 

Francis Manley Bird Ashwin, I59 

Isaac Newton Edwards, igj 


Wednesday, 8th April, 1903. 

Thomas Gordon Hensler, ] 02 

John Rutter, I03 

George Coote, 104 

Mr. Sparrow, 


Thursday, 16th April, 1903. 

William Meredith, - - - 165 

John Jameson Truran, ^ , 105 

Joseph Bell, ------- 105 

Mrs. Florence Blackwell, - - - - -165 

Mrs Florence Pollock, 

Edward Pilgrim, 103 

Emma Burgess, . - - I0g 

William Richard Percy Lawrence, ----- - - - , . 108 

Ronald Dale, 109 


Thursday, 23bd April, 1903. 

Mr. Scrivener, ------- 109 

Frederick G. Mackett, - - 109 

Mr. Taylor, - - - 169 

F J Pitston, - 109 

Herbert William Knowles, - - - - - - . - . - - 170 

Police-Superintendent Pryke, - - - - 170 

Henry Hemsley, - -- -- -- -- -- -- 170 

Detective Marden, - 170 



CONTENTS. 


Wednesday, 6th Mat, 1903 


Frank Whitmore, - 
Detective- Sergeant Scott, 
Mrs Wisken, 

Dr A. J. Pepper, - 


- 1 71 I Dr. Carr Sprague, - 

- 171 I Mrs Blackwell, 

171 ' Superintendent Pryke, - 

- 172 


Kate Cranwell, 


Wednesday, 13th May, 1903. 

- 174 1 Thomas Mumford, - 


T. H. Gurrin, 
George L. Mold, 
Lucy Pittman, 


Friday, 22nd May, 1903 


- 175 

- 175 

- 175 


George Maylam, 
Henry Churchill, - 
Detective Harden, 


Alfred Lewis, 

Mrs Martha Ha vies, 
Sidney Butler, 


Friday, 29th May, 1903 

- 176 Miss Annie Whiting, 

- 176 Detective Scott, 

■ 176 


Speech for the Defence, - 
Dougal Committed for Trial, 


II. PROCEEDINGS AT THE CORONER’S INQUEST. 

Thursday, 30th April, 1903. 

Detective-Sergeant David Scott, 

Mrs. Wisken, - - 

Mrs Florence Blackwell, 


Thursjday, 7th Ma.y, 1903. 


Dr Pepper, - - . - 

Detective-Sergeant Scott, 

Mrs Morton, . - - - 

Kate Cranwell, 

- 186 1 

- 187 1 

- 188 

- 188 1 

Francis Ashwin, - - - . 

Arthur Edwards, - - - - 

Eliza Cranwell, - - - . 

Police-Supt Pryke, 


Friday, 15th May, 1903. 

Lucy Pittman, 

George Coote, 

- 190 1 

- 191 1 

1 Ernest Legrand Holland, 

1 Henry Pilgrim, - - . » 

Coroner’s Address to the Jury, 
Dougal Committed for Trial, 

; ; 



III. Trial of Dougal at Oxford, 9bh April, 1895, for Theft, 

IV". Trial of Dougal at the Central Criminal Court, 9th December, 1895, for 
Forgery, 

y. Petition in Favour of Dougal, convicted of Forgery, 


xi 


PAGE 

174 

174 

174 


175 


175 

176 
176 


177 

178 


178 

179 


181 

182 

184 


189 

189 

189 

190 


19X 

192 

193 

196 

197 


199 

204 



CONTENTS. 


xii 

PiGE 

VI Property found on Dougal when Arrested, - . 207 

VII Presumption of Miss Holland’s Heath, - - - , . . , 20 S 

VIII Extracts from Banking Accounts, - 210 

IX Dougal’s Certificate of Discharge from the Army, - - - - » 211 

X Reports of Medical Officers of Cambridge and Chelmsford Pi isons, - - 212 
XI Letter from Miss Holland to her Nephew, - . _ , . . 213 

XII. Correspondence, . . - - 214 

Xni Petition by Dougal, - - . . 230 

XIV, Question m House of Commons regarding Confession by Dougal, - - - 236 



LIST OF ILLUSTEATIONS. 


Samuel Herbert Doiigal, Fronttspiece 

Camille Cecile Holland, - - - - facing page 4 

The Moat Farm, ----------- 18 

Dougal’s Diary, ,, 26 

Excavation of the Moat, ,, 38 

DougaPs Improvement Plan, - ,, 46 

Mr. C, F Gill, K C , « - „ 62 

Clothing found on Miss Holland’s Body, ,, 92 

Miss Holland’s Body, ,, 104 

The “Heath” Cheque, ,, 118 

Genuine and Forged Signatures of Miss Holland, - - - - ,, 128 

Mr. George Elliott, K.C., - - - 138 

Mr. Justice Wright, ,, 14$ 

Dming-room at the Moat Farm, ,, 168 

Last Entry in DougaPs Diary, l^O 

The Barn arranged for the Inquest, ,, 180 

Forged Letter of 25th October, 1899, ------- 206 

Forged Letter of 7th June, 1899, 216 

DougaPs Locomobile, - - . . 230 

Plan of Moat Farm, - - . 



SAMUEL HERBERT DOUGAL. 


INTRODUCTION. 

I. 


The Predestined Victim. 

In the year 1898 Miss Camille Cecile Holland, a lady of about 
fifty-six years of age, was living, as maiden ladies so often 
do, in a boarding-house in London. She was a rather 
pretty, faded, delicate-looking woman, who took to preserve 
her youthful appearance means that were rarer in those 
days than they are now. She powdered her face, dyed her 
hair a reddish-gold, and was careful over all the details of 
her toilet; her landlady has left it on record that, though 
she looked about sixty in bed, when she was finally ‘‘ got-up 
for the day she seemed ten or fifteen years younger. 

Miss Holland was rather a romantic figure in the limited 
middle-class circle in which she moved Her mother, 
a Frenchwoman, had married her father, an Englishman 
from Liverpool, at Chandernagore, in India, in the year 
1836, and it was in that country that Camille had been born. 
Later in life she went to live with an aunt, a sister of her 
father, who kept a girls’ school near Liverpool, and eventu- 
ally, on her aunt’s retirement, came to live in London with 
her. 

Camille Holland possessed all the Victorian accomplish- 
ments in a. fairly high degree. She was a prolific producer 
of water-colour paintings, she wrote sentimental little songs 
and set them to music, she rhymed ‘‘ hours ” with '' bow’rs ” 
and flow ” with ago,” and ended every other line with 
the word “ love.” She had fair hair, indeterminate brows, 
an oval face, with a mouth rather surprisingly full, especi- 
ally as to the lower lip, in the midst of so much delicacy of 
feature and hue. Even as a middle-aged woman she attracted 
the gentlemen,” and was, according to an acquaintance, 
never without a man friend to go about with.” 

B 


1 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

A weli-to-do relation in India left his money to her aunt, 
the schoolmistress, and on that lady's death thia legacy, that 
was to prove so fatal, descended to Camille. In all it 
amounted to an invested capital of between £6000 and £7000, 
which at the end of the last century was a much more ade- 
quate provision for a single woman than it would be now- 
adays. Camille Holland’s only living relations were two 
nephews and a niece. She was an affectionate aunt enough, 
but appears not to have seen much either of her nephews or 
her niece, though she corresponded with them occasionally. 
She was, it appears, a little pleased with her position as the 
wealthy member of the family, the aunt with property to 
leave. By religion she was a member of the ‘‘ Catholic 
Apostolic Church,” whose headquarters is in Gordon Square, 
and there seems no reason to doubt that she was a truly 
devout woman. In the year 1895, when she was staying at 
Bruges, she wrote to a nephew in the following strain* : — I 
wish you had a more lucrative position and not so much 
work; but never mind, although we have all so many 
drawbacks, we have many blessings, and our Heavenly Father 
is so good to us and always helps us and leads us in all our 
ways — and all works for our good — His ways are pleasant- 
ness and peace! ” 

Did Miss Holland ever remember having written that 
sentence, and ask herself who, or what, it was that had led 
her down that dark way which ended at the Moat Farm — ^the 
way that left both pleasantness and peace behind for ever? 
For this pleasant, benevolent, and accomplished elderly lady, 
whose religion had sufficed and supported her for so long, 
must surely have realised that she was flying in the face of 
all its dictates when she became the mistress of a man who 
could not. marry her, and went away with him to live as his 
wife — and at a time in the world’s history when such a step 
required far more courage, even in the acknowledgment of it 
to her own soul, than it does nowadays. 

The history of Camille Holland’s relations with Samuel 
Herbert Dougal would be difficult enough to understand were 
all the evidence of its various stages before us. As it is, with 


* See Appendix XI. 
2 



Introduction. 


no record beyond mere hearsay as to how they met, or how 
the acquaintanceship progressed, it must remain one of those 
mysteries of the human heart which there is no sounding. 

It is supposed that they first met at the EarFs Court Exhi- 
bition, but whether this is so or not is not actually known. 
It IS also reported that they met through correspondence in 
a matrimonial agency journal. Mrs. Dougal stated that 
Dougal had told her this was so, but any statement of DougaPs 
must be received with suspicion. However the first meeting 
came about, “ Captain ’’ Dougal, as he called himself, though 
he never attained commissioned rank, soon became a visitor 
at the boarding-house in Elgin Crescent. Once, according 
to Miss Holland’s account, she went to spend the week-end 
with him at the Royal Hotel, Southend Although she realised 
she must not be too candid about her doings lest she should 
lose her reputation, she was rather pathetically unable to 
resist talking about her sweetheart,” and used to confide 
in a sewing-woman, a Miss Annie Whiting, who came 
to the house, about her outings. She told this woman that 
her sweetheart ” was a widower with an invalid son, and 
that this son was with them at Southend. He was probably 
invented by Miss Holland to play propriety. 

Even in 1898, the year that she made Dougal’s acquaint- 
ance, she seems, according to the statements of Miss Whiting, 
to have felt doubts amounting to alarm about DougaPs motive 
in courting her. Miss^Annie Whiting had been requested 
by Miss Holland to call her early one morning, for she was 
going to Brighton by the 10.20 train to take a house for 
herself and Dougal. Annie Whiting went into her room as 
requested, and, finding her still in bed, said: You won^t 
catch that train.” I’m not going,” replied Miss Holland. 
“ We’ve parted I’ve found but he doesn’t want me, only 
my money. What do you think, he wants me to withdraw 
all my money and let him invest it in his name, but I won’t 
do it, so we’ve entirely parted.” Evidently Miss Holland 
had taken fright; she was a shrewd little business woman, 
and, according to Annie Whiting, close with her money. For 
a little time she did not meet or correspond with Dougal, yet 
she eventually made up the quarrel and went about with 
him as before. Dougal had in 1895 advertised in a paper 

3 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

called The GhT%^tiarb Million for a mentally or otherwise 
afflicted lady or gentleman to take care of/' but he seems to 
have found women presumably in full possession of their 
senses as lucrative as any helpless half-wit could have been. 

There is a type 'of woman who finds comfort and even 
excitement in her relationship, as patient or penitent, with 
her doctor or parson. She has either been married without 
real satisfaction to herself, or she is a spinster ; both states of 
being can have the same result. Feeling outwards, like a sea- 
anemone, for some emotion to satisfy her, she fastens on these 
blameless relationships, and extracts from them some ghost 
of emotion wherewith to fill her days ; fortunately both physical 
and moral healers are well equipped to defend themselves 
against this type of woman and to protect her from herself 
But there are women to whom this deflection of the needs of 
their nature is not enough, certainly not enough when, instead 
of the shadow of desire, the realisation of it is offered to 
them. Camille Holland had had no love affair save a blame- 
less affection for a young Naval officer, the brother of a school 
friend of hers; he had been drowned, but the body had been 
recovered, and his parents had sent her his cornelian ring, 
which she always wore. She had lived chastely, and was 
truly and intensely religious, but when she found that the 
thing which she had missed in life was being offered to her, 
the habit of thought of a lifetime was swept away. Her heart 
remained faithful to her Naval officer; she refused to leave 
off wearing his ring, and she often talked of him to the land- 
lady of the lodgings where she afterwards lived with Dougal; 
but something stronger and more vivid than the pressed and 
withered leaves of a long-past affection was, so she imagined, 
in her possession now. 

There are men, criminals such as Dougal, George Joseph 
Smith, and Landru, who recognise emotionally-starved 
women, who scent them from afar off, and who know exactly 
what they are about when they enter into relationship with 
them. It is when meetings such as that of Dougal and 
Camille Holland take place that criminal history is made. 
The potential murderer has met the born murderee; the man 
who is such a convinced egoist that he quite honestly thinks 
he is justified in anything he may do to another human being 
4 




Introduction. 


to gain his own ends, has met the woman who asks nothing 
better than to yield to his wishes; her desire telling her that 
by so doing she is gaining something that she has always 
lacked and which she must have, now that it is at last within 
her grasp. 

We all have our breaking-point, whether in matters of 
money or of emotional gain, or in the satisfaction of any 
one of the desires that ravage and prick perpetually at 
humanity. There is no one of us so saintly that at some 
place on the scale he cannot be induced to fall. It is only 
the whereabouts of this point on the scale of values that 
diJBferentiates the murderer from the normal human being, 
or the good woman from the victim. Difierence in scale 
makes the difference in essence. There is a point where 
humanity has had to say Beyond this point a man becomes 
anti-social, and as such must be eliminated.” Both Camille 
Holland and Samuel Dougal were beyond this point of safety 
— ^he as criminal, she as victim. 

For the one thing that stands out clearly about poor Camille 
Holland is that she was a perfect example of that type of 
human being — nearly always a woman — ^whom one may call 
the born murderee — a type that the potential murderer is 
quick to recognise, the type to which belonged the victims 
of George Joseph Smith and of Landru. Hedged in by the 
conventions and restrictions of her upbringing and her 
religion, she had retained her virtue up to an age when it 
would be reasonable to think it might have been safe, and 
yet the convictions of a lifetime were thrown away by her 
at the bidding of a coarse, vulgar man who was her social 
inferior. She feared and distrusted him, and yet she went 
with him into an isolation so complete that death had removed 
her from it for four years before any inquiry was set on 
foot as to her fate. 


11 . 

The Professional Woman Hunter. 

Samuel Herbert Dougal was an adventurer born to prey 
upon just such a woman as Camille Holland. He was a man 
of strong animal passions and skilful address, and incapable 

6 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

of fidelity or of ruth. There is no shadow of doubt that 
physically he was enormously attractive to women, of much 
the same type as that magnificent male and cruel murderer, 
Pranzini. DougaTs animal magnetism was enormous; even 
detectives employed in the case have admitted that, in spite 
of being too smarmy,"” he somehow could get the little 
extra comforts he craved even out of a stony-hearted 
prison system. Men might dislike him, but they could not 
deny the fascination of his intense vitality. Clever, with 
a slick surface cleverness that enabled him to pass as rather 
a rough diamond of a gentleman in not too critical society, 
his life from his early youth had been a blend of Jekyll 
and Hyde. As Hyde he had been the vainglorious, dissolute 
youth who, bored by the restrictions of the civil engineering 
ofidce wherein he worked, amused himself at music halls and 
bars, and ran into debt to such an extent that the East End 
of London became impossible for him, and, fearful that his 
father, a hard-working man who had saved to give his sons 
a good education, should hear of some of his doings, he 
enlisted in the Koyal Engineers. He was then a young man 
of nearly twenty, of splendid physique and considerable in- 
telligence, and he gained rapid promotion. He was very 
clever with his pen (a talent he found so useful later), and 
his neat draughtsmanship proved of great assistance to him 
in his new life, fitting him for office work and all sorts of 
clerical duties. As Jekyll he remained in the service for 
twenty-one years and seventeen days, winning excellent 
opinions and testimonials, finally retiring with a pension of 
2s. 9d. a day — he had not lost by ill-conduct one of those 
days of the twenty-one years, two weeks, and three days, 
and every single one of them counted for his pension. He 
became the possessor of a medal for long service and good 
conduct, and a discharge* where his conduct and character 
are noted as being very good, and on which, as his special 
qualification for employment, it is recorded that he is a 
very good clerk. Only his fellow-soldiers knew his private life 
to have been a long procession of inglorious victories over 
servantmaids and shopgirls, who were relieved of their virtue 
and their money by Dougal, 

* See Appendix IX. 

6 



Introduction. 


He had already in his character of Jekyll been twice married 
and twice widowed. In 1869 he had married a Miss Griffiths, 
who bore him four children. She accompanied him to Halifax 
when the regiment left England. There she led, according 
to report, a very unhappy life, and in June, 1885, she sud- 
denly became ill, and after sui^ering great pain died on the 
evening of the same day. Dougal obtained leave, went home 
to England, and returned with a new wife whom he had 
married in August. In October she also died in Halifax, 
being taken with sudden illness and vomiting that ended in 
death. In those days a death that occurred in military 
quarters did not need to be registered in the civil part of 
the town, and no objection was raised when Dougal buried 
his second wife, as he had his first, within twenty-four hours 
of her death. 

Dougal did not marry again while in the Army, but life 
without a woman to ill-treat was impossible to him, so he 
took a young girl of twenty, the daughter of a Halifax 
farmer, to live with him, and brought her to England as his 

wife.’^ She seems to have been deeply attached to him 
and to have believed for some time his promise of marriage. 
However, he treated her so badly, frequently assaulting her 
and threatening to kill her, that finally she took the baby she 
had borne him and returned home, posing as his widow. 
During the early part of this connection his discharge had 
taken place (in the month of March, 1887, eleven years before 
he met Miss Holland) 

After the episode of the Halifax girl, he appears to have 
lived with a widow, who passed as his wife, at Maidstone, 
and who also left him owing to his cruelty, taking with her 
the two children that had resulted from the connection. 

These years after DougaTs discharge from the Army were 
filled by various odd jobs, such as being a traveller in glass 
and cutlery, storekeeper in a private training ship, steward 
at clubs, and even landlord of a public-house at Ware, in 
Hertfordshire, where he was in company with an elderly 
woman apparently possessed of some means. She was a 
woman with her own ideas about spending her money, and 
many quarrels took place in the public bar over Dougaks 
efforts to take charge of her cash. After a few months fire 

7 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

broke out in the dead of night, and considerable damage was 
done. Dougal applied for the insurance money, but the case 
wag looked upon as so suspicious that, far from granting his 
application, the insurance company applied to the police for 
his arrest for arson. He had taken a private house only a 
few hundred yards from the inn, and insured it with a 
different company; this, too, caught fire, but no insurance 
was paid. He stood his trial at the assizes at St. Albans, 
and was acquitted for lack of evidence on 6th December, 
1889. 

Next we hear of him in Ireland, where he obtained a 
situation in Dublin Castle, and it was in Dublin that he met 
his third wife, Sarah Henrietta White, whom he married on 
7th August, 1892 His career at this period is a little 
difficult to trace. He must have left his wife and come back 
to England, for, at the Easter Quarter Sessions at Oxford, 
held on 9th April, 1895, he was charged with stealing one 
linen duster, two teacloths, and four yards of dimity, value 
5s. 2d., against the peace of our Sovereign Lady the Queen, 
her Crown and Dignity. 

These articles were the property of an unlucky woman 
called Emily Booty, with whom he had been living.* Miss 
Booty first met Dougal in London in August, 1894, and, as 
she put it in her deposition, an acquaintance sprang up 
between them.’’ They took a house called North End House 
at Watlington on a three years’, lease in Dougal’s name, but 
it was Miss Booty who paid the two guineas for the drawing 
up of the agreement. She also paid £10 to move her furni- 
ture from Camberwell to Watlington, and gave Dougal two 
£10 notes to buy more furniture. She had £90 when she 
first met Dougal (the meeting, unfortunately for her, had 
taken place as she was coming out of her bank in Camberwell). 
Eendered foolhardy by the success of his treatment of women, 
Dougal brought over his wife and children from Ireland to 
North End House, an arrangement which Miss Booty bore for 
a while, but at last resented sufficiently to pack her boxes. 
Dougal used threats of violence, and, terrified, she ran out 
of the house and sent for the police, who helped her to remove 


* See Appendix III. 
8 



Introduction. 


her furniture. The superintendent, at Miss Booty^s request, 
searched Dougal’s boxes and found the articles which he was 
accused of stealing. Evidently Miss Booty could only be 
imposed upon up to a certain point, and beyond that point 
she became really dangerous. 

Dougal was arrested and charged with larceny, but allowed 
bail, and he at once proceeded to obtain a warrant against 
Miss Booty for stealing an incubator, value £8. The charge 
was gone into by the Marlow bench, and it transpired that 
Dougal had bought the incubator with money provided by 
Miss Booty, and the charge was at once dismissed. Dougal 
when he stood his trial at the Oxford Quarter Sessions 
defended himself with the greatest skill and eloquence. He 
said in his defence: I have served in the Boyal Engineers 
for twenty-one years, and have a pension of £60 a year; if 
I am convicted of stealing a penny I shall lose every penny 
of my pension The dimity was bought from a traveller, 
and not paid for till after this charge was made.'^ Once 
again his fantastic luck held good, the jury probably took 
into account his excellent Army record, and found him not 
guilty, but added a rider to the effect that his conduct with 
Miss Booty was bad in the extreme. 

Dougal apparently returned to Ireland with his wife, for 
we next find him in difficulties in Dublin over a matter of 
a cheque. He was employed at the Koyal Hospital up to 
24th September, 189^5, when he was suspended and subse- 
quently discharged. He was on daily duty there as a 
messenger, and had access to the room of the assistant military 
secretary. Colonel Childers, and hence to his cheque book, and 
to that of his wife, which was also kept there. On 16th 
October a man, undoubtedly Dougal, though the cashier was 
unable afterwards to identify him, cashed a cheque made out 
for £35 at Messrs. Cox & Co.'s Charing Cross branch The 
cheque was apparently signed by Lord Frankfort of Mont- 
morency, the Major-General commanding the forces in the 
Dublin district, who for the past year had been signing all 
the documents that passed through the hospital. When Lord 
Frankfort came to go through his pass book, he realised that 
somebody must have been forging his name, and communi- 
cated with Cox's. The discovery of this forged cheque was 

9 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

followed by that of a second in which the name of Lord 
Wolseley had been used The matter was placed in the 
hands of Detective-Inspector Eichards, of Scotland Yard. He 
obtained samples of the handwriting of every person who had 
access to the office where the cheque books were kept, and 
suspicion fell upon the discharged Dougal 

The inspector went to Ireland and found Dougal living in 
an out-of-the-way cottage in a place with the singularly un- 
suitable name of Prosperous Village. Dougal was arrested 
for forgery and uttering, and was taken to London, where 
he stood his trial at the Central Criminal Court.* By way of 
an alibi he had prepared a diary with a false account of 
his movements. The entry for 16th October ran as 
follows: — At home most of day, went to town and made 
a few small purchases, called in at the Institute and looked 
at the papers ; and, for the 17th — Attended Masonic lodge 
in evening with Brother Shore No business.'^ A diary is 
not evidence, but, nevertheless, it was an ingenious move on 
DougaPs part, if dangerous. But unfortunately he had, 
when in London, gone to the Civil Service Stores in Bedford 
Street on 16th October, and bought some boots and shoes, 
and given as the address to which they were to be sent : “ Mrs 
Dougal, 2 LiSey Street, Inchecore, Dublin.” Like the 
cashier, the assistant could not identify him; she only said 
that he was about the same size and build as the man who 
bought the boots and shoes Evidence was given that the 
cheque forged in Lord Frankfort^s name had been taken 
from a book issued to Mrs. Childers. The matter of the 
forgery of Lord Wolseley^s signature was not proceeded with, 
but upon the charge of forging and uttering the Frankfort 
cheque Dougal was found guilty, but was strongly recom- 
mended to mercy by the jury on account of his previous 
good character — ^yet another example of the use of Dr. Jekyll 
to Mr. Hyde. He was sentenced to twelve months' hard 
labour. 

DougaPs next step was to get himself admitted into the 
London County Lunatic Asylum at Cane Hill by attempting 


* See Appendix lY. Jabez Balfour was standing his trial in another 
part of the Court at the same time — Ed 
10 



Introduction. 


to hang himself on the bell-handle of his cell in Pentonville 
He was unharmed, and there was no mark on his neck; it 
was a half-hearted attempt. However, his sleep became more 
and more disturbed, and he was apparently suffering from 
acute melancholia. He was certified by three legally qualified 
medical practitioners at Pentonville Prison. His acute 
melancholia only lasted for twenty-one days, but, lest a return 
to the prison should cause a relapse, he served the whole of 
his sentence at Cane Hill, and was discharged from there duly 
certified as a sane member of society once more, and on his 
discharge it was noted that his conduct during his confine- 
ment had been exemplary. 

Dougal had now, of course, lost the pension that twice 
before had trembled in the balance There is in existence 
a most curious document in DougaPs own handwriting, 
written with great economy on a piece of grocer’s wrapping 
paper, consisting of a memorial to the Governors of Chelsea 
Hospital, setting forth many excellent reasons why he should 
be reinstated in the enjopnent of his pension.* A rough 
woodcut of a Chinaman and a legend to the effect that T. Patey, 
grocer, sells the best sugar and tea, is mingled with DougaPs 
extremely ingenious and well-set-out statement, in which he 
speaks of himself in the third person, and refers to the 

mental aberration ” from which he suffered, which had 
already, according to his own account, caused him to be not 
responsible for his actions at the time of the forgery. This 
ingenious document begins: ‘‘ We, the undersigned, humbly 
petition the Commissioners of Chelsea Hospital to consider 
the case of the undermentioned,’^ and ends in the correct 
form with: Your memorialists humbly pray . . . 

but, unfortunately for Dougal, it continued to lack signa- 
tures, and he probably found it was not worth while going 
on with the matter. 

He was now more down-and-out than he had ever been 
before. He was over fifty years of age, had lost his pension, 
had innumerable children, both legitimate and illegitimate 
— though it must be admitted he did not trouble himself about 
supporting these unfortunates — and he would find it difficult 


See Appendix V. 


11 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

to obtain fresh work. His brother Henry at Biggin Hill* 
came to his assistance, and for some time Dougal looked after 
house property for him. His wife apparently was with him 
most of the time, but owing to his persistent ^cruelty and 
immorality she left him and went back to her mother in 
Dublin, taking the surviving child with her (the younger had 
died, apparently of convulsions, at North End House, 
Watlington). Owing to his behaviour Dougal lost the job 
with his brother, and once again he was let loose upon the 
world. 

His last and greatest and (until the end) most successful 
adventure was upon him — he met Camille Holland. 

III. 

The Wooing and Departure. 

Whether it took place accidentally at the Earks Court Exhi- 
bition, which seems on the whole the most likdy supposition — 
certain it is that they went there together once or twice after- 
wards — or whether it came about through an advertisement in 
a matrimonial paper, a theory which there is no evidence to 
support, that meeting had equally fatal consequences for both 
the people involved. It is permissible to assume that Dougal, 
from the moment he set eyes on Miss Holland, recognised the 
particular material which he was so adept at moulding to his 
desires The little elderly woman, who obviously, by the 
attention she paid to her appearance, liked to attract 
admiration, was clearly in possession of the necessary means 
for a life of leisure. Dougal’s motto might well have been 
‘‘ A single woman and her money are soon parted. That 
there was ever an atom of fondness in that tiger’s heart of his 
need not be imagined for a moment. There are many excuses 
for what poor Miss Holland would have called her lapse 
from virtue.” There are none for Dougal in that he was the 
cause of it. Except for some perverted and cynical twist of 
mind that he may have had, which gave piquancy to the act, 

* Biggin Hill is at Oudham, in Kent, where Harriet Staunton was 
incarcerated and starved by the four so-called ‘‘ Penge ” murderers. 
See Trial of the Stauntons,’* edited by J. B. Atlay. — Ed. 

12 



Introduction. 


there can have been no physical pleasure for him in his 
conquest of this timid, precise, elderly woman. His taste 
was rather for the buxom country wenches whom he was yet 
to garner so plentifully. It was probably that quality of 
rude virility, which had demanded so much and so many for 
its satisfaction, that attracted Camille Holland. He was 
still what ia called a fine figure of a man,^^ his brown hair 
was plentiful, his brown, pointed beard that hid his mouth 
and chin was still not heavily streaked with grey, his eyes 
were bright grey and challenging and slightly Mongolian in 
shape, as were his arched and slanting brows. He was blufi, 
hearty, very much of the Jovial traveller who had seen the 
world,, and he had the art of love as well as the art of pen- 
manship at the tips of his thick, coarse fingers. Even though 
he frightened her, Camille Holland could not resist him. 

In view of their very different social positions and of Miss 
Holland's religious turn of mind, it does at first sight seem 
strange that Dougal did not run the risk of committing 
bigamy, especially when we consider that he must have known 
that he at least took the risk of losing her altogether by 
admitting his inability to marry her. Probably he was afraid 
that Mrs. Dougal might find him out, and he did not wish to 
repeat his taste of prison life. 

Nevertheless the mystery will never be solved of how in a 
few short weeks he succeeded in overthrowing the convictions 
of a lifetime which had been apparently so rigidly implanted 
in Camille Holland’s soul. That he did so is certain. 

Mrs. Florence Pollock, who kept the boarding-house at 
Elgin Crescent, has left it on record that Dougal called 
twice, and on one occasion had tea with Miss Holland in 
the drawing-room. She described him as a tall, military- 
looking man with a short, trim beard. Mrs Pollock seems 
to have been one of the few women affected unfavourably by 
Dougal, just as Miss Ripley, of Herne Bay, was one of the 
few similarly affected by George Joseph Smith. Apparently 
Dougal was very short and ungracious to the lady of the 
house on meeting her in the hall, and the matter rankled. 
Mrs. Pollock averred that she would not soon forget the way 
she had been treated in the hall. It was simply ungentle- 
manly.” She added, with a conscious or unconscious 

13 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

shrewdness that thiows a sidelight on the matter as it had 
been discussed in Elgin Crescent : “ We were under the 
impression^ that Miss Holland was going away to be married 
. . . but some of my gentlemen thought not/' Some of 

my gentlemen were wise in their day and generation and had 
sized up the spinster in the late blossoming of her St. Martin's 
summer, and her burly wooer's tempered raptures, but too 
well. 

Married or not, Camille Holland left the eager, curious 
household at Elgin Crescent on 9th December. She went to 
a house called Parkmore that she and Dougal had taken at 
Hassocks, near Brighton, and there it is presumed they had 
their honeymoon. They had taken the house furnished for 
thirty shillings a week, and Miss Holland paid Dougal a 
cheque for <£6 for the first month's rent on 5th December. 
There is a further payment of £6 made by her to him on 
6th January, doubtless the second instalment of the rent 
But Dougal had no wish to stay in some one else's house ; he 
wished for property of his .own; he felt the time had come 
to settle down and become a gentleman of leisure. Through 
an advertisement he got into touch with a Mr. William 
Savill, who, subject to mortgage, owned a place known as 
Coldhams Farm, Quendon, near Clavering, in Essex, and 
negotiations for its purchase were begun through a land 
agent, Mr. Rutter. It was now that one of the most curious 
incidents in Dougal’s and Miss Holland’s life together took 
place Mr. Rutter had, at Dougal's instigation, made out 
the contract for the purchase in the latter's name. In spite 
of the fact that Miss Holland had completely burned her boats 
and placed herself in Dougal's power, she now took a step of 
which one would have thought she would have been afraid. 
She went alone up to London, called on Mr Rutter, and had 
the first contract destroyed; and a second one, in which she 
was named as the purchaser of Coldhams Farm, drawn up. 
She must still have been in the first and most extreme stages 
of infatuation, and this burst of independence is curious to 
note. Dougal evidently never completely succeeded in 
mastering her, and it was probably the knowledge of this 
failure that caused him to silence her for good. 

This new contract was duly signed on 19th January, and 
14 



Introduction. 


on 26th January Miss Holland and Dougal went to Safron 
Walden, to furnished rooms in the house of Mrs- Wisken, 
so as to be near their new property.* This little house at 
the end of Market Row, Saffron Walden, has an 
old-world air; being the end house, it Juts into a 
sort of little square, over which its old-fashioned bow 
window, cut into little square panes, looks out. Here they 
had a bedroom and sitting-room, and passed for man and 
wife, though Dougal told Mrs. Wisken that if any letters came 
for Miss Holland she was to take them in, as it would be 

all right.'’ It was, of course, important for Dougal that 
Misg Holland should continue to function in her capacity of 
provider, and to do this she had to use her own name for 
business purposes. 

For nearly two months Dougal and Camille Holland lived 
at Mrs. Wisken 's, and a certain feeling of friendliness sprang 
up between the landlady and her lady lodger. Miss Holland's 
little brown and white dog, Jacko, to whom she was very 
devoted, found his way to Mrs. Wisken's heart also. Mrs. 
Wisken thought Dougal also a very pleasant person ; he would 
chat to her in a friendly manner and talk to her canary. He 
was still playing the attentive lover, for he would take Miss 
Holland's breakfast up to her on a tray and then she would 
have it in bed, and afterwards take her bath and dress, 
often assisted by Mrs. Wisken, who loved a good talk with 
her lodger. Miss Holland confided in Mrs. Wisken the story 
of her early love affair, and it is Mrs. Wisken who has left it 
on record that Camille Holland looked ten or fifteen years 
younger when she was dressed for the day. 

From Saffron Walden Miss Holland communicated with a 
man who had been in charge of her stored furniture for 
many years, and caused it to be sent down to Coldhams Farm. 
It was while Miss Holland was at Mrs. Wisken's that she 
wrote also to her nephew Edmund, the letter that was the 
last one ever received from her by any member of her family. 

* While at Saffron Walden, in the early part of this year 1899, 
Dougal used to frequent the public-houses of Bishop’s Stortford. 
Chapman, the poisoner, who was afterwards executed for the murder 
of his three wives, at this time had the public-house called The Grapes 
at Bishop’s Stortford. It is extremely likely that these two men, 
both to be so distinguished in the same line, met. — ^E d, 


15 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

Mr. Edmund Holland's little girl had died, and Miss Holland, 
who had been very attached to the child, wrote to condole 
with him. Edmund Holland expected her to come to the 
funeral, but she did not do s'o; probably she was afraid of 
having too many questions put to her, and probably also 
Dougal would have regarded the project with disfavour. It 
was all to his interest for a breach to be made between Miss 
Holland and her family. Edmund Holland wrote to his aunt 
about the funeral, and received no reply; there is little doubt 
Dougal intercepted letters when he thought it wise. Doubt- 
less both Mr. Edmund Holland and his brother did not wish 
their aunt to think that they were trying to keep in touch 
with her with the view of some day getting her money. They 
rightly felt the advances should come from her side, so every- 
thing continued to further Dougal's plans for her isolation 

They do not appear to have been altogether happy months 
for Miss Holland, those she spent in the sleepy little town 
of Saffron Walden, though they must have seemed Paradise 
to her during the three dreadful weeks which were all she 
was to know of life at the Moat Farm. But Miss Holland, 
so used to being the powerful little lady with money, did 
not like the way Dougal tried to take the money matters into 
his own hands ; she stood on her dignity as the source of 
income in a way that would have been rather shocking had 
not Dougal deserved every suspicion that any one could 
have had of him. She c'onfided to Mus. Wisken that all the 
money that had purchased Coldhams Farm was hers — Dougal, 
by the way, being of a romantic nature, had rechristened the 
place The Moat Farm, the name by which it was to become 
infamous. 

Another cause of disquiet to Miss Holland was the fact 
that Dougal occasionally went to London and stayed away 
all night; in the evening a wire would come explaining, in 
the classic phrase, that he was “ detained by business," and 
Miss Holland would go out to Mrs. Wisken and countermand 
the little dinner she had ordered, adding: I don't believe 
he need stay up at all; he could have come back if he'd 
wanted to." However, Dougal and Miss Holland passed, 
even in the observant eyes of Mrs. Wisken and her daughter, 
for a most devoted couple. Each day when Dougal came back 
16 



Introduction. 


riding on his bicycle from superintending affairs at the 
Moat Farm, he would start ringing his bell at the other end 
of Market Kow, so that Miss Holland, sitting waiting for 
him in the little sitting-room, with its glossy brown and 
yellow wallpaper and its bow-window filled with ferns, would 
herself go to the door and let him in; the couple would 
then always exchange an affectionate kiss, and would go 
into the sitting-room with DougaFs burly arm about his little 
companion. Let us hope that, on balance, these two months 
spent at Mrs. Wisken^s were happy, and that the thing for 
which Miss Holland bartered the convictions t>f a lifetime 
retained for her its illusions and comforted her with its 
pleasures. 

IV. 

Miss Holland’s Three Weeks at the Moat Farm. 

On 27th April, driven in a trap by Henry Pilgrim, an 
old man who had worked for the former owners, Dougal and 
Miss Holland left Mrs Wisken^s to begin life at the romanti- 
cally named Moat Farm. They drove through Newport, 
turned up a lane, turned off that again into another lane 
still less frequented, and then into a third, a mere cart- 
track, leading to the farm. The house itself is a building 
that on a sunny day holds something sinister and dreary, a 
look as of a house in some wild Bronte tale, and that on a 
wet, grey day might stand" for the epitome of everything 
that is lonely and grim. If Dougal had had it in his head 
to choose of set purpose a spot where people were not likely 
to come, where the isolation was too complete for any rescue 
or for swift flight, he could not have picked the place more 
surely. Surrounded by dark fir trees and gnarled apple 
trees in a very ecstacy of contortion, it is a small, neat, 
almost prim house, its deeply sloping roof patterned in 
diamond shapes with lighter tiles ; its famous moat circles it 
so completely that it is only possible to enter it at one point, 
where a bridge spans the water. For miles around the 
countryside is sparsely populated, and at that time there was 
great agricultural depression, and the signs of life were 
even fewer than they are now. The soil is heavy clay that 

clings about the feet, and the inhabitants seem to hold in 

c 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

their slouching walk and heaviness of mien some recognition 
of this fact, as though the perpetual drag of the clay pulled 
them always downwards, both body and soul. Life was at 
a very low ebb in this dreary countryside, and the habits of 
the beasts of the field, so blameless in them and so degrading 
in human beings, were the rule rather than the exception 
in the small overcrowded cottages. Lonely lanes, woods 
where game was preserved, pallid fields divided from each 
other by low hedges, or by the dark, plumy shapes of elms, 
lay all about the Moat Farm for miles. 

Dougal had made the place look fairly shipshape, bushes 
had been cut and trimmed, and the place did not present 
that aspect of wild desolation which it does to-day. 
The trap could not go further than the barn, for from there 
only a narrow bridge and pathway led straight up to the 
house- Miss Holland, therefore, must have dismounted from 
the trap by the little wicket gate, and perhaps waited while 
the trap was stowed away in the barn. If she stood, as it 
would have been very natural to do, for a moment, looking at 
her new home, she would have seen, just in front of her, the 
muddy waters of the moat flowing (for they were fed by a 
spring); and on the right another circle of water or sub- 
sidiary moat to which a ditch ran from the farmyard for the 
purpose of drainage. Straight ahead, the narrow garden 
path led to the house, which had a bow-window on either side 
of the front door, • 

Such was the house to which Miss Holland came on that 
27th of April. Four years later, to the day, on 27th April, 
1903, her body was found in the drainage ditch, which Dougal 
had caused to be filled in and planted with trees. For nearly 
the whole of those four years — for Miss Holland was mur- 
dered twenty-one days after her arrival at the farm — Dougal 
lived with his succession of mistresses in the place where he 
had murdered her, and must often have passed by the spot 
where her body lay. 

Naomi Read, a widow woman who had worked for the 
Savills, had been engaged to help in the house, and on 
29th April arrived a girl of the attractive name of Lydia 
Faithful, who stayed till 6th May. Mrs. Read only worked 
with her for two days, and then left. Lydia Faithful 
18 




The Moat Farm 



Introduction. 


departed on 6tli May, and there followed a servantless gap 
till the 8th, when Florence Havies — commonly known in the 
case as Florence Blackwell, from the married name which 
was hers when she gave evidence later — arrived to take the 
position of general servant She was nineteen years of age. 

On her first morning she rose at six and went downstairs. 
Half an hour later, as she was in the scullery, she heard 
Mr. Dougal come down; he came into the scullery, and, 
coming up behind her, put his arms round her and kissed 
her. She was greatly upset, and went through the process 
known as giving him a piece of her mind.’' Dougal had 
met another of the few women whose sure instinct warned 
them against him. He went out of doors, and when Miss 
Holland came down the indignant servant girl complained 
to her of his conduct, and said she must go home that day. 
Whether it was the first time that this promiscuous amorous- 
ness of Dougal had been brought to Miss Holland's notice 
cannot be known; probably not. She was very upset and 
cried bitterly, also she begged the girl to stay with her — 
it is probable that poor Miss Holland had had a terrifying 
taste of what life alone with Dougal could be like if he were 
displeased. 

Later Florence heard Miss Holland reproaching Dougal 
with his conduct; she could not catch the words, but the 
tones of the voice were angry. Dougal, the man who could 
bide his time, did not 1(^ his temper or reply violently; 
Miss Holland seemed much more angry than he. Florence 
allowed herself to be persuaded, out of pity for her mistress, 
to stay on. For a few days all went on quietly, but Florence 
thought it odd that no tradesmen's cart ever called at the 
house, everything that was required being fetched in the 
trap, while even the postman was never allowed to approach, 
Dougal meeting him in the lane and taking the letters from 
him a habit to which he adhered during his whole tenancy 
of the Moat Farm. 

On the Tuesday, 16th May, Miss Holland and Florence went 
up to bed at about nine o'clock, leaving Dougal in the dining- 
room. About ten minutes later Dougal went to the door of 
the girl's room and called ‘‘Florrie!" three times in a 
low voice. Then he pulled at the door, which opened out- 

19 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

wards, but was luckily bolted — Florrie was far too afraid of 
him to leave the door unfastened The door, which was not 
very strong, threatened to give way, and Florrie, screaming 
for help to her mistress, held on to the handle. Miss Holland 
came flying to her assistance, and Florence went into hysterics. 
When she recovered. Miss Holland told her that Dougal, who 
had gone to his room, had declared he had done nothing to 
alarm or hurt the girl, but that she had taken alarm at 
hearing him wind up the cuckoo clock — an ingenious but 
somewhat feeble explanation. Together the two women went 
into Dougaks bedroom, where he was pretending to be asleep, 
and, according to Florence, her mistress said: It^s no good 
you pretending to be asleep, you’ve only just got to bed,” 
which seems a reasonable remark. Miss Holland then took 
Florence into her own room with her, and they slept together. 
The next morning Florence reiterated that she must go home. 
Miss Holland cried bitterly, and again begged her to stay, 
promising to take the greatest care of her and to take her 
everywhere with her. She was so kind to me,” said 
Florence afterwards, I did not like to leave her alone.” 

So that miserable Wednesday and Thursday dragged by. 
Miss Holland hardly speaking to Dougal, and keeping her 
promise to Florrie, whom she took with her when she went 
out and who slept with her at night. Friday, the 19th of 
May, dawned, and on that day Miss Holland must have had 
some sort of reconciliation with Pougal, for at about half- 
past six she came into the kitchen and said to Florrie : 

Do you mind if I go into the town to do a little 
shopping?” Florence replied: ISTo, not so long as Mr. 

Dougal goes with you,” to which Miss Holland answered that 
he was going to drive her, and that she would only be gone 
an hour or so. 

Miss Holland had already dressed herself for her little 
excursion in a white sailor hat and a dark dress (in the 
evidence it is sometimes referred to as black and sometimes 
as navy blue), with a fall of white lace at the throat, and 
saying Good-bye, Florrie, I shan’t be gone long . . . ,” 
she went down the path, over the bridge, and got into the 
trap with Dougal, and drove away. Florence went to the 
door and watched her go. As far as is known, no human 
eye save Dougal’s ever saw Miss Holland alive again. 

20 



Introduction. 


It may seem almost incredible that when she found out, 
as she must have done only too soon and too completely, the 
sort of man Dougal was. Miss Holland did not leave him. 
She was an independent woman with a private income. But 
it must be remembered that she did not know that the man 
at whose side she lived had already planned her death — for 
that he had by the time he took her for that drive, if not 
long before, there is no doubt. There is nothing more diffi- 
cult than to believe in the possibility of murder in our own 
immediate surroundings; it is the sort of thing that happens 
to other people, not to us, and not even to people we know, 
only to people in the papers. And Miss Holland must have 
felt the impossibility of going back to the old life. How 
could she cover up her tracks? In the boarding-house she 
had left curious and critical acquaintances; true, she need 
not have gone back to that particular place, but news travels 
round, and somehow or other people — ^that terrifying 
Victorian body known as people — would know that she 
had not been married by the Captain with whom she had 
gone away. Then the furniture, those family relics, of which 
she was so proud and which she had hoarded so long — how 
was she to retrieve all that from DougaTs grasp? What she 
had done must have seemed a very final closing of the doors 
on her past life to Camille Holland. So she patched up some 
sort of a peace with the man with whom she had cast in her 
lot, and went for a drive wth him that fine evening in May. 

DougaPs conduct in making peace is easily understood. 
He had already planned that evening^s work, and it was 
necessary that Miss Holland should go out with him. His 
behaviour with Florence is less easily explained. He knew 
already from the incident of the kiss in the scullery that she 
did not wish to have anything to do with him, and yet he 
followed her up to her room ten minutes after she and her 
mistress had gone upstairs, too soon for it to be possible that 
the latter could be asleep. This was either the conduct of a 
man in whom sex was a disease, who was so mad with lust that 
he could not know ordinary prudence, or it was the conduct 
of a man who knew it did not matter putting his well-to-do 
mistress against him, as she would soon be powerless to 
reproach him — indeed, that it might even be a wise step to 

21 



Samuel . Herbert Dougal. 

incense her, as servants and labourers might hear the quarrels, 
and not be surprised when they were told she had left him 

Soon after eight o’clock that evening Dougal arrived home 
alone. The moment Florence saw him she asked, in alarm 
for her own safety* Where is the mistress *2’^ Gone to 
London,” replied Dougal airily. '‘What!” cried the 
horrified Florrie, “ gone to London and left me here alone?” 
" Never mind,” replied Dougal, “ she’s coming back soon, 
and I am going to the station to meet her.” 

Florence was a simple, country girl, and, though she knew 
her own mind, she did not know the railway time-table, yet 
it did occur to her that surely it would be impossible for her 
mistress to go up to London and get back the same evening. 
Florrie guessed correctly — ^there was no train that Miss 
Holland could have caught to town that night, other than one 
arriving at Liverpool Street at 10.56, much too late for her 
return to be possible. Several times that evening Dougal 
went out, saying he was going to meet the mistress, and at 
last between twelve and one he returned for the last time and 
said that she had not come. He told Florence to go to bed, 
and she went up to the spare room, and, opening the window, 
sat by it all night, ready to get out of it should he attempt 
to break open the door. She came downstairs again at seven 
o’clock, determined not to appear until the men who worked 
about the farm had arrived, and she found that Dougal had 
got breakfast ready, and that there was tea and bacon and 
eggs on the table. He said to her : “ I have just had a letter 
from Mrs, Dougal She’s going to have a little holiday, and 
is going to send a lady friend down.” As a matter of fact, 
it was still too early for a letter to have arrived. 

Florence had written to her mother the day before, begging 
her to come and fetch her away, a fact of which Dougal was 
aware, and that probably served to protect her. During the 
morning her mother arrived, and gave Dougal a piece 
of her mind Mrs. Havies abused him roundly for behaving 
improperly to her daughter, and demanded a month’s wages 
and her railway fare back and her own railway fare forth 
and back. Dougal did not dispute the demand, but laid the 
money on the kitchen table and muttered something about 
“ I haven’t harmed your child.” He then drove away from 
22 



Introduction. 


the house in his trap. Mother and daughter packed the 
latter’s belongings, and then left in the hired trap in which 
Mrs. Havies had arrived. On their way to Newport they 
met Dougal returning by himself. He did not acknowledge 
them in any way, but whipped his horse up and passed them 
quickly. He was then a murderer of about sixteen hours’ 
standing, and perhaps his nerves were a little affected. 


V. 

Dougal’s Four Years at the Moat Farm, 

Now begins the strange) story of Dougal’s life at the Moat 
Farm. He had already sent for his wife to join him — an 
interesting point in connection with the idea that the crime 
was premeditated. He had suggested to her some time pre- 
viously that she should take a little cottage near him in the 
country, where, he explained, he was managing an estate for 
an old lady. On the niorning of the 20th he sent his wife 
a wire telling her to come at once. It had been arranged 
previously that she should not arrive until the Bank Holiday 
on 22nd May, but, on receipt of this wire, she took an after- 
noon train to Newport, where she was met by her husband 
and old Pilgrim with the horse and trap. Dougal, appar- 
ently, was prepared to treat his wife better than he had done 
before, and she stayed on with him at the Moat Farm instead 
of retiring to a cottage as had been previously arranged. 

The neighbouring clergyman, Mr. Morton, and his wife 
called, and she was introduced to them as Dougal’s daughter 
— for they had heard of Miss Holland and had known her as 
Mrs Dougal Evidently in those early stages Dougal was 
more cautious about the conventions than he became later. 
He still kept up the pretence that Miss Holland might be 
returning, for he told his wife that he was expecting her back, 
and that when she came Mrs. Dougal was to go and live in 
a cottage which had been taken at Stansted ; and Mrs. Dougal 
returned to Croydon, where she had been living, to pack her 
things and to send them down to Stansted. Then she 
came hack to the Moat Farm. 

Not unnaturally Mrs. Dougal occupied herself with going 

2a 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

over the house and examining its contents. She found all 
Miss Holland's clothes and her Jewel case, which contained, 
among other things, a gold watch and chain and a good many 
rings. Dougal ceased to talk about the return of Miss 
Holland, and Mrs. Dougal stayed at the Moat Farm, and sent 
for her belongings from the Stansted cottage. 

A girl called Emma Burgess, who had already assisted Mrs. 
Read to arrange the furniture in the house in April, now 
came back on 2nd June as general servant. She stayed there 
till the month of May, 1900, when she went away for a 
while. Emma Burgess seems to have accepted the state of 
things without question She never saw again that red- 
haired, elderly lady who she had thought was Mrs. Dougal 
during the two days she had worked there in April ; and for 
the first part of her time as general servant she, like the 
Mortons, thought Mrs. Dougal was DougaFs daughter, but 
this pretence does not seem to have been kept up. On 25th 
October, 1899, Mrs. Dougal confessed to Mrs. Morton that she 
was DougaFs wife, and showed her her marriage certificate. 
Mrs. Morton, with Christian charity, continued to visit at 
the Moat Farm, though she seems to have been surprised that 
Mrs Dougal occasionally wore some of Miss Holland’s 
clothing, but Mrs. Dougal explained that her husband had 
told her Miss Holland was away yachting, and that she was 
to do what she liked with the things; in fact, she gave Mrs. 
Morton a black shawl and some pieces of music belonging to 
Miss Holland. * 

Dougal seems to have spent less and less of his time on the 
farm; it was too like work for his taste, and he preferred the 
easier method of getting money by forging Miss Holland’s 
signature. 

The manager of the National Provincial Bank (Piccadilly 
branch) received a letter written on 29th May, 1899, which 
ran as follows : Miss C. C. Holland presents her compli- 
ments to the manager, and will be glad if he will forward 
her a new cheque book.” The address given was the Moat 
Farm. The cheque book was duly forwarded, and on 6th 
June the bank received a letter enclosing a cheque made one 
to Dougal and asking for £30 to be sent in £5 notes. 
Replying to this request the manager wrote : Tour signature 
24 



Introduction. 


appears to differ from that with which we are acquainted 
I shall be obliged if you will kindly confirm the same by 
signing it afresh m your usual manner.’’ On 8th June Mr 
Robinson, the manager, received the following letter : Dear 
sir, — Cheque to Mr. Dougal quite correct. Owing to a 
sprained hand there may be a discrepancy in some of my 
cheques lately signed — Yours truly, Camille C Holland.” 

After that life went easily enough for Dougal. He started 
to sell out Miss Holland’s capital, and opened an account in 
his own name at the Birkbeck Bank. In the month of 
September he sold out four hundred shares of George Newnes, 
Ltd , forty-three shares in Great Laxey Mines, and £500 of 
United Alkali Co. On 31st October he withdrew in the name 
of Miss Holland £670 from the National Provincial Bank, 
and placed exactly the same sum to his own credit at the 
Birkbeck Bank In all he did this seven times, so that by 
September, 1901, he had £2912 15s. m his account. Thus 
he was enabled to pay with cheques signed by his own name — 
a necessary thing for him to be able to do, living in a place 
where every one knew that Miss Holland had left him. Until 
he was able to do this he paid with notes sent down to him 
from Miss Holland’s bank in reply to the forged letters. 
Another financial transaction that Dougal carried 
triumphantly through was the finishing of the conveyance of 
the Moat Farm, which, in consequence of the bankruptcy of 
one of the solicitors concerned, had never been executed, and 
in April of 1900 Doug^, in Miss Holland’s name, sued the 
Savills for specific performance of the agreement The 
action was settled on terms very favourable to the plaintifi, 
and Dougal’s next step was to forge a letter signed with Miss 
Holland’s name asking for the property to be conveyed to 
Mr. Samuel Herbert Dougal, which was accordingly done. 
Both this letter and the share transfers on which the name of 
Camille Holland was forged were witnessed by Dougal himself, 
an ingenious arrangement that saved him much trouble. 

Dougal’s most important operation on the land after the 
disappearance of Miss Holland was the filling in of the 
drainage ditch, about which he had spoken to old Pilgrim, 
giving orders that he should get men and begin to fill it 
in the very first weeks at the Moat Farm. After that fatal 

25 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

night of 19th May the filling of the ditch went on apace, 
so that in a few days many barrow loads of mould and stones 
had been put into it. Dougal kept a few cows and pigg 
and fowls, apparently more for the sake of appearances than 
anything else; he never made them pay, and he let all the 
land go to hay, which gave him less trouble than anything 
else and brought in a certain amount of money at the least 
cost of outlay. He carried out extensive alterations of an 
ornamental nature, planting trees and hedges, and laying out 
a flower garden. But, so little, for some reason or other, 
did he like the farm that in November of 1900 he was adver- 
tising it for sale, using a number at the Times and the 
pseudonym Ubique,^’ which is the motto of the Royal 
Engineers. But nothing seems to have come of this attempt 
to sell the place 

About this time a curious little incident occurred. One 
day Jacko, Miss Holland’s dearly-loved little dog, turned up 
at Mrs. Wisken’s in Safiron Walden. She was delighted, 
partly at seeing the little dog and partly because she thought 
she would see his mistress again. She had been more than 
a little hurt at never having heard from her. However, no 
mistress followed, and Jacko insisted on staying with Mrs. 
Wisken. After about three weeks she wrote to the Moat 
Farm, addressing the letter to Mrs. Dougal, saying that the 
dog was with her, and asking what she was to do about 
it. Dougal wrote in answer to the letter, telling her to turn 
Jacko out at night and that he wcfuld find his way home, 
an idea that did not meet with Mrs. Wisken’s approval, so 
she kept the dog with her. A few days later Dougal came 
at dusk to the sidedoor of her house and asked if she still 
had Jacko, and, on her replying in the affirmative, asked 
for him to be given up. Dougal took the dog away with 
him, having avoided all Mrs. Wisken’s questions as to how 
his wife was. 

Dougal seems during the first months to have been extremely 
popular in the neighbourhood — as a blufl, genial, talkative 
man, always willing to hold forth on any subject. He was a 
splendid shot, and, although he cannot have passed for a 
gentleman, he made a great effect as what is known as a 
good fellow. He also was a person of note as owning one 
26 



30 Ttiesday 



Dougal’s Diary, Entry of 30th September, 1902 



Introduction 


of the first motor cars ever seen in that part of the country, 
a conveyance to which he refers in his diary as the ‘‘ loco- 
mobile or loco/’ He vras popular also because he stood 
drinks to his friends, amongst whom he numbered the clergy. 
He gave <£10 towards a clock for Clavering Church to com- 
memorate King Edward’s coronation, which clock still per- 
forms its functions and may be seen by the curious, though 
all of Dougal has disappeared in a bed of quicklime. 

Had Dougal been able to restrain his amours within the 
not at all narrow limits of the not very exiguous circle in 
which he moved, he might have been living yet, but it was 
unwise of him to seduce one sister in front of the other, and 
to deny paternity when confronted with afi&liation orders, 
both of which things he did. He probably could not help 
himself, for his propensities were too violent to be hidden 
long, and rumour, never very difficult to start in a small 
country place, began to get busy with him and his doings. 

In his vulgar, gross way he had some of the tastes attributed 
to the more dissolute Roman Emperors. He liked a touch 
of an orgy about his doings, and strange tales got 
about of bicycling lessons given in the field to girls who 
rode machines in a state of nature. What a picture — in 
that clayey, lumpy field, the clayey, lumpy girls, naked, 
astride that unromantic object, a bicycle, and Dougal, gross 
and vital, cheering on these bucolic improprieties. , . . ! 

In Dougal’s diary, whict^ is for the most part an innocuous 
document, consisting merely of entries such as: Letter to 
bank. Raining to-day. Sent to Stansted for binder ” — 
harmless enough if one forgets that the letter to the bank 
was forged — there is to be found beside the date of 30th 
September, 1902, the following curious little sentence: An 
extraordinary incident was witnessed by me to-night ! 1 1 Paid 
K £1 in wages.” 

Many of the rumours were doubtless incorrect, but there is 
no question about his relations with women during this period 
that his wife was still in the house with him. Many women 
who did not have to be brought into the case were nursing 
Dougal’s children, for, most unfortunately, he never seems 
to have exercised any discretion as to the results of his be- 
haviour. There is a letter extant, written in July, 1901, 

27 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

which seems to show that he did not contemplate Mrs. Dougal 
being with him much longer; indeed, the quarrels between 
them were very frequent. The letter is an answer to an 
advertisement, and runs as follows — 

Miss L , — I am in want of some one to look to my wants during 
the absence of my wife who is frequently away from home, should 
like one of a cheerful disposition and young, and, judging from your 
advertisement, you might perhaps like to try the duties — which are 
light. There is only myself to look after and cook for Heavy 
work done by a woman who comes once or twice a week; all laundry 
work put out. One cow is kept for our use. This is a farmhouse 
and a jolly English home I should like (if you think anything of 
it) an appointment where most convenient to you, or you could come 
here and see the place, expenses paid 

(Signed) S. Herbert Dougal 

Miss L., whosoever she may have been, was fortunate in 
not becoming an inmate of this jolly English home.^’ 

A girl, Kate Cranwell, was engaged as servant in December, 
1901. In January, 1902, Mrs. Dougal left the Moat Farm 
with a man called Killick, a labourer, and went to live with 
him, and in May Dougal instituted proceedings for divorce 
against her. Eliza Cranwell, a sister of Kate’s, accompanied 
Dougal to Wales to serve the papers on Mrs. Dougal at 
Tenby, whither she had gone — a curious arrangement, but 
one apparently undertaken with the approval of Eliza’s 
mother. The suit was undefended, and the decree nisi was 
granted him on 1st August of that year. 

Some time in this year Dougal tried the experiment of 
taking in paying-guests. It is improbable that remorse 
troubled him, but fear certainly did. He was drinking very 
heavily of brandy, and seemed not to like to be alone. A 
Mr. and Mrs. Gill, who wanted a fortnight’s shooting, picked 
the name of the Moat Farm out of a list of farms advertised 
in the Great Eastern Railway guide, and decided to go there 
for a fortnight. Dougal met them at Newport Station and 
drove them up to the farm in his trap; he drove extremely 
fast without lights, and when they arrived at the house all 
was in darkness. Mr. Gill, who seems to have taken this 
rather odd way of receiving paying guests with great good 
nature, helped Dougal to take out the pony and stable it; 
then they all went into the house. Dougal found some cold 
28 



Introduction. 


meatj but it was so old nobody ate it, so supper was made 
off bread and cheese and beer. Dougal explained the empti- 
ness of the house by saying that his wife had gone away with 
one of his labourers, but that she had returned the night 
before, and that if he had stayed there with her he would 
not be able to get his divorce; therefore he Had left the farm 
the previous night, and Mrs. Dougal had evidently left that 
morning. The Gills went to bed, and the next day when 
they went downstairs they found the servant Kate and another 
girl in the house ; in fact, they caught sight of Dougal kissing 
Kate. The Gills noticed that Dougal always met the postman 
in the lane, and they found their letters waiting for them 
on their plates at breakfast. The Gills seem to have made 
up their minds to make the best of their holiday. They used 
to go down to the moat and feed the fishes, that were very 
tame; in the evenings they played poker with Dougal, who 
taught them the game. Dougal was apparently almost a 
teetotaller while Mr. and Mrs. Gill were with him, and he 
struck them as being a very charming and very popular' man 
who had at one time drunk too much and was trying to over- 
come his falling. They could see that he was worried, but 
concluded it was over the trouble with his wife. He told 
them that he only slept two or three hours each night, and 
certainly he was always up by four and out of doors. He 
tried to sell Mr. Gill the farm, but failed. 

In September Kate Craij^well was found to be with child by 
him, and she was fetched home, and another girl was sent to 
take her place. In December Kate^s child was born, and in 
January of 1903 an affiliation order was made out against 
Dougal. By this time the new servant was also pregnant with 
a child by Dougal, and these girls were only two amongst 
the many whom he seduced, if that term is applicable to those 
who were, for the most part, such willing victims, in the 
countryside. In one case it is known that he had relations 
with three sisters and with their mother. It was unwise of 
him, for the more people talked abouL the goings on at the 
Moat Farm, the more they began to recall every little thing 
to do with the past. 

DougaTs quarrels with his wife had been frequent before 
she left him, and it appears that both she and the deserted 

29 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

Kate Cranwell were apt to voice the gradually growing sus- 
picions as to the disappearance of Miss Holland rather freely. 
It was remarked by the womenkind who came and went at 
the house that Miss Holland had never returned for any of 
her clothes. Indeed, Eliza Cranwell (she who helped Dougal to 
serve the divorce papers) was a dressmaker, and had altered 
many of them to fit Mrs. Dougal. Eliza said, according to 
her own account, to Dougal : '' You have had twelve months 
for forging cheques; you will be hung next for the killing 
of that woman.'’ The fact that Dougal had served a sentence 
for forgery and lost his pension apparently came out when he 
very foolishly contested Kate CranwelTs application for an 
affiliation order. 

All this publicity was a bad thing for a man who wished 
his decree to be made absolute, and the King's Proctor, 
who had taken the usual steps to inquire into the conduct 
of a successful petitioner, had no difficulty in finding many 
reasons why this desired consummation should not take place. 
There had been undoubted adultery on Dougal's part 
with Miss Holland, although it may be said that 
Mrs. Dougal had taken her husband back since then, but 
there was no doubt about Kate Cranwell, and the King's 
Proctor rescinded the decree mu on 9th March, 1903. Dougal 
did not contest the King's Proctor's intervention. Perhaps 
he was beginning to feel that the less he had to do with the 
law the better . Had he but known it, the police were already 
on hie track. 

A letter from the local constable, setting forth the suspicions 
that by now filled the countryside, was sent to Captain 
Showers, chief constable of Essex. The letter ran as 
follows : — 

Sir, —I have the honour to report, for your information that is a 
talk in this Village Clavering about Mr. Herbert Samuel Dougal of 
Moat House Farm Clavering since last October a Detective named* 
Giles was about Clavering Making enquiries respecting Mr. Dougal 
and a Miss Holland, which was thought to have been Dougal wife 
but about 4 years ago Mr Dougal wife lived at Stansted as his 
Daughter ^d Mr Dougal lived at Saffron Walden tijl he came to 
the Moat House Farm Clavering with Miss Holland After a time 

* Apparently the detective sent by the King's Proctor. ^En. 



Introduction. 


Miss Holland was missing. Mr. Dongal told People she had gone 
in the Continent and he was Expecting her back, but she has not 
been seen in Clavering since. Great many things are reported to be 
m Mr. Dougal’s House marked C. C Holland. Since the last two 
Cases at the Bench from Moat House it roused people to talk again 
and it IS now said it was Miss Hollands Money that bought Moat 
House Farm and People think now he must have done away with her 
and buried her Dougal about 6 months ago applied for a Divorce 
from his wife who had misbehaved herself with a man Named George 
KiUick Engine driver somewhere Nr Maidstone in Kent and Dougal 
wife Knows all about this affair of Miss Holland has threatened to 
split on him Killick has been heard to say there will be an Essex 
Mystery Mr Gaylor Farmer of Clavering was talking to me one day 
said his cows got into the old Castle Grounds he saw a Piece of 
Ground had been Moved the shape of a grave * I am now told that 
letters has come to Moat House addressed Miss Holland and have 
been answered bv Dougal’ s wife t 

I have the honour to be, Sir, 

Yours obedient Servant, 

(Signed) James Dbew, P C 124. 

Mr Supt. Barnard. 

The police at once traced Miss Holland's nephews, her 
bankers, and her solicitors. Mr Edmund Holland was able 
to say that he had not heard from his aunt since she wrote 
to him on the occasion of the death of his little girl at the 
beginning of 1889. Messrs. Hart & Co. had been under the 
impression they had been in communication with Miss Holland 
at the Moat Farm for four years past, and her bankers also 
were under the same delusion. Miss Pittman, of the Quendon 
Post Office, stated that letters and circulars had continued 
to come to the Moat Farm for Miss Holland during the time 
that had elapsed since her disappearance. These letters had 
generally been taken by Dougal at the gate. 

Superintendent Pryke, who was superintendent of the 
district, was instructed by the chief constable to make in- 
quiries into the village rumours. Mr. Pryke called upon 
Dougal on 4th March, just five days before the decree nisi 
was rescinded. He told Dougal he had come to see him with 
reference to a scandal in the village about a lady named 
Miss Camille Holland. Dougal, to whom it must have seemed 
that his long-delayed doom was upon him at last, kept his 

* This mound proved to have nothing to do with the case. — ^En. 

t Untrue. Mrs. Dougal was innocent of any illegal action, however 
slight.-^En. 


31 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

head and chatted pleasantly. He said that about three years 
ago he had driven Miss Holland to Stansted Railway Station 
with her luggage, consisting of two bags, and that he had 
not seen or heard of her since. They had had a tiff the 
night before she left, said Dougal, as a result of the servant 
girl telling lies about him. The two men parted with quite 
a friendly handshake. 

Superintendent Pryke went off to Stansted Railway Station. 
No one could remember ever having seen Miss Holland leave 
from that station, but, of course, four years had elapsed, 
and negative evidence is not of much value. What was more 
important was that a survey of the ticket book of that date 
showed that no ticket for London had been taken for that 
train. 

Meanwhile, Inspector Bower, of the C I.D., was helping 
the Essex inspector, Marden, up in London, and, when they 
had a meeting and compared the facts they had gathered, 
it was clear that something very serious was amiss. Inspector 
Bower ascertained definitely that the last cheque purporting 
to have been made out by Miss Holland was one dated 28th 
August, 1902, and made payable to J. Heath. The cheque 
was for £28 15s., and it was crossed by the Birkbeck Bank, 
Chancery Lane, and cleared through the Union Bank of 
London; eventually it had come back to the National Pro- 
vincial Bank, and was the only one of the Holland cheques 
that they still had in their possession. Mr. Ernest Legrand 
Holland stated definitely on seeing the cheque that it was not 
in his aunt’s writing, and it was decided to proceed against 
Dougal with a charge of forging the Heath cheque. 

On the day following Pryke’s visit Dougal drew out his 
bank, balances of £305 and £300 respectively from the Birk- 
beck Bank and from the local London and County Bank at 
Bishop’s Stortford, where he had also opened an account. 
On 3rd March, the day before the superintendent called upon 
him, he had made the following entry in his diary : 

Raining. Sent to Stansted for a loco, boiler. Mr. 
Newman declined to let me have it. One pound fourteen 
ounces of rump steak.” The next day, the day of Pryke’s 
visit, he made no entry in his diary, nor did he ever again. 
He had heard that on leaving the Moat Farm Pryke had gone 
32 



Introduction. 


to Stansted Eailway Station, and he was a desperate man. 
The fact that it was raining, or even that he had bought 
rump steak (he was a very hearty eater), had ceased to 
interest him. But, besides his own safety, apparently there 
was one thing that still interested him, incredible as it may 
seem. . . . Instead of making a bolt for it by himself, 

he took a week-end at Bournemouth with a successor of Kate 
Cranwell, who, like her predecessor, was pregnant On 
5th March, the day after Superintendent Pryke’s visit, 
Dougal went up to London and stayed at the Central 
Hotel, Smithfield. He returned to the farm on the 
night of Thursday, 12th March. He left again on Friday, 
this time taking with him a quantity of luggage, and again 
that night slept at the Central Hotel. On Saturday, 14th, 
the girl left the farm, also taking a quantity of luggage with 
her, which she left at the cloakroom at Liverpool Street 
Station. She and Dougal proceeded on the same day to 
Bournemouth, where they stayed the week-end at the Coburg 
Hotel. Dougal had already wired to the Coburg as follows : — 
Please reserve double room, lady and self. Dougal. On 
the Monday they took a steamer trip to Swanage, and on 
the morning of Tuesday they returned to London, the girl 
going back to the Moat Farm, leaving the boxes still in the 
cloakroom at Liverpool Street Station. 

Dougal, on the afternoon of Wednesday, 18th March, went 
into the Bank of England ^and asked one of the cashiers to 
change some ^610 notes which he presented. These were the 
notes which he had withdrawn from the Birkbeck Bank, 
and, had he but known it, they had already been stopped. 
The cashier glanced at the notes, saw the numbers that they 
bore, and asked Dougal to endorse one of them. Dougal did 
so, writing the name '' Sydney Domville,'' and the address 
Upper Terrace, Bournemouth. 

Mr. Domville was then asked to step into the secretary’s 
office, and Detective-Inspector Cox, who was on duty at the 
bank, was quickly fetched. Cox read the name written on 
the note and said: That is not your name, your name is 
Dougal. These notes form part of the proceeds of a forgery, 
and you will have to come with me to the Old Jewry.” With 
the assistance of another detective Cox took Dougal to the Old 
^ 33 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

Jewry, but on the way, not caring to leave the Bank of 
England without a detective, he sent the other man on 
ahead to ask for a relief. As Cox and Dougal were about to 
enter the gate of the courtyard, Dougal suddenly made a 
dash along Cheapside. Cox, who was entirely taken by 
surprise, as Dougal had been walking along quietly, rushed 
after him. Dougaks luck, which for so many years had been 
so fantastically good, here abandoned him finally, and never 
smiled on him again. He dashed down a side street, and 
it proved to be a cul-de-sac. Inspector Cox caught him and 
collared him. When Dougal was searched there were found 
on him eighty-three £6 notes, eight £10 notes, £63 
in gold, two 4s. postal orders, two 6s. postal orders, one 
7s. 6d. postal order, a £5 gold coin, and jewellery, including 
five lady’s rings and two lady’s gold watches. One of the 
rings was the cornelian one that Miss Holland had always 
worn and had cherished so dearly, and which can only have 
been taken from her dead body. In the luggage left at 
Liverpool Street Station by Dougal and the girl who was with 
him many articles afterwards identified as belonging to Miss 
Holland were discovered. Later that day Dougal was taken, 
handcufied, to Saffron Walden. 


VI. 


The Search. 

Dougal burst into newspaper fame. It needed no astute- 
ness to read between the lines and see that beyond the 
accusation of forgery stood one of much darker import 
Indeed, the police at once started examining the Moat Farm, 
and every one knew for what they searched. All that Miss 
Holland had ever possessed was still at the farm, all 
her personal and household linen bearing her name; the 
grand piano on which she had been wont to play the little 
songs of her own composition; the large pictures in oils and 
water-colours of languishing ladies and pretty landscapes. 
Her music was in the music chest, and her books with her 
name written on the fly-leaf were in the bookcases. Her silver 
and electro-plate, her masses of china ornaments, the photo- 
graphs of her family; in short, everything that she was 
34 



Introduction. 


known to have prized, was found there and identified as hers. 
If she had gone away she had not only lived for four years 
without any assistance from her banking account, but also 
without any of her personal belongings. 

Every inch of the house was tapped and measured, and then 
the laborious digging of the garden began Day after day 
it went on, the men often working up to their waists in slime, 
but, if ever the police felt on their mettle to bring a peculiarly 
base murderer to justice, they did on this occasion. They 
uncomplainingly worked on, sleeping in the house and cooking 
their own food. They had several accidents, one man falling 
into the slime of the emptied moat, head and all, and sprain- 
ing his ankle badly. They sometimes came upon bones of 
animals, and once in an outhouse they found a human skull, 
which caused much excitement, but was proved to have been 
there for years and to be very old. The digging went on, 
but interest in it had begun to wane Five weeks had gone 
by and there was nothing to show for all the pains that had 
been taken. Six feet down into the earth had the labourers 
dug ; the whole of the Moat Farm must have looked like front- 
line trenches after a bombardment. The world began to say 
that nothing would be found there, that Miss Holland was 
probably alive after all, and that a great deal of money was 
being wasted. A pathetic little object during the excavations 
was poor Jacko, very stiff in the legs, almost blind, and quite 
deaf, who wandered about forlornly. 

During the weeks of the search at the farm, before anything 
had been discovered, and while Dougal was yet charged only 
with forgery, an application was made in the Probate Court 
before Sir Francis Jeune on behalf of Miss Holland's 
executors, to presume her death Sir Francis Jeune, after 
listening to what Mr Hargreave Deane had to say, said that 
in the circumstances he would grant the application, giving 
leave to presume the death on 18th* May, 1899. From far 
and near the police received letters from people who thought 
they had seen her, and all the letters had to be investigated. 
They were all written in good faith, for one thing is certain, 
and that is, that when any one disappears there will always 

* Date given ia newspaper report. The actual date on which Miss 
Holland was last seen alive was 19th May. See Appendix VII. — ^En. 

35 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

be found perfectly honest people who really imagine that they 
have seen him or her. An old cabman, who had often driven 
Miss Holland when she lived in London, swore that he had 
seen her and talked with her in June, 1902, long after her dis- 
appearance. Strangers wrote from places as far apart as 
the West Highlands, Wales, Ireland, and Eastbourne, with 
stories of mysterious ladies held against their will, and 
lodgers who received still more mysterious letters All this 
resulted in a great deal of unpleasantness to perfectly harm- 
less people who perhaps had their own reasons for wishing to 
live quietly and undisturbed for the time being, but no 
inquiry brought to light any trace of Camille Holland. 

The police were also the recipients of letters from numerous 
cranks : men who offered to walk about the Moat Farm with 
some sort of a divining rod which would tell them where any 
body lay hidden ; spiritualists who had received messages from 
another world (one of them most unaccountably written in 
French) giving various accounts of where Miss Holland was 
if alive, and where her body was if dead. There was even 
one communication from a gentleman who had invented or 
discovered some means of getting at the truth from what he 
called ^ ‘ Chromoscopy ’ ’ He wrote : 

In the last few years I have been experimenting with colours, and 
have arrived at many remarkable conclusions in my deductions there- 
from I have, by way of test, been working out “ The Moat Farm 
Mystery,’* and I get, from the imperfect data I possess, somewhat 
remarkable deductions. I send them r on to you for what they are 
worth 

I read early m March, 1899, of a slow process of poisoning, in 
which pigments used for purposes of art figure conspicuously. Also 
the spectrum gives arsenic as a possibility. The process seems to 
become most susceptible to will-suggestion of another. April of the 
same year marks a stage of deep depression, in which Miss Holland 
realises that her position with Dougal is likely to undergo a great 
change, and she feels he will prove himself to be not the man she 
fondly thought him. The month following (May) gives mostly 
decidedly an incarceration, as if it were in some private asylum, or 
in a small room situated near a river or near water I deduce from 
this showing that Miss Holland was incarcerated, for a time, at Moat 
Farm, as there are no indications of a sudden violent death; and if 
death has occurred it was a very slow process. Granting death has 
occurred, some indications of the fact will be discovered by searching 
beneath or behind some statue, picture, or work of art that is in or 
about Moat Farm. 

36 



Introduction. 


Whatever you may think respecting the above, I would like to add 
that the spectrum gives most strongly and very decidedly the following 
two points . Nothmg of a really satisfactory character will be actually 
known during April, but the month of May next will bring a clear, 
definite solution of the whole problem, and then it will be seen how 
near or how remote my deductions given above are 

Should like chromoscopy to be tested with more detailed data, not 
only in the case in question, but in other cases, as I feel sure that the 
system will be helpful in criminal investigation 

The discovery of the real state of matters at the Moat Farm 
must have been a serious blow to the advocate of chromoscopy. 

Meanwhile Dougal was brought before the magistrates at 
Saffron Walden on the forgery charge and remanded several 
times.* The evidence which was given left no doubt in any 
one’s mind as to the fact that for four years Dougal had been 
forging Miss Holland’s name Nothing could, in any event, 
have cleared Dougal of the forgery charge, as, on his own 
showing, he had not seen Miss Holland during the period of 
time that letters purporting to be from her had been pro- 
ceeding from the Moat Farm, and letters addressed to her had 
been accepted there. 

At last on 27th April, four years to the day after Miss 
Holland’s arrival at the farm — and how that coincidence must 
have struck at Dougal’s fearful heart ! — ^the police found that 
for which they were looking, but not before matters had almost 
come to a much less satisfactory crisis. For Dougal had 
threatened through his solicitors to sue Captain Showers for 
^1000 for the damage done* to the Moat Farm, which, after 
all, was in law Dougal’s property. 

It was now that Inspector Bower took a hand in the pro- 
ceedings in Essex; hitherto all his work on the case had been 
confined to the forgei'y end of it in London. He found the 
local police under Inspector Scott hard at work digging in 
the moat in filthy, black mud Bower took a heavy stone 
with a sharp edge and threw it down into the mud ; it hardly 
disturbed the surface, but lay there where it had fallen. 

The body would never have sunk under that mud if the 
stone wouldn’t,” said Inspector Bower. “ We’ve got to look 
elsewhere for it.” He started to make inquiries, and from 
a local labourer discovered that there had once been a 


See Appendix I. 


37 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

drainage ditch running from the farmyard to carry its 
drainage, and that thisi ditch Dougal had caused to be filled 
in soon after his arrival at the Moat Farm. Inspector Bower 
at once saw the importance of finding the labourers who had 
carried out this piece of work. A. hobbledehoy lad from a 
neighbouring village was found who had been employed to 
cart to the farm the soil which had been used to fill in the 
ditch; the man who had actually filled it in was called Gilpin, 
and seemed to have disappeared. Inspector Bower traced 
him to Herefordshire, and brought him back to the Moat 
Farm. He was able to state more or less definitely where he 
had started to fill in the drainage ditch. He had pointed 
out to Dougal at the time that the farmyard would overflow, 
but Dougal had insisted on the work being carried through. 
Digging now began in the region indicated by Gilpin. 
Inspector Bower had previously noticed that a lot of roots of 
blackthorn bushes were sticking out of either side of the moat, 
and it had occurred to him that the blackthorn that had been 
cut ofl there must have been disposed of somehow. Gilpin 
remembered that when the bushes were cut down they had 
been stacked outside the shed where the trap and horse were 
kept, but he did not know what had become of them. 

The digging proceeded in soil sodden with sewage and liquid 
manure that had seeped through from the farmyard. The 
men dug for hours with no; result. Suddenly in the after- 
noon one of them, who was digging with a fork, brought up 
on it a piece of old cloth, and a minute or two later his fork 
struck upon something hard which he drew out. It was a 
woman's boot, and inside it were the bones of the foot. The 
sergeant was summoned, and everyone now got to work in 
real earnest, till at last the figure of a woman, lying face 
downwards with her head slightly turned to one side, was 
discovered. The Moat Farm had yielded up its secret at 
last, just as hope had nearly been abandoned. 

The body was covered by the blackthorn bushes whose dis- 
appearance had worried Inspector Bower, and it had been so 
sheltered by them that the clothes on that side were in a good 
state of preservation, but on the part of the body that had 
rested against the mud everything had been destroyed. 
Dougal, after committing the murder, must have thrown the 
38 




Excavation of The Moat 


Introduction. 


body into the deep end of the ditch where the filling-in had 
already been begun and covered it by the masses of black- 
thorn, and had then spent the night in the actual burial. 
He had ingeniously cut out the side of the bank and placed 
the body in the hollow thusi made, so that at once it had 
several feet of undisturbed earth on top of it. He had 
crammed in the blackthorns, and shovelled in loose earth in 
the ditch alongside. The sad thing from DougaTs point of 
view was that there had been in the farmyard a vast mound of 
manure, and if he had hidden the body in the heart of that 
it would have been so utterly destroyed in the course of 
time that nothing save perhaps the thigh bones would have 
remained, and the clothes would have been completely burned 
away. As it was, there in the ditch, preserved by the 
blackthorn bushes, lay the remains of Miss Holland. They 
were got upon a board which was forced beneath them, and 
carried into the little greenhouse at the side of the house 
which Dougal himself, who was very much of the '' handy 
man,’^ had built. The search in the trench went on, and a 
wire hair-frame and some hairpins were found and a 
tortoiseshell comb. 

Not till the next day could the doctor make an examina- 
tion, for it was too dark that evening, and not till the next 
day did Mrs. Wisken identify the remains of clothing, the 
comb, the hair-pad, and the out-of-date bustle, all of which 
she recognised as having belonged to Camille Holland. The 
amount of clothing found on that one small woman's body 
is indeed amazing to modern eyes. Six women could be 
clothed with what Miss Holland wore, except that her 
garments were such as not even an old lady would dream of 
wearing nowadays. According to Mrs. Wisken, it was 
nothing for Miss Holland to wear a pair of natural " 
woollen combinations, a pair of white linen combinations, 
a pair of steel-framed corsets, two pink woollen underbodices, 
black cashmere stockings, a pair of bloomers, and two petti- 
coats. 

The body was, of course, in an advanced state of decom- 
position, and there was no sign of any wound upon it until 
the head was examined. Dr. Pepper, assisted by Dr. 
Sprague, of Safiron Walden, conducted the post-mortem. 

39 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

The skull was examined last, and on the right side, just 
behind the ear, there was a round hole with a fine piece of 
lead attached to the rim of it, and on the left side of the head 
there was another hole. It was obvious even to the layman, 
without the statement of doctors to that effect, that this 
wound could not have been self -inflicted. 

The inquest on the body was held in the old barn of the 
Moat Farm, and was opened on 30th April."^ It was a dismal 
day, with the rain pouring down in heavy sheets and adding 
to the look of utter desolation that had spread itself about 
the Moat Farm. Dougal had been told on the previous day 
of the discovery of the body at the Moat Farm, and rumour 
has it that he had been until then wearing a white tie (pre- 
sumably as a token of innocence), and that he changed it to 
a flowing black tie as a sign 'of mourning. This, however, 
though a charming story, must be dismissed as fiction, for 
it is unlikely that Dougal would have so far forgotten himself 
as to admit at this stage of the proceedings that the body 
was that of Miss Holland. Dougal, who attended the inquest, 
had to be protected by the police from the mob; as he was 
driven up to the Moat Farm a great shout went up from the 
watching crowd, which tried to rush the cab. Dougal was 
hustled through the throng by a strong guard of police, and 
taken into the dining-room, where he had eaten so often, 
and where he had drunk so much brandy, if all accounts are 
true. Here Inspector Mar den charged him with the wilful 
murder of Camille Holland by shotting her on or about 19th 
May, 1899, adding the usual warning as to anything he might 
say. 

Like the proceedings for forgery before the magistrates, 
the inquest suflered several remands, and not until 16th May 
did a coroner’s jury return the verdict of wilful murder 
against Samuel Herbert Dougal, adding that the body was 
that of Miss Holland, and that the murder took place on the 
evening of 19th May, 1899. Dougal exclaimed, Gentlemen, 
I am a perfectly innocent man.” Meanwhile the charge 
against Dougal at the magistrates’ court had been changed 
from forgery to murder. 


* See Appendix II. 

40 



Introduction. 


VI I. 

Dougal Awaiting Trial. 

During the time that elapsed between the proceedings 
before the magistrates and the trial, Dougal seems to have 
been full of hope, and to have looked at his case from the 
outside in that curious detached manner that murderers seem 
to find so easy. He wrote many letters — always having been 
ready with his pen — ^while he was awaiting his trial.* To an 
elderly woman, whose acquaintance he had made so long ago 
as the Watlington episode, he wrote often. She had written 
(she always began her epistles My dear friend ’’) offering 
to send one of his sons some cigarettes, an offer of which 
Dougal approved. You are very kind to think of sending 
Albert some cigarettes,'' he wrote, Player's Medium are 
very good, sold in boxes of fifty at Is., or Wills' Gold Flake 
in round tins at Is. IJd. are also good." 

Dougal's fancy for teaching people to ride bicycles crops 
up again in these letters. I should much enjoy a ramble 
in the forest just now, the country is looking at its best," 
he writes, '' I could teach you to ride a bicycle. A lady is, 
of couf'se, more timid than a man, and consequently takes 
longer to learn. I am keeping well. — Kindest regards, yours 
faithfully, S. Herbert Dougal." And in the next letter he 
says: '' It is a pity I am not disengaged! just now, as we 
could have a run round together and visit some of our old 
haunts. You are near th« forest and can have a ramble 
therein at your own sweet will ; many a time I have run 
through there on my car, and also on a bicycle. Have you 
taken to one yet? You should, now you have the leisure to 
do so and the time of year also favourable, I expect my 
trial to commence about the 22nd, and may take some days. 
There are a lot of witnesses against me, and the circum- 
stances look very dark, but let us hope there will be a light 
cloud following. I am at any rate keeping up my spirits 
to meet the charge." 

His little daughter, Olive, writes to Dougal that she is 
living with very kind people, and that her mother is going 
to be confirmed in the Roman Catholic Church, and is taking 

*See Appendix XII. (D). fA charming euphemiim Ed. 

41 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

the name of Mary Magdalene. Dougal replies to his little 
daughter: I hope you are paying great attention to your 

lessons and trying to learn all you can. I was glad to know 
Mam is going to be confirmed. But to a girl who was just 
about to give birth to a child of his, he writes cynically : 

‘‘ Mrs. Dougal has been confirmed in the Roman Catholic 
Church, and is to be called Mary Magdalene — ^whatever that 
may mean, I don't know." A little further on he writes : 

If I have the opportunity I will write the history of this 
case; it will be interesting reading." He ends with 

Kindest regards, yours very sincerely, S. Herbert Dougal." 

On 12th June he writes again to the girl, who by now has 
become a mother. He refers to the event in the following 
delicate manner : I received your letter this morning giving 
me certain information which I have no doubt is 
correct. Allow me to congratulate you. At the same time I 
hope you are going on all right and are comfortable." In 
his next letter he writes : ‘‘I was thinking of a child 
(daughter) born on the 11th of this month might be named 
' Draga ' after the poor Queen of Servia assassinated on that 
day. What a dreadful piece of business! " Evidently, to 
Dougal, queens were more sacred than commoners. 

A thing that interests Dougal more than the birth of yet 
another child of his is a matter 'of some missing dresses. 
His wife writes to him saying that Olive needs some new 
frocks, and Dougal replies that he has just bought her two : 
“ The two dresses, slate and fawn colour, were, I believe, 
taken to her at the Convent, Bishop's Stortford; she must 
surely have seen them. They were very nice frocks, and 
nicely made. Before she went away to Belgium I bought her 
a complete rigout, sheets, pillow slips, all new underclothing, 
and a very nice green coat trimmed fur. Did they return 
all these things? Well, if she has not those coloured frocks 
it is evident they have not. I have often thought they gave 
away other people's things; perhaps some other children have 
these frocks. She also had a new, very fine hairbrush (6s.), 
everything of the very best. . . . You ought to write 
Sister Maria for all her things." To the girl who has just 
given birth to a child, he also writes in an attempt to trace 
the missing frocks : I had a letter from Mrs. Dougal yester- 
42 



Introduction. 


day. Simply Olive m well and happy and wants some new 
dresses. She speaks of a drab and a fawn-coloured dress; 
were not they made by your sister and sent to the convent? 
When you write kindly let me know, as Mrs Dougal thinks 
they were bought for you. Olive has never had them. I 
have often thought those nuns are charitable with other 
people's things I . . . When you are able you will send 

me a list." In another letter to the same girl he writes: 

. . . those two pieces we bought together at Wallis', 
a fawn and slate-coloured piece. ... I thought they 
had been sent to Olive, and have so informed Mrs. Dougal. 
Kindly let me know." He ends the same letter on a note of 
virtuous surprise, because he has reason to believe that the 
girl's parents are keeping back his letters to her : . 

that is a very serious offence," writes the man who had stolen 
letters steadily for four years, the Post Office authorities 
would prosecute them for it if it were known." All through 
the case the trail of second-hand clothes is to be detected. 
Mrs, Dougal and Kate Cranwell wore Miss Holland's clothes, 
and n'ow in prison, in peril of his life, Dougal is still worried 
about dresses. The whole case is as full of incredible petty 
meannesses as the tale of Henry Seddon.* 

But the cream of all Dougal's letters is to be found in 
one to the newly-made mother : '‘I dare say the girls have 
received their notices to attend next Monday at Chelmsford, 
have they not? There will be several from about there, and 
it would be a good idea to club together and hire a trap 
and drive all the way. It is a delightful drive through un- 
dulating country, and at this time of year it would be a 
veritable treat for them all." When one considers who all 
the girls from about there " were, and in what relation they 
had stood to Dougal, his thought for them makes of this a 
truly novel sort of mothers' meeting. 

VIIL 

The Trial. 

Before the Saffron Walden bench, at the inquest, and at 
the, trial itself, practically the same evidence was given by 

* See “ Trial of the Seddons,’* edited hy Pilson Young. 

43 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

the same witnesses. There is very little that is fresh in the 
trial escept the speeches by counsel and the summing up of 
the judge. The ground had been thoroughly gone over in 
the preliminary proceedings. Before the magistrates at 
Saffron Walden Mr. Pearce prosecuted for the Treasury and 
Mr. Arthur Newton defended the prisoner. Mr. Eeed 
appeared for Mrs. Dougal, and Mr. Wild* watched the pro- 
ceedings on behalf of the National Provincial Bank. At the 
trial, which was held in the Court House at Chelmsford, a 
terrible apartment of yellow, varnished seats and staring, 
light greenish walls, the counsel for the Crown were led by 
Mr. C. F. Gill, K.C., and for the defence by Mr. George 
Elliott. Mr. Arthur Newton was the defendant’s solicitor. 

Mr. Gill, who later became Sir Charles Gill, belonged to 
the dour type of Irisliman; his chief gift was an extra- 
ordinary capacity for taking pains. It was said of him that 
he never went into Court without knowing his brief 
thoroughly, and that when he was engaged on a case he 
always knew more about it than did any one else in Court. 
He spoke slowly, sometimes even haltingly, but his cross- 
examination was terribly effective. He had built a prison 
wall round Dougal, from which the latter was unable to dis- 
lodge a single stone. 

The three most important witnesses proved to be Mrs. 
Wisken; Miss Holland’s bootmaker, Mr. Mold; and Florence 
Blackwell. The case for the prosecution hung on whether the 
body could be identified beyond doubt as that of Miss Holland, 
and, as the corpse itself was unrecognisable, the question of 
the clothing found with it was of first importance. Mrs. 
Wisken was able positively to identify it. She had herself 
altered the dress found with the body, and she was able to 
point to the silk frills she had put on the cuffs and collar. 
She swore also to the braid sewn upon the skirt as being her 
own handiwork. She was an excellent though perhaps almost 
too determined witness, and cross-examination failed to shake 
her. 

Mr. Mold, the bootmaker with the terribly appropriate 
name, finally disposed of any lingering doubt that the body 

* Now Sir Ernest Wild, the Recorder of London. 

44 




Introduction. 


might not be that of Miss Holland. His name could still 
be traced on the underneath of one of the boots, where he 
always placed it. Also, he recognised the boots as being some 
made for Miss Holland on her particular last, for her foot 
was remarkably small, and, since she was chilly by nature, 
she had had them lined with curly lamb’s wool, which was 
still recognisable. 

Florence Blackwell told of the anxious days she had spent 
at the Moat Farm, of Dougal’s attempts on her, and of Miss 
Holland’s departure with him in the trap and his subsequent 
behaviour. Her mother, of course, testified to having fetched 
her away, on account of her letter, on the Saturday. 

A formidable array of financial witnesses took the Court 
through the mazes of Dougal’s transactions : forged cheques, 
transfers of shares, and letters to stockbrokers and bankers. 
Mr. Gurrin, the handwriting expert, who had been so disas- 
trously mistaken (though no one as yet was aware of it) in 
the case of poor Adolf Beck, gave evidence on the matter 
of signatures. Florence Pollock supplied the only humour 
in the relentless march of the proceedings by insisting 
first of all on identifying Dougal amongst the members of 
the jury, and then fixing on the Shire Hall keeper, though 
she admitted in this latter instance that “ he appeared to be 
very much altered.” Finally, she was able to pin her erratic 
eyes upon the dock and recognised Dougal, but she had caused 
a ripple of mirth in which the accused Joined heartily. 

The case had been expected to last a week; it took only two 
days. Mr. Gill’s speeches for the prosecution were scrupu- 
lously fair, but quite relentless in their logic. He simply 
marshalled his facts, and a damning array they made, and 
every witness that came into Court helped the prosecutor. 
Mr. Gill pointed out that the police had been looking for the 
body of a woman who was about 6 feet 4 inches in height, 
and that they had found such a body. But the question of 
identity did not rest upon the evidence of that alone, but 
was supported by the identification of the clothes and boots 
found upon the body. The next question after that of identi- 
fication was to decide whether murder had been committed; 
this had also been conclusively proved. Mr. Gill then piled 
fact upon fact in speaking of the accused’s relations with 

45 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

Miss Holland, the financial position which was for Dongal so 
precarious if Miss Holland chose to leave him. Counsel 
pointed out that, at the very time that Miss Holland dis- 
appeared, accused had been preparing the way for another 
woman to come to the vicinity, and that ever since Miss 
Holland's disappearance her financial affairs had continued to 
be transacted year after year from the Moat Farm as though 
she had still been there. The accused had finally gained 
possession of the whole of the money standing to his credit 
at both his banks, had taken all the articles of jewellery that 
he could and gone to London. All these facts, Mr. Gill con- 
tended, were consistent only with the guilt of the accused. 

Mr. Elliott called no witnesses for the defence — it is said 
much to DougaFs disappointment, though it is difficult to 
conceive what he can have imagined any one could have 
said to help him, or whom he could have hoped to regard his 
character favourably, save the one or two women — and there 
were such — ^who were still infatuated with him. Needless to 
remark, Mr Elliott did not allow his client to go into the 
witness-box. These deprivations — if such they were — allowed 
the defence to have the last word before the summing up, 
a more valuable asset in a case where the only chance was 
to try and create a doubt as to the identification of the body 
in the jury's minds. All that man could do Mr. Elliott did, 
but the task was as hopeless as the task of the defence in 
the case of George Joseph Smith, perhaps even more hopeless. 
The evidence massed up by the Crown was too solid; it made 
a wall right across his way, a wall without even a chink 
in it. Mr* Elliott made some play with the undoubted fact 
that Dougal had already been tried and found guilty in the 
minds of most of the newspaper-reading public, and warned 
the jury against being influenced by anything that they had 
heard or read. Admitting that the prosecution had “ a case 
of terrible suspicion," Mr. Elliott contended that it had not 
yet furnished complete proof. Assuming that the person 
found dead had met her death by violence, was it certain 
that it was the body of Miss Holland? Mrs. Pollock, an 
apparently honest witness, had made two mistakes in her 
identification. This body which had been found was entirely 
unrecognisable. The defence hinted that Mrs. Wisken had 
46 




Dougal’s own plan showing projected improvements in the garden 



Introduction. 


been a much too determined and positive witness to be quite 
reliable. He also made some play with the fact that all the 
garments and accessories buried with the body had been very 
old-fashioned. Did this not show that the body might be 
very much older than they thought, and that it had been in 
the ground a great deal longer? In spite of the fact that 
Miss Holland's own clothes were always clearly marked, there 
were no identification marks upon the clothing found with the 
corpse, and it was not suggested that the murderer had cut 
them ofi. When the defence came to Mr. Mold and his boots, 
the position became even more difficult, and Mr. Elliott was 
reduced to saying that, although Mr. Mold might produce 
the lasts which these boots fitted, there yet might have been 
other boots manufactured which would fit these lasts. How- 
ever, continued Mr. Elliott, skating over the terrible difficulty 
of Mr. Mold and his boots as quickly as possible, even allow- 
ing that the body found was that of Miss Holland, and that 
she had been murdered, were the jury completely satisfied 
that Miss Holland's murderer was the accused? Mr, Elliott 
then came to what would have been, if Dougal had been a 
reasonable human being, the most reasonable part of his 
argument. He pointed out that Dougal was dependent on 
Miss Holland for money, that she was devoted to him and 
had given up her relations and friends for his sake. Yet 
the jury were asked to believe that the accused made away 
with this woman for financial advantage 1 Her death, 
reasoned Mr. Elliott, woult be the end of Miss Holland's 
bounty to accused, and would be the worst thing that could 
happen to him. 

But, unfortunately, although her death may have meant 
an end to her bounty, there was no doubt that it had not 
meant the end of the advantages Dougal had gained from his 
connection with her. Mr. Elliott was on surer ground when 
he argued that a guilty man would surely have removed all 
signs of Miss Holland's presence in the house, and would never 
have asked a girl, who had known Miss Holland as the first 
Mrs. Dougal, to come back as servant at the farm while the 
real Mrs. Dougal was there. The utmost that Mr. Elliott 
could hope to show was that the case was not fully proven 
against the accused. He had no material except the very 

47 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

flimsiest with which to work. Even DougaFs extraordinary 
optimism must have been failing him as the trial progressed, 
and the summing-up of Mr. Justice Wright must have shown 
him there was no hope Scrupulously fair as it was, the 
summing-up was deadly. 

The learned judge went over the ground traversed by both 
counsel He paid a tribute to the fairness of the prosecution 
and the eloquence of the defence. He pointed out that in a 
case of this kind, when the evidence was entirely circum- 
stantial, it was of vital importance that every link should be 
sti ong He pointed out that there were four important wit- 
nesses as to identification, and that there was the serious 
circumstance that Miss Holland was undoubtedly at the Moat 
Farm until 19th May, 1899. If the boots found on the body 
were Miss Holland's, the conclusion could hardly be resisted 
that the body was Miss Holland's body. If it were not, whose 
body was it ^ The evidence of the revolver was not of great 
importance ; what was important was that Miss Holland had 
gone away with accused on the evening of her disappearance, 
and that he was the last person seen with her. The learned 
judge then recapitulated the points for the defence, ayd said 
that the jury must give them their consideration, but he 
pointed out that in a case such as this the motive must always 
be looked for, and the motive in this case the Crown suggested 
was the iady^s fortune That fortune Dougal undoubtedly 
did get into his hands 

The jury retired at four o’clofik to consider their verdict 
They were absent for nearly an hour, and when they returned 
Dougal was brought into Court, and the Clerk of Arraigns 
asked the foreman of the jury whether a verdict had been 
arrived at. The foreman replied that they found the 
prisoner guilty of murder. And that is the verdict of you 
all? asked the clerk And the foreman replied Yes.’’ 

Dougal pulled himself together and stood to attention, a 
last touch of the old soldier. The clerk then asked him if he 
had any reason to give why sentence should not be passed. 
Dougal’s mouth twitched, and he leaned towards Mr Newton, 
but made no reply. 

Mr. Justice Wright wasted no preliminary words on 
Dougal ; he simply used the prescribed formula in sentencing 
48 



Introduction. 


him to death. Dougal heard the awful words without 
flinching, and, turning, went down the steps of the dock into 
the regions below. 

Dougal appealed, but the appeal was dismissed. The game 
was up at last, not even the fact that he had been twelve 
months in a lunatic asylum could save him now; his conduct 
had been too consistently clever and cunning for that. 

It is curious to reflect that, if Dougal had lived more 
staidly and had realised Miss Holland’s fortune sooner, he 
could have cleared out with it and never have been suspected, 
except by local gossips, and never have been arrested at all. 
Whereas Crippen would probably have escaped arrest if he 
had only stayed where he was and not made a bolt for it. 
Truly the path of a murderer is hard. Dougal at least had 
little to complain of, he had had a very good run for Miss 
Holland’s money. 

IX. 

The End Of It All. 

Dougal’s good spirits left him during the time that had to 
pass between conviction and execution. He made several so- 
called confessions one was undoubtedly a last efiort to 
get the case reconsidered as manslaughter instead of murder, 
and contains no truth other than the bare admission that he 
was the cause of Miss Holland’s death. He wrote an appeal 
to the Home Secretary which is a perfect example of hypocrisy.* 
'' Laying on a shelf ” — [the grammar is his own]- — at the 
side of the house t was a revolver and cartridges with which 
I had been shooting early in the afternoon. I took up the 
revolver and commenced unloading by extracting the 
cartridges, and had lifted up the small clip of metal closing 
the end through which it was loaded, having the weapon in 
my left hand, when she said : ' Come and look at the beautiful 
silvery moon.’ I moved across towards where she sat, when 
the revolver accidentally exploded, and immediately I said, 
' I hope I haven’t hurt you, dear,’ and almost at that instant 
her head fell forward. I supported her and spoke a few 

* See Appendix XIII 

t The shed where the pony and trap were kept — ^En, 
n 49 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

endearing words I said ‘ Speak, Cecily, dear,^ and, 
thinking she had fainted, placed the cushions of the trap 
under her shoulders and head/’ So his story continues, of 
how he lost his head and thought no one would believe him — 
in which he was probably correct — and of how, panic- 
stricken, he buried the body. The Home Secretary paid no 
attention to the statement, and Dougal then wished to make 
a personal appeal to the King as an old soldier.” Old 
soldier ” has two significances in the English language, and 
even during his satisfactory term of service Dougai had 
shown himself to be an old soldier ” in both meanings of 
the phrase. 

The confession of DougaTs which seems most nearly to 
approximate to the truth is one which he sold to a newspaper, 
which admits that when he found Miss Holland so much 

closer ” with her money than he had expected, he decided 
to get rid of her. He declares that he took her shopping in 
the trap before he drove her home and shot her, but this is 
unlikely, as no one could testify to having met her on that 
evening of 19th May. It is more likely that he took her for 
a little spin in the deserted countryside, and then made some 
excuse 'for turning back, and driving, as usual, to the coach- 
house, took out his revolver, and shot her as she stood upon 
the step of the trap or when she had descended, and was 
waiting below him. He then carried the body into the 
waiting ditch and covered it for the time being with the 
blackthorns, and afterwards, ea6h time he told Florrie he was 
going out to meet the mistress, went to see, in his murderer’s 
fearsomeness, that all was still well. After Florence had gone 
to her room he went out again and covered the body with 
earth. Next day he caused more cartloads of soil to be tipped 
in until the ditch was filled in completely. Afterwards he 
planted trees upon the spot. 

In both accounts he declares that he knelt and kissed the 
dead face again and again, and this is quite likely. Patrick 
Mahon, after battering a servant girl who had discovered him 
robbing the house, almost to death, covered her face with 
kisses. Deep down many apparently diverse emotions have 
the same spring, and in that fact consists the danger of all 
stirring of the deeps. Nothing availed to save Dougal, and 
50 



Introduction. 


it is some consolation to those unregenerate enough amongst 
us to feel satisfaction that one who has caused atrocious 
suffering should suffer in his turn, that Dougal had a horror 
of death for himself, though he met it stoically enough. 

He remains an example of the typical criminal in that he 
is the perfect mixture of cleverness and idiocy. In the 
Mental Deficiency Act of 1913 persons such as Dougal are 
defined as — Persons who from an early age display some 
permanent mental defect, coupled with strong vicious and 
criminal propensities, on which punishment has had little 
or no deterrent effect/" Dougal showed the two symptoms 
of a moral imbecile, astute as he appeared. He was entirely 
lacking in moral sense, and had not the cleverness, as fortu- 
nately n'o one has, completely to cover up the lack. Dr. 
Mercier has named wisdom "" as the intellectual quality 
that guides and governs the higher and more comprehensive 
phase of conduct, that regulates the main business of life — 
an adaptation of circumstances that teaches us how to act so 
that in the long run and on balance our lives will be suc- 
cessful."" And, speaking of those, who, like Dougal, are 
lacking in this ^'wisdom,"" Dr. Mercier says: However 

astute, clever, dexterous, intelligent, his shifts and dodges 
and stratagems and tricks may be, he is always a failure in 
the long run. He may succeed in his immediate object. 
. . . His devious path soon leads him round into 

disaster; and usually the disaster lies so plain before him 
that we wonder how a mat? so superficially clever should be 
beneath the surface such a fool. ... He takes the most 
careful measures against detection by one method, and lays 
himself open to certain and speedy detection by another 
method. ... He has plenty of intelligence, but little or 
no wisdom. He is a clever fool-"" In these words of Dr. 
Mercier’s we see all the contradictions of DougaPe conduct 
made plain. 

It was this lack of wisdom that led Dougal to the gallows on 
the morning of 8th July, 1903. It is officially reported that 
murderers meet their doom with composure, but in this case 
it really seems to have been true. Chelmsford Prison is built 
like the half of a wheel, or like a fan ; that is to say, 
corridors radiate out from a hall, which is the hub. The con- 

61 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

demned cell lies to the right of this hub; it is opposite the 
padded cells, and is a roomy apartment with two windows 
of thick ribbed glass which only admit of a dirty sort of day- 
light. Nowadays the condemned cell is so placed that it is 
only a few steps to the scaffold, and all is over in a few 
seconds from the time the hangman enters the cell. But on 
that morning in July Dougal had to be taken across one 
corridor, down another, through a door which had to be 
opened and closed behind him, down another little stretch of 
passage, through another door which had to be opened and 
closed behind him, and across a section of courtyard. 

It was a fine, sunny morning as Dougal, bare-headed and 
bare-throated, took that last brief walk in the open air. 
Away to his left he could see the great gates of the prison 
which were never to open for him again. The execution 
shed is small at Chelmsford, and the chaplain had to stand 
on one side of the drop, and two warders, standing on planks, 
were ready in case Dougal needed support, just before the 
lever was pulled. The executioner, Billington, had his hand 
upon the lever when the chaplain bent forward towards 
Dougal, who could not see him, for already the white cap 
had been drawn over his face. Twice the chaplain asked 
Dougal : “ Are you guilty or not guilty? while Billington^s 
hand stayed upon the lever. Dougal half-turned his head in 
the direction of the chaplain^s voice and said Guilty! at 
the moment that the lever was pulled. This action of the 
chaplain’s* was severely criticis^fd both in the Press and in 
Parliament. The German chaplain who had attended Muller, 
the “ train ” murderer, had persisted in a like manner and 
secured a muttered avowal of guilt at the last moment. It 
is a nice theological point how far a minister of God is 
justified in agitating a man during his last moments on earth 
for the sake of his soul, but it must be admitted that, in spite 
of the indignation of the public, such persistence is logical 
enough in view of a chaplain’s beliefs. 

Dougal was buried, according to custom, in the precincts of 
the prison. The body of his victim lies in Saffron Walden 
cemetery; above it is a cross of white marble ornamented 


See Appendix XIY. 
52 



Introduction. 


with a carved bas-relief taken from an early and very 
characteristic painting by Miss Holland herself; it represents 
a very feminine-looking angel gathering the figure of a young 
girl to her bosom; the inscription on the cross runs as 
follows : In sympathetic memory of Camille Cecile Holland, 
of Maida Vale, London, who died at Clavering under distress- 
ing circumstances on the 19th May, 1899, aged 56 years. 
'Nunc demum reqmescat in paceJ^ Miss Holland herself would 
surely have approved of the delicacy, if not of the grammar, 
of that well-chosen phrase — “ under distressing circum- 
stances/^ 

Little Jacko was taken home by Mrs. Wisken and lived the 
rest of his days with her, the object of admiring curiosity. 
And now he stands, stuffed and in a glass case, on a side 
table, in the parlour where Miss Holland used to listen for 
the sound of Dougaks bicycle bell. 



Leading Dates in the Samuel Herbert Dougal Case, 


1846 

1866, March 
1869, March 
1880, June 
August 
October 
1885-86 

1887, March 
1887 


1888 

1889 


1892, August 

1894, August 
November 

December 

1895, February 


April 

1896, January 

February 

December 

1897-98 

1898, September 


Samuel Herbert Dougal born 

6 Enlisted in Royal Engineers. 

8 Married Miss Griffiths. 

27 Wife dies at Halifax, N.S 

4 Dougal marries Marie Boyd. 

6 Second wife dies at Halifax, N.S. 

Dougal takes Hahfax girl to England, and she has a child 
by him ; she leaves him and returns home with child. 

Dougal retires from the Army with pension and medal. 

Dougal joins Messrs- Defries &; Son, of Houndsditch, as a 
traveller in glass and cutlery. Lives with a widow 
who leaves him on account of his cruelty, taking 
with her the two children of the connection. 

Dougal employed as storekeeper on the private training 
ship ‘‘Mercury.” 

Steward of Stroud Green Conservative Club. 

Steward of the Southend Conservative Club. Becomes a 
Freemason. 

Dougal acquitted of charge of arson at St. Albans. 

7 Dougal marries third wife in Ireland. 

Dougal meets Miss Booty in London. 

8 Dougal and Miss Booty at the North End House, 

Watlington. 

20 Dougal brings his wife and family to North End House. 

16 Miss Booty leaves Dougal. 

23 Miss Booty having given Dougal into custody on the 
charge of larceny, he is committed for trial at the 
Oxford Quarter Session. 

9 Dougal acquitted of larceny. 

13 Dougal convicted of forgery and sentenced to twelve 
months’ hard labour. 

3 Dougal admitted into Cane Hill Lunatic Asylum. 

8 Dougal discharged from Cane Hill Asylum. 

Dougal works for his brother at Biggin Hill, Kent. 

Dougal first meets Miss Holland. 

Miss Holland last seen at her bank. 


66 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 


1898, November 

7 

Miss Holland calls on a house agent at Brighton. 

December 

2 

Dougal takes furnished house at Hassocks, let by the 
same agent 


5 

Miss Holland joins Dougal at Hassocks. 

1899, January 

10 

Miss Holland signs contract for purchase of Moat Farm. 


26 

Dougal and Miss Holland go to Mrs. Wisken’s at 
Saffron Walden* 

March 


Miss Holland gets letter from Edmund Holland and 
replies. 

April 

5 

Miss Holland pays purchase money of Moat Farm. 

S J 

27 

Dougal and Miss Holland leave Mrs. Wisken’s for Moat 
Farm. 

May 

13 

Florence Havies (Blackwell) enters service of Miss 
Holland and Dougal. 

9} 

16 

Dougal tries to enter Florence Blackwell’s bedroom. 

99 

19 

Miss Holland last seen alive. 

9 J 

20 

Florence Havies’ (Blackwell) mother fetches her away. 

J 9 

20 

Mrs. Dougal arrives. 

99 

22 

Renting of Stansted cottage for Mrs. Dougal begins. 

99 

29 

Dougal writes to bank for cheque book. 

June 

2 

Emma Burgess, servant, arrives. 

99 

8 

National Provincial Bank sends Dougal £30 in bank 
notes. 

September 


Dougal sells shares — Great Laxey, Newnes, United 
Alkali. 

October 

14 

Dougal opens account at Birkbeck Bank. 

1900, March 

2 

W rit for specific performance. 

April 

6 

Statement of claimr 

June 

14 

Action settled. 

99 

18 

Authority by Camille C. Holland. 

August 

20 

Conveyance Moat House. 

November 


Sale of Central Uruguay shares. City and West End 
shares. 

1901, September 


Sale of Palace shares, &c. 

December 

9 

|Cate C ran well engaged as servant. 

1902, January 


Mrs Dougal leaves Moat House for the first time. 

April 


Mrs. Dougal leaves Moat House finally. 

May 

9 

Divorce suit commenced. 

August 

1 

Decree niaz (undefended). 

99 

28 

Cheque to J. Heath, £28 15s. 


56 



1902, September 

j) 

December 22 
22 


1903, January 27 
» 30 

„ 31 

February 14 
„ 24 


March 


April 


May 


June 

July 


4 

5 
9 
9 

10 

16 

16 

18 

19 

27 

2 

8 

16 

23 

27 

29 

30 
1 

6 
7 

13 
15 
2 
29 
22 
23 

14 


Leading Dates. 

Kate Cranwell leaves. 

Another servant takes her place. 

Kate Gran well’s child born. 

Dougal opens account at London and County Bank, 
Bishops Stortford. 

Afl&liation order made against Dougal. 

Police report as to rumours. 

King’s Proctor intervenes. 

King’s Proctor’s plea. 

Dougal’s solicitor writes that no answer will be filed. 
Supt. Pryke visits Dougal. 

Dougal withdraws his bank balances, £305 and £300. 
Decree msi rescinded. 

Mr. Holland visits National Provincial Bank. 

Chief constable reports to Director of Public Prosecutions. 
Director authorises warrant to be applied for. 

Warrant for forgery obtained. 

Dougal arrested. 

Bemand. 

Remand — evidence taken. 

Remand 

Remand. 

Remand. 

Remand. 

Body found. 

Post-mortem examination. 

Inquest opened. 

Remand — no evidence. 

Remand. 

Inquest. 

Remand. 

Inquest — verdict. 

Remand. 

Committed by justices. 

Trial opens at Chelmsford. 

Dougal found guilty and sentenced to death. 

Dougal executed. 


57 



THE TRIAL 


WITHIN THE 

SHIRE HALL, CHELMSFORD, 
Essex Summer Assizes, 
MONDAY, 22nd JUNE, 1903. 


Judge — 

Mb. justice WRIGHT. 

Counsel for the Crown — 

Mr. C. F. Gill, K.C. 

Mr. R. F. Geaham-Campbell, and 
Mr. W. J. Geubbe. 

(Instructed by Mr. Pearce on behalf of the Treasury.) 

Counsel fd'h the Defence — 

Mr. George Elliott, 

Mr. Basil Watson, and 
Mr. J. P. Valletta. 

(Instructed by Mr. Arthur Newton.) 

Counsel on behalf of the Eocecutors of the WiU of the late 
Miss Holland and the Next of Kin — 

Mr. E. J. Naldeett. 


59 



First Day — Monday, 22nd June, 1903. 

The Clerk of Arraigns — Samuel Herbert Dougal, you are 
charged in this indictment that on the 19th day of May, 
1899, at Clavering, in the county of Essex, you feloniously, 
wilfully, and of your malice aforethought did kill and murder 
one Camille Cecile Holland. How say you : are you guilty 
or not guilty? 

The Prisoner — Not guilty. 

Opening Speech for the Prosecution. 

Mr. Gill — May it please your lordship, gentlemen of the 
jury, I appear on behalf of the Crown with my learned 
friends Mr. Grubbe and Mr. Graham-Campbell to present 
the facts upon which the prisoner at the bar is indicted for 
the murder of a woman named Camille Cecile Holland on 
the 19th day of May, 1899, at Clavering, in this county, 
whose body, it is alleged by the prosecution, was found there 
on the 27th day of April in this year. I shall have to lay 
the facts in some detail before you in order that you may 
follow the case as it is presented to you. Shortly, the case 
for the Crown is that the deceased woman, who was at that 
time living with the prisoner at a place called the Moat 
Farm, was shot through the head, and her body was buried 
in the ditch, where it was found close to the house. The 
deceased in 1899 was fifty-six years of age. She had lived 
for some years with her aunt at Kilburn. After the aunt’s 
death in 1893 she lived at different places, managing her own 
affairs. She was a lady of some means, her property being 
worth about ^66000 or ^07000. She invested her money 
through brokers (Messrs. W. H. Hart i Co.), and she also 
had a bank account at the Piccadilly branch of the National 
and Provincial Bank of England. She was also possessed of 
a considerable quantity of furniture and articles of jewellery. 
After her aunt’s death she stayed, among other places, at 37 
Elgin Crescent, Bayswater, a boarding-house kept by Mrs. 

61 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

Mr GiU 

Pollock. While here a matter occurred to which I must call 
your attention, as it will have an important bearing on the 
question of the identity of the body. In January, 1897, 
Miss Holland had a pair of boots made for her by a boot- 
maker named Mold, whom she had employed before that date. 
These boots were lined with curly lamb’s wool. Miss Holland 
was a lady with an ezceptionally small foot. Mr. Mold will 
describe to you the particulars he t'ook for the purpose of 
making these boots; he has in his possession the lasts upon 
which the boots were made, and his name was stamped upon 
them. I draw your attention to this fact, because upon the 
question of identity it will be proved to you on the part 
of the prosecution that the boots found on the body were the 
boots which Mr. Mold made in 1897. I suggest to you it 
is beyond all possible question that Mr. Mold is in a position 
to identify the boots. 

Whilst Miss Holland was staying at 37 Elgin Crescent she 
employed a Miss Whiting to do certain work for her with 
regard t'o her dresses. Miss Whiting will tell you that in 
1898 she made some alterations to the dress found on the body 
which enable her to identify it. The prisoner is first known 
to have been with Miss Holland while she was staying at 
Elgin Crescent. The fact of his visiting her there will be 
spoken to by Mrs. Pollock (the landlady) and Miss Whiting. 

In December, 1898, Miss Holland left 37 Elgin Crescent 
and went to live with the prisoner at Parkmore, Hassocks, 
near Brighton, which had been taken by him for a period 
of two months. It appears that in January, 1899, a cheque 
was drawn in favour of the prisoner for £6 for four weeks’ 
rent at 30s. a week. It will also be shown that in December 
the prisoner was in communication with Messrs. Rutter, land 
agents, with regard to the purchase of Moat Farm, which 
at that time was called Coldhams, and was in the market, 
and that he was also in communication with Mrs. Savill and 
her son, who were interested in the sale. These negotiations 
resulted in the sum of £1550 being accepted as the purchase 
price of the property. In the meantime the deceased woman 
was taking the necessary steps to be in a position to pay this 
money by dealing with a list 'of securities she then had at 
the bank, which, it may be presumed, the prisoner had an 

62 



Mr. C. F. Gill, K.C. 

{Photo hy Elliott F>il) 




opening Speech for Prosecution. 

Mr GiU 

opportunity of seeing. The contract for the sale of the 
farm was prepared in the first instance by Messrs. Rutter 
in the name of the prisoner, who told them that he had no 
money of his own, but that he was engaged to a lady who 
was going to provide the money to pay for the farm. Sub- 
sequently Miss Holland herself saw Messrs. Rutter, and the 
first contract was torn up and another was made out in the 
name of Miss Holland. The prisoner wrote to Mrs. Savill, 
expressing a wish to go and live somewhere near to the farm 
until he could take possession, and as the result of some 
communications the prisoner and Miss Holland went to live 
with a Mrs Wisken at 4 Market Row, Safiron Walden, where 
they had a bedroom and a sitting-room. Mrs. Wisken will 
tell you that they lived there as man and wife. The first 
night the prisoner told Mrs. Wisken that if any letters came 
in the name of Miss Holland she was to take them in as they 
would be ‘‘ all right. We shall find that the identity of 
the deceased woman was continued all through as far as her 
business relations were concerned. She continued to com- 
municate with her bankers in the name of Miss Holland, 
and she was doing her own business all through up to 19th 
May, 1899. 

The prisoner and Miss Holland lived at Mrs. Wisken's for 
nearly two months. Mrs. Wisken frequently saw the deceased 
lady, and helped to dress and undress her. Mrs. Wisken was 
a dressmaker, and did some work for Miss Holland, and she 
can speak positively to sonpie articles of dress that Miss 
Holland was wearing at that time. While Miss Holland was 
staying at Mrs Wisken's a little daughter of one of her 
nephews died. The nephew wrote to her regarding that 
event and received an answer. This was in the end of 
March, 1899, and that letter was the last received by any 
relative of Miss Holland from that lady. 

The day for the completion of the purchase of the farm 
arrived, and we find that on 22nd April £1360 was drawn 
from the account of Miss Holland, which, with £200 pre- 
viously paid on deposit, completed the purchase. £300 was 
paid for the stock on the farm. Possession was given imme- 
diately, and on 27th April Miss Holland and the prisoner 
went to live at the farm. The farm is a very isolated one^ 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

Mr Gill 

the nearest house being half a mile away and the nearest 
railway station 3 miles away. Miss Holland appears to 
have at once informed her bankers of her new address. When 
the prisoner and Miss Holland had been in occupation of the 
farm for about a week a girl named Florence Blackwell was 
engaged as a servant on 9th May. No one else lived at the 
place; the men engaged on the farm left at 5 or 5.30 each 
evening. The prisoner and Miss Holland lived there as man 
and wife, and occupied a room on the first floor of the house. 
A ditch which used to drain the farmyard into a smaller 
moat was partly filled up before the prisoner took possession, 
and soon after he entered into occupation he expressed his 
intention 'of filling it up entirely. There can be no doubt 
that in the month of May of that year the process of filling 
up this ditch was being carried out. 

The servant, Florence Blackwell, went to live at the farm 
on 13th May. On the following morning the prisoner 
attempted to kiss her, and in consequence she made a com- 
plaint to Miss Holland. On Tuesday night, 16th May, the 
girl went upstairs t'o bed about nine o’clock and Miss Holland 
went upstairs about the same time to the room she (Miss 
Holland) occupied. When the servant had been in her room 
a few minutes the prisoner went to her door and called her 
by her name two or three times in a low voice. She raised 
an alarm, and he tried to force the door open, but she pre- 
vented him. Miss Holland came, and the girl seems to have 
fainted. When she came roun«^ Miss Holland took her into 
the room where the prisoner was; he pretended to be asleep. 
Something was said, and then Miss Holland and the girl 
went to another room and slept together that night and on 
the two nights following, 17th and 18th May. From this 
fact you, gentlemen, can imagine the position of what was 
taking place at the farm. 

The most important date in the case is 19th May, because 
that is the day when Miss Holland was last seen alive. .On 
the evening of that day Miss Holland went to the girl Florence 
Blackwell, who was in the kitchen, and made a communica- 
tion to her. Miss Holland was fully dressed, ready to go 
out. She had no luggage with her at the time. She joined 
the prisoner, who was with a pony and trap outside the house, 
64 



opening Speech for Prosecution. 

Mr GUI 

and the prisoner drove off. As they drove away Miss Holland 
said, '' Good-bye, Florrie, I shan't be long " I shall submit, 
gentlemen, that the prisoner, having driven Miss Holland 
away from the house, shot her with a revolver, holding the 
weapon close to her head, the bullet passing in at one side 
of her head and lodging under the scalp on the other side, 
where it was found. Having shot her, I shall also submit 
that the prisoner took her body and threw it into the grave 
which was ready for it — ^the ditch which was being filled in — 
clothed as the body was with the dress, boots, stockings, and 
underclothing It was quite obvious that the body was thrown 
into the ditch from the position in which it was found. 
Miss Holland was 5 feet 3, or 6 feet 4, in height, of slight 
build, and the prisoner was a man of considerable physical 
power. I suggest to you, gentlemen, that the prisoner shot 
the deceased woman as they were driving, having possibly 
distracted her attention for a moment while he fired. The 
exact way the murder was done, however, is a matter that 
you need not consider, because the question is not exactly 
how it was committed, but whether the woman was murdered 
on that night, and whether there was any person who had 
the opportunity or the motive to do it except the prisoner. 
The fact that Miss Holland was murdered as I have described 
is bey'ond the possibility of question; the fact that her body 
was disposed of immediately after the act follows from the 
medical evidence which will be called. 

The prisoner returned to "Mie house at 8.30, when the 
girl at once asked where her mistress was. He replied that 
she had gone to London, and that he was shortly going to meet 
her and bring her back As a fact, any one leaving the 
Moat Farm after 6.30 in the evening could not possibly reach 
Liverpool Street before 10.56, and so it would have been 
impossible for her to have returned that night. The prisoner 
went out two or three times that night saying that he was 
going to meet '' the mistress," and he returned each time 
saying that she had not come. At 12.50 he told the girl 
that, as the mistress had not come, she had better go to bed. 
During the time that he was going in and out that night he 
had opportunities of being on the spot where the body was 
concealed by the person who in fact committed the murder. 

S’ 65 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

Mr Gill 

The girl went to the spare bedroom, and remained there 
dressed all night. When she came downstairs at seven 
clock next morning she found that the prisoner had pre- 
pared breakfast. He told her that he had received a letter 
from Mrs. Dougal/^ stating that she was going for a short 
holiday, and that she would send a friend down That 
statement, like statement with regard to the train, must 
of necessity have been an untrue one If Miss Holland had 
gone to London that night she would not have reached London 
in time to have posted a letter which would reach the Moat 
Farm by seven o’clock the next morning The prisoner knew 
that some statement must be made with regard to the dis- 
appearance of the lady, and he also seems to have been pre- 
paring at the same time for the advent of another woman 
who was to appear on the scene. 

About this time the prisoner took steps to engage a small 
house at Stansted, a village close by, which it appears was 
occupied for a time by his actual wife, who came on the 
scene at the Moat Farm a few days after 19th May.* The 
servant at the farm wrote to her mother about the prisoner’s 
conduct, and the mother arrived at the farm on the morning 
of 20th May. She complained to the prisoner of his conduct 
towards her daughter, and claimed a month’s wages and 
travelling expenses for herself and her daughter. He at 
once placed the money on the table and then left the house. 
Afterwards the servant and her mother also left, leaving the 
house unoccupied for the tim# being. A little later another 
woman, who was described by the prisoner as his widowed 
daughter, but who was really his wife, arrived and lived 
with the prisoner there for some considerable time. 

From 19th May that year no one saw Miss Holland alive, 
but her business affairs went on as if she were alive. Her 
brokers and bankei's only knew of her address as the Moat 
Farm. From time to time her shares were sold, the money 
was paid into her account at the bank, and money was drawn 
from her account and placed to the prisoner’s account at the 
Birkbeck Bank. He took no steps with regard to Mies 


*In point of fact, Mrs. Dougal arrived at the Moat Farm on the 
afternoon of Saturday, 20th May. — E d. 

66 



Opening Speech for Prosecution. 

Mr Gill 

Holland’s disappearance, but right down to 1902 her affairs 
went On as if she were taking an active interest in the affairs 
of life. 

Early this year, 1903, when the prisoner’s wife had left 
him, inquiries were commenced with regard to several matters, 
and on 4th March the prisoner was interviewed by Super- 
intendent Pryke. At the time this interview took place the 
prisoner had £300 at the Birkbeck Bank and £300 on deposit 
at the London and County Bank at Bishop’s Stortford On 
the morning of 5th March he withdrew the whole of this 
money with the exception of a few shillings, both from the 
Birkbeck Bank and the London and County Bank. It is 
quite evident that the prisoner was anxious to get into his 
tangible possession all the money which was standing to his 
account Having withdrawn this money in notes, it appears 
that he was anxious to get rid of the larger notes for smaller 
ones, the latter being less difficult to get rid of, and he no 
doubt believing that by changing the notes he would be 
breaking the trace of them. On 10th March he changed £100 
worth of larger notes into notes of smaller denomination. 
Shortly after that he was found to be leaving Moat Farm 
with luggage that could be easily and quickly packed. 
Amongst that luggage there were several articles of men’s 
and women’s clothing, jewellery, &c. These goods were left 
at the Central Hotel, London, and in the cloakroom at Liver- 
pool Street. At that time inquiries were being pursued by 
the police, with the result tl%at on or about 13th or 14th 
March observation was being kept on the farm, but no process 
was served. When the prisoner was arrested eighty-three 
£5 notes were found on him, and eight £10 notes, besides 
a quantity of valuables, watches, rings, &c., which could be 
conveniently carried about. 

Counsel went on to describe the finding of the body in a 
ditch at the Moat Farm, and in conclusion he submitted 
that the case against the prisoner was established — ^that the 
prisoner was guilty of the murder of Miss Holland, and that 
the evidence would sustain the statement he had made. 


67 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

Evidence for the Prosecution. 

Eenest Legrakd Holland, examined by Mr. Grubbe — I 
am a civil servant employed at Somerset House. Miss Camille 
Cecile Holland was my aunt; I am a son of an only brother, 
and I have one brother and one sister. My father died some 
years ago. Miss Holland formerly resided at Liverpool with 
her aunt, Sarah Ann Holland. Both came to London and 
resided at Kilburn Priory. Miss Holland's aunt died in 
1893 About the time my aunt was possessed of £6000 
capital, as far as I know, which she inherited from her aunt 
and an uncle named Thomas ; she also had .some furniture and 
jewellery. I knew her well, and when my father died she 
was almost a mother to me. When at school I used to spend 
some of my holidays with my aunt, and up to 1893 I saw a 
good deal of her. That was the last I saw her alive. She 
would be about sixty years old now or a little older. She 
was a fairly good business woman and gave personal attention 
to her business affairs, and was very careful about money 
matters. She had a banking account at the National Pro- 
vincial Bank. I knew nothing t>f Samuel Herbert Dougal, 
the prisoner, or of my aunt's acquaintance with him. On 
9th March I went to the National Provincial Bank apd was 
shown a cheque. 

Mr. Justice Wright — How does that affect this case? 

Mr. Gill — I propose to show that the prisoner went on 
dealing with her property after Miss Holland’s death. The 
witness, when he saw the cheque, said that it was a forgery, 
and I propose to show why it was that the prisoner was 
arrested. 

Mr. Justice Wright — Do you propose to prove another 
ofience which is not material to the present charge ? 

Mr. Gill — I propose to tell the story of the case which I 
consider necessary. It is impossible to tell that story without 
going into evidence with regard to this lady's conduct of 
affairs. 

Mr. Justice Wright — It may be unfair to the prisoner if 
charges not material to the murder case are introduced. 

B(cam%nat%on continued — Since the arrest of the prisoner I 
have visited the Moat House Farm, and I identify a grand 



Evidence for the Prosecution. 

Ernest L. Holland 

piano as being the property of my aunt, also several pictures 
and a number of books, about twenty volumes. Some of the 
pictures were painted and signed by my aunt, and some of 
the books had her aunt's name, S. A. Holland, stamped in 
gold on them. I als'o identified an electro-plated revolving 
dish with S. A. H. on it, and a number of silver forks and 
spoons marked H. and S A. H., and a lot of table linen 
sheets and blankets marked C. C. Holland, S. A. Holland, 
and S. A. H. I saw a quantity of music bearing my aunt's 
name in her own handwriting, which I know well. There 
was a prayer-book stamped S. A. Holland in gold on the 
outside I noticed the top of a silver biscuit dish and a 
silver salver and a medicine chest all belonging to my 
aunt, and some photographs of Indian scenes which my aunt 
greatly prized I saw the medallion (produced) hanging 
up on the wall in the house at Moat Farm. I had seen that 
before at my aunt's houses in London and in Liverpool ; it 
is a representation of a grandfather of Miss Holland. She 
was extremely proud of it, and unlikely to part with it 
willingly. The ring produced I have seen my aunt wearing 
often. The cross produced is my aunt's property. I have 
seen both my aunt and her aunt wearing it. The produced 
photo marked D2 is one of my Aunt Camille taken years 
ago, the photo marked D3 is a photo of my aunt, an enlarge- 
ment of the other. I have also seen a die in the possession 
of the police marked C. C. H. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Elliott — My aunt was a woman 
who would not like to be interfered with in the management 
of her own affairs. The goods at the farm were in every- 
day use, just as though she might have been there herself. 
My aunt had her furniture and effects stored in London, anci 
I have heard that when she went to the Moat Farm she had 
her furniture removed there, I saw it at the Moat Farm 
put about without any concealment, and I also saw other 
furniture and effects which I do not identify as my aunt's. 
I identified all I could remember with absolute certainty. 

I am the person who on 16th March took the responsibility 
of accusing the prisoner of forgery by swearing an informa- 
tion at this Court. I am one of the next-of-kin of my aunt. 

69 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

Ernest L. Holland 

Inspector Mar den spoke to me first about the prisoner on a 
Saturday I had not seen Superintendent Pryke. 

I have received letters from my aunt, the last in 1896. I 
have received hundreds from her^ I have not kept any I 
have seen a letter purporting to be from my aunt subse- 
quently, but since these proceedings were commenced; but 
prior to Inspector Harden coming, I had not seen my aunt's 
handwriting for about seven years. I knew her bankers, the 
National Provincial Bank, were in the habit of receiving a 
number of letters and cheques from her, and I observe that 
the cheque marked D1 was honoured by her bank in August. 

I saw it first at the bank on the Monday, I think, after 
Inspector Harden came to see me I had seen -.no other 
police officer. He had told me his inquiries and suspicions. 
At the first interview he stayed about half an hour. A 
gentleman at the bank showed it to me. It was after hearing 
about the inspector's inquiries I at once pronounced it to be 
a forgery. The cheque was brought out to me and shown to 
me singly, not with others. 

Be-exarmned — saw a letter from my aunt before these 
proceedings were commenced since receiving one from her; 
I saw one my brother had subsequently to any I received. 
My brother lost a child in March, 1899. I did not see any 
letter my brother may have received from my aunt at that 
time. When I saw the cheque at the bank I was shown other 
documents which I believe to be genuine. When I stated in 
cross-examination that I had n^t seen my aunt's handwriting 
for about seven years I meant that I had not received a letter 
myself from her during that period. 

Edmund George Holland, examined by Mr. Grubbe — I 
am a nephew of the deceased Miss Holland and brother to the 
last witness I saw my aunt in September, 1898, in London. 
I wrote to her in January, 1899. I had heard from her in 
the previous December, and in consequence of that letter my 
wife went to meet her. I then had a dog in my possession 
belonging to the deceased. In March, 1899, I wrote to my 
aunt about a child that I had ill, and I received a reply. She 
replied from Market Row, Safiron Walden " That was the 
last time I heard from her. 

70 



Evidence for the Prosecution. 

Mrs F. Pollock 

Mrs. Florence Pollock, examined by Mr. Gill — I am a 
widow residing at 37 Elgin Crescent, Bayswater, London. 
I knew Miss Camille C. Holland ; she lived with me as a 
paying guest from I7th June, 1898, and left on 9th December 
following. She had very few visitors, but was out a great 
deal. A gentleman called on two occasions, and on one 
occasion had tea. This would be about a fortnight before 
she left. She spoke of the gentleman as the captain; she 
never told me his name. 

Is he a man you can recognise? — ^Yes. 

Do you see him in the Court? — (Looking straight at the 
jury-box) Yes, I see him among those gentlemen over there. 

Will you kindly remove your veil, madam? — ^Yes. Oh, 
yes, now I can see him (pointing to same gentleman). 

Will you kindly listen to me for a moment, madam. Look 
slowly round the Court again? — ^Yes, there is the gentleman 
(pointing to the Shire Hall keeper) 

Mr. Elliott — I don^t know if I ought to interfere, but I 
understand this lady has identified a gentleman on the other 
side of the Court. 

Mr. Gill — Will you do what I ask, madam, and look 
around the Court slowly, please. 

The Witness (pointing to the prisoner in the dock) — 
That is the man sitting there. 

Examination continued — ^When she left her luggage was 
sent on addressed to c/o Captain MacDougal, and, I believe, 
sent to Brighton. There wej*e two large trunks ; there might 
have been more. Some letters came through the post 
addressed to Miss Holland after she left, and in consequence 
of directions from Miss Holland I readdressed them care of 
National Provincial Bank, Piccadilly. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Elliott — ^When would this be? — 
About four years ago. 

Are you quite sure that the prisoner is the person who 
called at your house? — ^Yes, I am quite positive. It made a 
great impression on me. 

Have you seen the portrait of the prisoner in the papers? 
— I may perhaps have seen it. 

Do you say that this impression has remained with you 

71 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

Mrs F. Pollock 

all these four years? — ^Yes. I feel sure he is the man. I 
looked all round the Court when I came in, and I recognised 
the prisoner when I saw him. 

Annie Whiting, examined by Mr. Gill — I reside at 5 
Basing Road, Westbourne Park, London In 1898 I knew 
Miss Holland, who was then residing at 37 Elgin Crescent. 
About June m that year Miss Holland employed me t'o do 
some dressmaking, including repairs and altering her dress 
I relined the skirt produced. I remember Miss Holland 
having a skirt dyed ; it was coarse and similar to the one 
produced. Miss Holland often had her skirts altered into 
petticoats. I remember a man coming to see Miss Holland 
at 37 Elgin Crescent. 

Look round the Court and see if you can see him here ? — My 
eyes are very bad. That's the man (pointing to prisoner). 

Cross-examined by Mr. Elliott — I recognise the cloth of 
the skirt produced; I identify it, as it is a strange cloth. 
There is no lining, and I cannot identify it by any lining 
or stitching. I believe the cloth has been dyed, but I could 
not say it positively. The cloth is peculiar; it is not sold 
now, and it was old-fashioned four years ago. I know it is 
the stuS; it is half cotton and half wool; I cannot say where 
it was made. It might be homespun or imitation sacking 
cloth. It is a piece of old-fashioned stuff like some of which 
I made a skirt of for Miss Holland. 

Mr. Grubbe — ^Annie Louise Waddington is unable to attend 
the Court, owing to her having undergone an operation. I 
propose to read her evidence. 

Mr. Justice Wright — The evidence does not appear to be 
very material. 

Mr. Gill — I am afraid I must press for the admission of 
the deposition. 

Dr. Sprague, examined by Mr. Gill — Miss Waddington 
underwent an operation to her knee on Thursday, and is 
now confined in Chelsea Hospital 

Detective-Inspector Martin, examined by Mr. Gill — Miss 
Waddington made her deposition in the presence of the 
prisoner. 

72 



Evidence for the Prosecution. 

Annie L. Waddinston 

Annie Louise Waddington, sworn, states — reside at 7 
Chesterfield Street, London. In the latter part of the year 
1898 I was living with Mr. and Mrs. Crone at Parkmoor 
House, Hassocks, near Brighton, and I remember the prisoner 
and a lady coming and taking the house furnished from 
Mrs. Crone. The signature as witness to the agieement pro- 
duced is in my handwriting, and I remember signing it as 
witness. The lady was, I should say, between fifty and sixty, 
and resembled the photograph (D3). 

Ltsaght John Rutter, examined by Mr. Gill — am a 
member of the firm of Messrs. Rutter, 10 Norfolk Street, 
Strand, London. At the end of the year 1898 the prisoner 
called upon me. He was then residing at Parkmoor, Has- 
socks, near Brighton. He negotiated with us for the pur- 
chase of Coldhams Farm, Essex. He was alone when he first 
came. He said he was acting for a lady, a Miss Holland, 
who, he said, he was about to marry. He said he had no 
means, and that the lady was finding the money. I had a 
number of interviews and correspondence, and ultimately a 
price was fixed upon, which was £1550. I sent in January, 
1899, a contract for signature; we afterwards got it back. 
I have searched for the accompanying letter, but cannot find 
it; it was accompanied by a cheque for £200, the deposit, 
which was signed by Miss Holland. I cannot remember who 
signed the letter. A day or two after Miss Holland called 
at our office and made a communication, and in consequence 
I altered the contract in her ^ presence, and a fresh one was 
made out in her name as purchaser, and she signed it, and 
I tore up the previous contiact which was in DougaTs name. 
This was in January, 1899. There was considerable delay 
in the completion of the purchase, and there was a valua- 
tion to be made of the stock, which was about £280 to 
£290, payable to Mr. Savill and Sir William Foster. Sub- 
sequently to the payment of the deposit we received the two 
letters produced, dated 14:th and 18th April respectively, 
and marked D98 and D99, addressed to Messrs. Rutter, 
and purporting to be signed by Miss Holland, urging early 
completion of the business. We afterwards received the 
letter produced, marked D69, purporting to be signed by the 

73 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

Lysaght J. Rutter 

prisoner. I afterwards saw the prisoner and Miss Holland 
at the Moat Farm. In the early part of 1901 I received a 
letter from the prisoner, which I have searched for, but have 
failed to find, offering the Moat Farm for sale. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Elliott — It was at the end of 
1898 that the prisoner commenced negotiations about the 
purchase of the farm, and there was considerable correspon- 
dence. I produce copies of the correspondence. The whole 
of the negotiations respecting the purchase were with the 
prisoner. The first letter addressed to Holland was on 15th 
March, 1899; it is addressed to C. Holland, Esq.,^’ as are 
several other letters. I am sure a lady calling herself Miss 
Holland called at our office. The reason why Miss Holland 
was more than once addressed as C. Holland, Esq., was that 
the letters were written, not by me, but by the correspon- 
dence clerk. I prepared both contracts. Drafts were made, 
and handed over with all the papers on 28th November, 
1899, to Mr. Savill. We have no record of the day on which 
Miss Holland called; the interview might have been entered 
in my diary, which would be destroyed after two years. I 
agree that the contract must have been made in the early 
days of January, 1899. The second contract, with the draft, 
was handed to Mr. Savill, and we have been unable to get 
it back. I kept no note of the conversation I had with the 
prisoner at the first interview. I asked the prisoner whether 
he had means and whether he was the purchaser, as it was 
most important to know whether^ the purchaser had the means 
to complete. He said Miss Holland had the means and was 
the purchaser, and that was the end of the conversation at 
that time. The prisoner continued the negotiations. I can- 
not say exactly when Miss Holland called; it was some time 
in January, and I understood that she was living at Hassocks. 
It was early in April, 1899, that I saw the prisoner and 
Miss Holland at the farm. The purchase was not completed, 
and they had not taken possession. I never saw them after 
they did so. Miss Holland appeared to be a woman who 
was quite capable of taking care of her own interests. 

Mrs. Henrietta Wisken, examined by Mr. Gill — I reside 
at 4 Market Eow, Saffron Walden. I know the prisoner 
74 



Evidence for the Prosecution. 

Mrs H. Wisken 

well. He came on 26th January, 1899, with a lady to lodge 
in my house, and stayed with me until 27th April, 1899. 
They were introduced to me by Miss Parnwell. They 
occupied one bedroom and a sitting room, and I knew them 
as Mr and Mrs. Dougal. After 27th April, 1899, they went 
to live at Coldhams Farm, Clavering, which he renamed 
Moat House Farm while staying with me The photographs 
produced, marked D2 and D3, are photographs of the lady 
passing as Mrs. Dougal. On the first night they were at my 
house the prisoner came downstairs and said to me that if 
there should be a letter addressed to Miss C. C. Holland 
would I take it in, it would be all right. On the following 
morning a letter arrived so addressed, and I took it up and 
put it under the door of their bedroom During the time 

they stayed there a number of other letters, some of which 

were registered, came addressed to Miss C. C. Holland, which 

1 gave to the lady passing as Mrs. Dougal. The lady I knew 
as Mrs. Dougal when dressed looked about fifty years of age, 
but when in bed ten or fifteen years older. She had golden 
hair, grey or blue eyes, powdeied face She was about 5 feet 

2 or 3 inches in height, and had a good figure for an aged 

person. She had very small feet, and wore size 2 in boots, 

also very small hands. She had a very nice set of teeth. 

She was well educated, and appeared to be a lady. She told 
me Mr. Dougal was a land agent. She also told me she had 
bought Coldhams with her own money, as her husband had 
none. She said she was borm in India. Miss Holland’s linen 
was marked C. C. Holland.” She had a small brown and 
white dog called Jacko,” which came back to my house 
about sixteen months after they left me. I wrote and told 
the prisoner about it, and he came for it. I have never seen 
the lady since they left me. She promised me faithfully she 
would come and see me. In fact, she wanted me and 
my daughter to go with her as housekeepers. Just before 
going to the farm Mrs. Dougal advertised for a servant in 
the Walden Weekly News. She engaged a young woman, 
aged twenty, named Lydia Faithfull, who, I believe, came 
from Cambridge. About a week after the Dougals had gone 
to live at Moat Farm a brown paper parcel came to my house 

75 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

Mrs H. Wisken 

addressed to Lydia Faithfully c/o Mrs. Wisken, 4 Market 
Row, Saffron Walden I never saw Lydia Faithfull. The 
advertisement in the paper requested replies to be addressed 
to my house. 

On 28th April I went to the Moat Farm, Clavering, and 
Sergeant Scott pointed out to me the body of the deceased, 
which was clothed. Before seeing it I gave a description of 
certain clothing to Sergeant Scott. I then examined the 
clothing which Sergeant Scott has produced to-day. I have 
seen the portion of the skirt produced, and I identify it as 
part of the dress of Miss Holland, to whom I have referred; 
it has two rows of braid and a binding at the bottom. I 
put the braid and binding on. I am a dressmaker, and I 
identify it as my work; it is a black serge skirt. I saw a 
good deal of Miss Holland, and helped her to dress. I had 
every opportunity of seeing her clothes. 

Mr Justice Wright — I understand, Mr. Gill, that you 
propose to call evidence in regard to the clotEes found on 
the body? 

Mr. Gill — Yes, my lord, I am taking the evidence of this 
witness now to avoid recalling her. 

Examination continued — The portion of the bodice is also 
serge trimmed with silk. There is a silk frill round the 
collar and on the revers, I put similar silk on the sleeve 
produced, and Miss Holland wore a similar bodice which I 
identify by the trimming on the collar and revers. I identify 
the cuff produced as part of -the bodice produced; it is 
trimmed with similar silk to the rest. I put the frill round 
the cuff and the piece of the trimming which I cut out and 
put on as it now appears. I relined the pocket in the bodice, 
and, as far as I can say, the lining of the bodice is the 
same as when I relined the pocket. Miss Holland when stay- 
ing at my house wore a similar frame for her hair as the 
one produced, I helped her to dress her hair with a similar 
one. She also used a tortoiseshell pin similar to the one 
produced, also a comb similar to the one produced. Miss 
Holland also wore a bustle or pad similar to the one produced. 

The underclothing produced is similar to that worn by 
Miss Holland. It is within my knowledge that Miss Holland 
76 



Evidence for the Prosecution. 

Mrs H Wisken 

wore two woollen vests similar to those found on the body. I 
had helped Miss Holland to dress on several occasions when 
she was with me. Miss Holland wore stays similar to the 
portions produced. I observe a hook inside ^ she had a similar 
one on her stays to attach to her bloomers. Miss Holland 
wore similar boots to the parts produced ; she had a tip to 
her boots similar to the one produced. Inspector Marden 
has produced to me a trunk similar to one Miss Holland had. 
In the trunk was the produced cape, which I put on Miss 
Holland when she left my h'ouse. Inspector Marden has also 
produced a portmanteau similar to one Miss Holland had 
when at my house. She also wore an elastic belt similar to 
the portions of the one produced. Miss Holland wore com- 
binations 

Cross-examined by Mr. Elliott — Miss Holland promised 
to come and see me when she left, but she never did so, nor 
did I go to the Moat Farm to see her. 

How long was she with you in Market Eow? — She was with 
me for two months. 

I suppose since she left you in April, 1899, you have had 
a number of other persons staying with you? — ^Yes, I have 
had several ladies lodging with me. 

And I suppose you have also been busy with your dress- 
making business? — ^Yes. 

Am I not right in thinking that Miss Holland had really 
passed from your mind? — No, I have thought about her a 
great many times, as I thought her a very nice lady. 

Have you not had other nice ladies since then? — ^Yes. 

How is it that you remember her so well? — Since a child 
I have been known to have a remarkably good memory. 

When was it that you first gave a statement to the police? 
— Somewhere about the beginning of March. They asked 
me to tell them everything I could remember, which I did as 
far as I could. At that time I told the police all I could 
remember were certain peculiarities about the dress, and I 
remembered that it was black. 

Have you not said since then that all the things the police 
showed you belonged to Miss Holland? — No, there were several 
things I could not identify. 


77 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

Mrs H Wisken 

Are not the articles which you say you can identify as 
belonging to Miss Holland articles of the ordinary kind 
which can he bought in numbers of shops'^ — ^Yes, some of 
them. 

Has any single one any name or mark which enables you 
to identify it, with the exception of the dress'? — No, 

I don’t profess to be an expert in ladies’ clothing. Will 
you kindly tell me what there was out of the ordinary'? Take 
the comb and hairpin'? — They were of an unusual kind. 

I don’t suppose that every lady wears a comb, but when 
they do wear one is it not like this'? — I have never seen any 
one wearing a comb like hers. 

Was the bustle an ordinary bustle'? — don’t know of 
another lady wearing one like that. 

You don’t mean to say that she was the only lady you 
know wh'o was wearing a bustle at that time? — It was an 
unusual bustle — of a warm material. 

You don’t suggest that it was the only bustle like that? — 
I never saw one like it. 

You say there was a hook upon the stays to support the 
bloomers. Is not that the ordinary means of supporting 
them? — I never saw one like it before. When I gave my 
statement in March I did nt)t remember about Miss Holland 
wearing two vests, I can’t say that I mentioned it before 
I saw the two vests, but I remembered it before I saw them — 
it might be three weeks or a month ago. 

Did you tell any one? — No.« Miss Holland wore a belt 
similar to the portion produced. It was shown to me for 
the first time at the inquest by Sergeant Sc'ott. 

Did you then swear that the belt worn by Miss Holland 
had several prongs which went through the material of the 
belt '? — ^Yes. 

The belt which is produced has hooks, but no prongs? — 
That is so. 

Were you in Court when Sergeant Scott gave his evidence? 
— ^Yes. 

Did you hear him say that no one could recognise the 
features, and that the head was a skull with nt> flesh upon 
it? — ^I think that is accurate. 

78 



Evidence for the Prosecution. 

Mrs H. Wisken 

Did you say at the inquest that you recognised the features 1 
— Yes. 

What do you mean by that'^ — I mean that I can recognise 
the small head and teeth. 

Did you mention about the head and teeth before the 
coroner *2 — I donH know that I did, but I swore I could 
recognise the body by the dress. I was not asked the ques- 
tion about the head and teeth. 

Do you remember being pressed as to how you identified 
the body? — ^Yes. 

And you replied that you identified it by the dress? — Yes. 
I saw the body itself, and I could identify it by the head. 

Do you seriously suggest that you recognise the body 
itself? — I do. 

I suppose you have seen hundreds Of yards of similar 
braid on dresses in your business? — ^Yes. The braid is on 
the bottom, and I have not sewn one so since ; it is generally 
two or three rows higher and not bound at the bottom, and 
it is not generally put on as I put this on. I did it by 
hand with an Ordinary stitch. 

I suppose you have employed the same stitch in hundreds 
of yards which you have sewn on? — Yes. There is only one 
hook I identify on the stays; the hook is outside, which is 
not an ordinary thing. 

Have you not Often seen that? — No, I have seen it now 
and again. 

What about the silk on the bodice and cufis? — It is ordinary 
good silk, with no peculiarity about it. 

Take the frame for the hair? — That is not often worn, 
but I have seen them worn before, and this pin is similar 
to ones worn. 

What have you to say about the boots? — The boots are a 
small size, and the piece of iron on the top is not usual, but 
I have often seen them before. 

Ke-examined by Mr. Gill — I can identify my own work 
from the general appearance. The frill on the cuff is not 
one I should buy in a shop ; it is One that would be made by 
a dressmaker to order. There were several articles of cloth- 
ing — stockings and other things^ — ^that I was unable to 

79 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

Mrs H. Wisken 

identify. When I saw the police in March they asked me 
questions, and I answered them as far as I could rememher. 
They did not ask me about underlinen then. I noticed the 
teeth in the skull of the body that was found ; they appeared 
to be perfect and like Miss Holland's teeth. 

Albert Lewis, examined by Mr. G-ill — I am an up- 
holsterer, and reside at 53 Carlton Vale, London. I knew 
Miss Camille C. Holland for .some years well. On 26th Sep- 
tember, 1895, I stored her furniture at my house, and it 
remained there till 28th March, 1899. Miss Holland called 
upon me, accompanied by the prisoner, and introduced him 
as Mr. Dougal. She gave me instructions to send two cases 
of her goods to Hassocks, and I forwarded them on 9th 
December, 1898. In March, 1899, Miss Holland again came 
accompanied by the prisoner, and gave instructions for her 
goods to be sent to Coldhams Farm at Clavering. I saw the 
goods packed up and sent ; there was sufficient furniture for 
a seven-roomed house. It came out of a house of that size, 
and it was crowded. I visited the Moat Farm in March 
or April of this year, and there saw a greater part of the 
things I had sent down. 

Sidney Butler, examined by Mr. Grubbe — I am a store- 
keeper, and reside at c/o Mrs. W. ^avill. Station Koad, 
Waltham Cross. In May, 1899, I was a clerk in the employ 
of Mr. Robinson, a builder, at Stansted, and in that month 
the prisoner came into the 'office and gave the name 

Mr. Dougal of Moat Farm, and inquired about a house 
we had to let, 4 Lower Street, Stansted. He inquired what 
the rent was, and took the house from Monday, 22nd May, 
1899. The first rent was paid on 29th May. I cannot 
remember the exact date when he first came for the house, 
but it was before the Saturday previous — ^the 20th — perhaps 
the Tuesday previous. I collected the rent the first week 
from a youngish person, who I understood was Mrs. Dougal. 
They gave up the house on 4th September following, when 
the last week’s rent was paid. I cannot say whether the 
house was occupied up to that date, but there was, I believe, 
on every occasion but one, some one there when I called for 

80 



Evidence for the Prosecution. 

Sidney Butler 

the rent, and on that occasion the prisoner called a few 
days after and paid the rent. I noticed that the furniture 
was not unpacked. 

Frank Whitmore, examined by Mr. Grubbe — I am the 
county architect, and reside at Chelmsford. I produce plans 
of the Moat House Farm, Clavering. The first marked A 
is a ground floor and bedroom plan, and a section showing 
the levels of the floors drawn according to scale. The next 
marked B is a plan showing the general position of the 
house and the farm buildings. The house is surrounded by 
a moat, and there is a smaller moat by the side supplied by 
the one round the house. To the smaller moat there was 
a ditch from the horse-pond, which ditch at one time 
apparently drained the yard; this has been since filled up. 
The part marked brown is the roadway I have taken the 
measurements. The distance from the house to the ditch 
is about 173 feet. From the house to the south end of the 
building marked barn is 270 feet. The plan is drawn 
according to scale. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Elliott — I believe it would be pos- 
sible for a person in one of the first-floor bedrooms to see 
the spot where the body was buried if the person leaned 
out of the window, but it would not be easy to see the spot 
from the window. 

Mrs Florence Blackwell, examined by Mr. Grubbe — I 
am the wife of Alfred Georges Blackwell, of 7 Swanfield Road, 
Waltham Cross. In May, 1899, I was unmarried, and my 
name was Florence Havies. On 9th May, 1899, I was 
engaged at Bishop’s Stortford by a lady who I was given to 
understand was Mrs. Dougal, but I now know to have been 
Miss Holland, to go as domestic servant to the Moat Farm. 
I took up my situation with her on Saturday, I13th May, 
at the Moat Farm, Clavering I was the only servant, and 
the only occupants of the house were the prisoner, Miss 
Holland, and myself. The first night I slept in a little bed- 
room at the back of the house. The prisoner slept in a bed- 
room on the right of the landing. The next morning I got 
up about six o’clock and commenced my duties. I was the 
o 81 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

IVIrs F. Blackwell 

only one up About half an hour afterwards the prisoner 
came down alone and into the scullery where I was He 
came up unawares and kissed me. I objected very much, 
and on the same day as soon as I saw Miss Holland I made 
a complaint to her. On Tuesday evening, 16th May, I 
retired to bed about nine o’clock; Miss Holland went to 
bed at the same time. The prisoner remained downstairs 
in the dining-room. Soon after, about ten minutes after, 
some one came to my door, and I heard some one speak. I 
knew the voice; it was the prisoner’s He called Florrie ” 
three times in an undertone, and pulled at the door with all 
his might The door opened outward. I asked him what he 
wanted. I screamed for Mrs. Dougal. The door has a 
bolt, and he pulled it nearly off. Miss Holland came to my 
door, and I had hysterics. After I came to I made a com- 
plaint to Miss Holland. She took me into the prisoner’s 
bedroom He was in bed and pretending to be asleep. 

Mis. Dougal ” said, It’s no use pretending to be asleep ” 
In consequence of what happened Miss Holland and I slept 
together in the same bed that night. I had made up my 
mind to go home, but, yielding to pressure from Miss Hol- 
land, I agreed to stay on 

When did anything further particular occur ? — ^Nothing 
very particular until Friday, the 19th. 

Where did you sleep on the Wednesday and Thursday? — 
With Miss Holland in the spare bedroom. 

What happened on the Friday ? — She came into the kitchen 
and said she was going out. *Dougal was there, and they 
drove away in a pony trap 

Had they any luggage? — No, she had no luggage. 

Did Miss Holland say anything to you as she went out? — 
She called out, Good-bye, Florrie, I shan’t be long.” That 
is all that she said, and I have not seen her since I expected 
her back that evening. 

How was she dressed when she went out? — She was wear- 
ing a dark costume and a hat and white veil. 

Whom did you see next? — Mr. Dougal. He came into the 
kitchen alone, about half-past eight in the evening. As 
soon as I saw him I said, Where’s the mistress?” He said, 
'' She’s gone to London.” I exclaimed, What I Gone to 
82 



Evidence for the Prosecution. 

Mrs F. Blackwell 

London and left me here all alone ‘2” He replied, Yes, 
but never mind, she's coming back, and I am going to meet 
her." He then went out. 

Did he tell you what he went out for? — Yes, he said he 
was going to take the pony out and feed it. He returned 
about nine o'clock and stayed indoors for about ten minutes. 
He then went out again, saying that he was going to meet 
her again. I heard no wheels drive away. In half an hour 
he returned and said, No, she has not come; I suppose she 
will come by that train something after ten o’clock." After 
waiting a few moments he went out again, saying that he 
was going to meet the train. In half an hour he returned 
and said, No, she has not come^ I suppose she will come by 
the twelve o'clock tiain." He went out again and came back 
at a quarter to one and said, The mistress has not come. 
You had better go to bed." 

By Mr, Justice Wright — You say that he came back at a 
quarter to one At what time did he go out before that? — 
He was only in a few minutes each time 

ExaminaUon continued — I went up to the spare bedroom 
and stayed there, without undressing, for the rest of the 
night. I was awake and sat by the window all night At 
6.30 the next morning the prisoner knocked at my door. 
When I got downstairs I saw him in the kitchen with the 
breakfast ready. He told me he had received a letter from 
the mistress, and that she was going to take a little holiday 
and would send a lady friend down I saw no letter. In 
consequence of a communication that I had sent to my mother 
the day before my mother came for me that morning and 
took me away. The prisoner paid me a month's wages, also 
the railway fares for myself and my mother. He then drove 
off, leaving us at the house. I visited the Moat Farm on 
28th April of this year, and I there identified the bodice 
and skirt of the costume found on the body. I identify the 
photographs produced, marked D2 and D3, as being photo- 
graphs of Miss Holland. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Elliott — ^Are you quite positive 
that there was no luggage in the trap? — ^Yes. 

Did the prisoner and Miss Holland appear to be on friendly 
terms? — ^Yes, so far as I could see. 


83 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

Mrs F. Blackwell 

Will you swear whether the dress that Miss Holland went 
away in was blue or black ? — I cannot swear that, but I know 
that it was dark 

If there was any trouble between the prisoner and Miss 
Holland, then it arose out of his kissing you ? — I donH know 
that. 

There was no other trouble that you were aware of? — Not 
that I was aware of. 

He did not come into your room when Miss Holland heard 
you scream? — He did not leave off at once 

From that time up to the time of your leaving did he 
make any other attempt whatever upon you'^ — No. 

During the time you were left alone in the house did he 
behave perfectly properly to you? — ^Yes. 

You would be angry when Mr. Dougal kissed you? — Yes. 

Have you remained angry with him all these four years ? — No. 

Are you inclined to be hysterical? — No. 

Did you make any hysterical noise before you heard the 
knock at the door? — No. 

Did the prisoner and Miss Holland occupy the same bed- 
room? — ^Yes. It was not next door to my room; it was not 
on the same landing. 

Did you ever hear anything in the shape of a revolver 
or a gun go off? — No, I heard nothing of the kind. 

Had you seen a gun or a pistol in the house? — No. 

When Dougal appeared at 8.30 did he seem to be in his 
ordinary manner ? — I noticed i^othing unusual about him. 

Did he talk to you as usual? — He said very little to me 
after what occurred on the previous Tuesday night. 

When he returned at 12 45 were his boots or his dress 
muddy? — I noticed nothing of the kind upon him. 

Did you see any blood on his clothes? — No. 

On the following morning you say that he told you that 
he had had a letter from Mrs. Dougal? — ^Yes. 

The ffrst post letters arrived early in the morning, did 
they not? — Not very early Mr. Dougal used to go out and 
meet the postman, and he returned with the letters about 
eight o^clock, as a rule. 

You did not go back to the Moat Farm after you left with 
your mother? — No, I was glad enough to get away. 

84 



Evidence for the Prosecution. 

Mrs F. Black-well 

Ee-esamined by Mr. Gbubbe — On the 19th Miss Holland 
asked me if I minded her going out shopping, and I replied 
that I did not mind so long as Mr. Dougal went with her. 
Miss Holland replied that he was going to drive her. Miss 
Holland was crying most of the time on the Wednesday. I 
remained with her all that day, and slept with her that night. 

Mrs. Martha Havibs, examined by Mr. Grubbe — I reside 
at 18 Swanfield Eoad, Waltham Cross, and am the wife of 
William Havies In April, 1899, I was residing at Bishop’s 
Stortford, and on the 29th of that month I removed to 
Waltham Cross. I am the mother t)f Florence Blackwell, the 
previous witness, and remember her going into service on 
13th May at the Moat Farm. On 20th May, in conse- 
quence of a communication which I received from my 
daughter Florence, I proceeded to Newport and hired a con- 
veyance and drove to the Moat Farm and saw my daughter. 
I saw the prisoner shortly after and told him I had come to 
fetch her away in consequence of his conduct to her, and he 
told me he had not hurt my daughter. The prisoner put my 
daughter’s wages for the month on the table for me, and also 
my own and my daughter’s railway fares back to Waltham 
Cross. I went to help my daughter to pack up, and, after 
finishing packing, she and I returned to Newport. On our 
way we passed the prisoner on his way back. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Elliott — My daughter made a com- 
plaint. The prisoner said he did not hurt my daughter ; I 
cannot remember anything else he said. I remember the date, 
as it was three weeks after I had entered my cottage. I said 
I knew it from my rent-book, but I have not looked at the 
rent-book, as I cannot read it. 

Ee-examined by Mr. Grubbe — I have been told the date of 
the first entry in my book, which is now produced. 

Charles Edwiis^ Prtke, examined by Mr. Grubbe — I am 
superintendent of police in the Essex Constabulary stationed 
at Epping. In consequence of instructions received, I visited 
the prisoner at the Moat Farm, Clavering, on 4th March. 
He knew me, and he knew that I was a police officer. He asked 
me indoors, and I went in with him and told him I was 

85 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

Charles E. Pryke 

instructed by my chief constable to make inquiries with 
reference to a scandal in the village and vicinity respecting 
the missing Miss C. C. Holland, and that no doubt he was 
aware of the rumour about her. I told him I had been in- 
structed to write down his replies to my questions, and he did 
not raise any objection. I then took down what he said. 

Mr. Elliott contended that, in the absence of any caution 
being given to the prisoner, the evidence of Superintendent 
Pryke as to what the prisoner said was inadmissible, and he 
quoted several decisions to strengthen his protest. 

Mr. Gill, in reply, said the man was not under arrest — no 
charge had then been formulated — and under those circum- 
stances the witness was entitled to give the results of the 
questions he asked. Before a prisoner was charged he might 
be asked anything in explanation of his conduct, but not after- 
wards. 

Mr. Justice Wright — There is no particular law on the 
point. While a person is not in custody, and where there 
is no immediate intention of taking him into custody, I think 
it has always been the practice of the police to give him every 
opportunity to explain anything. I have carefully considered 
the point, and I do n'ot think there is anything the defence 
need be afraid of. 

Exarmnation continued — The prisoner said, Yes, there is 
a lot of talk caused by my divorced wife and my late servant, 
Kate Cranwell.^^ I asked, “ Can you give me any informa- 
tion with a view to tracing the missing Miss Holland? 
He replied, “ I know nothing about her, and have not seen 
her since I left her at Stansted Railway Station about three 
years ago. I drove her there with her luggage, which I 
believe consisted of two boxes. I know none of her rela- 
tions or friends- She left nothing belonging to her behind 
in my house. We had a tif£ a few days before she left in 
consequence of my servant, a girl of about eighteen years 
of age, telling her that during the night I tried to enter her 
bedroom, which was false, as the knocking was caused by 
the weight of the clock striking against the wall when I 
was winding it up. Miss Holland was a woman of about 
forty years of age; she was very reticent and penurious. I 
86 



Evidence for the Prosecution. 

Charles E. Pryke 

first saw her about four years ago at Camberwell Green, 
London. She stated she was secretary to a ladies^ club some- 
where in the West End of London. She lived with me in 
London, Saffron Walden, and here. I never heard her say 
she had been in India, but she told me she had travelled on 
the Continent. If she had -any money or any railway shares 
or stocks, I was not aware of it. I have never received any 
letters here addressed to Miss Holland, but I have received 
a number of circulars.^’ I said, There is a rumour that 
your late servant, Kate Cranwell, when here signed several 
papers in the name of C. C. Holland. He said, That 
is false; she never done such a thing for me. I have never 
sent any papers away signed in the name of Miss Holland, 
and I have never received any money or anything else 
belonging to her."’ I said, Is it a fact that Moat House 
and land belong to her? He said, No, it does not; I 
purchased them with my money, and they were transferred 
to me by Messrs. Harris & Ingram, solicitors, Lincoln’s Inn 
Fields, London, who will no doubt give you full particulars 
of the same if you see them. Harris, I believe, committed 
suicide since. During the time Miss Holland lived with me 
she used to receive letters from a man who represented 
himself to be a sea captain. She received one from him two 
days before she left for good. The day after Miss Holland 
left my servant’s mother came and told me she was going to 
take her daughter away, which she did. She abused me, and 
alleged that I had been interfering with her daughter. She 
said she should g'o and tell the police at Newport. A publican 
from Newport drove her away. I don’t know the servant’s 
name or where she came from, but I believe Waltham. 
Before coming into Esses I resided at Biggin Hill, Seven* 
oaks, Kent, for seven or eight years. On Tuesday, the 
of last month, I went from here to visit my sister. Miss 
Emily Dougal, at Upham, Bishops Walton, Hampshire. I 
returned home the following evening, where I have been 
ever since.” I said, It is alleged that Miss Holland is 
supposed to be shut up in a room in this house. Do you 
mind me having a look round? ” He said, ” Certainly, go 
where you like.” He showed me all over the house and said, 

B7 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

Charles E. Pryke 

pointing to a piano and other furniture which was in what 
he called a lumber room, '' I brought these from Kent, and 
some I bought at an auction sale. All the furniture in the 
house is mine.’’ I said, “Is it correct that some of the 
clothing, dresses, &c., left behind by Miss Holland you gave 
to your wife and servant, and they had them altered and 
wore them? ” He said, “ I could not do that, because she 
left nothing behind her. My late wife is lying and trying 
to do me all the harm she can; she knows as much or more 
about Miss Holland than I do.” I said, “ Your present 
servant has been seen wearing a gold watch and chain Did 
that belong to Miss Holland‘S ” He said, “ No, that was in 
pawn; I bought the ticket from a man, and took the watch 
and chain out of pledge. You can see them if you like.” 
He fetched them and showed them to me. They were a lady’s 
gold watch and gold albert chain, apparently new. I said, 
“ Was your son here last week? ” He said, “ Yes, for a 
few days, and he is now in London. Miss Holland hired the 
servant, and that is the reason I do not know her name or 
where she came from.” I saw no one at the house except 
the prisoner and the servant. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Elliott — Before I went to inter- 
view the prisoner I had heard the result of inquiries which 
had been made, and I had heard that there was some pro- 
perty of Miss Holland’s at the house. I had not heard that 
cheques purporting to be signed by her had •^ound their 
way into his account. I had heard that her account had 
been drawn 'on, and that some of her securities had been 
sold, and I had heard about the purchase of Moat Farm and 
where the money was supposed to have come from to buy it 
as the result of police inquiry. 

I took the statement which I have read from answers to 
questions which I had put to the prisoner ; it is not an 
exact statement of everything said, but of everything I con- 
sidered important, and I don’t know whether I intended to 
use it against him. I was told the object of going to see 
the prisoner was with reference to the scandal, and I never 
told him that what he said to me might be used against him, 
I said I wanted to have a little private chat, and the object 
88 



Evidence for the Prosecution. 

Charles E. Pryjke 

was to invite his confidence. The writing I produce was 
written in his presence; some of it was written on my knee, 
some on the table, and some on my hand. 

I had a list, not in writing, of the points I had to inquire 
of him about. I did n'ot know he was lying. It was all 
rumour at the time. I did not read the statement over to 
him; I did not want to arouse his suspicion. I wanted to 
get all the information I could out of him, and he gave me 
permission t'o write it down I have heard of the applica- 
tion in the Divorce Court on 9th March. I told him it was 
a matter for the police to investigate. I did not mention 
the Divorce Court, but I mentioned his wife ; he began it. 

I can't say whether his statement about the servant's com- 
plaint is accurate. He said he had no property of Miss 
Holland's there ^ he said this previous to mentioning the 
dresses, and he then repeated that there was nothing left 
behind. I did not ask him specifically whether there was 
any furniture of hers there; and he said, pointing to some 
things, he brought them from Kent I did not notice that 
there were two pianos there. 

With regard to the purchase of the farm, I think he said 
it was bought with his money. I cannot say whether he said 
it was bought with money he had. I did not ask him whether 
he had any money from Miss Holland; he said he had not 
had any money from Miss Holland; it was not one of the 
inquiries I had to make — at least I donH remember it. I 
asked him when he had seeh Miss Holland last (that was 
one of the points I had to ask him) ; he said that about three 
years ago he drove her to Stansted Railway Station. 

Ee-exarmned — Except with the interview with the prisoner, 
my duties with regard to this case were at an end. I am 
sure that he said, I bought with my money,'' meaning the 
farm. My interview with the prisoner at the Moat Farm 
was on 4th March last. 

Further cross-examined — I was sent to the Moat Farm by 
the chief constable. I had my instructions from him, and 
the only other person present was Mr. Raglan Somerset, the 
deputy chief. I was with them about three-quarters of an 
hour, and they told me a number of points upon which I 

89 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

Charles E. Pryke 

was to seek information from the prisoner. "Up to that time 
I had had nothing to do with the investigation. I made 
no notes of the points. I was not told ‘‘ On no account to 
arouse his suspicions during this conversation. I was made 
acquainted with a number of the details. I knew there was 
a scandal about the prisoner, and I understood the police 
had been making inquiries for some days. I did not tell 
the prisoner that the evidence might be used against him, 
as I did not know it would be. I thought he had told me 
the truth, and I shook hands with him on leaving. I thought 
he had told me the truth till 8th March, when I saw Inspector 
Marden, and from what he showed me I altered my mind. 

I prepared my report the day after I called. In my report 
I did not mention that I prefaced my conversation by saying 
I wished to have a friendly talk. 

William Thomas John Howlbtt, examined by Mr. Grubbe 
— I am a police sergeant stationed at Saffron Walden. I 
have measured the distances of Moat Farm from various 
places and found the following : — Moat House to Audley End 
Station, i miles 1227 yards; Moat House to Newport Station, 
3 miles 341 yards; Moat House to Elsenham Station, 5 miles 
1341 yards; Moat House to Stansted Station, 5 miles 866 
yards. The distance from Moat Farm to Bishop's Stortford 
by the nearest road is about miles, and Saffron Walden 
about 6^ miles. I know the district well. The Ordnance 
map I produce appears to be correct, marked D152. 

George Matlam, examined by Mr. Grubbe — -I am chief 
clerk in the time table department of the Great Eastern Rail- 
way, which is responsible for working out all the train times 
on the system. The Great Eastern is the only line which 
runs from London to Stansted, Essex. In May, 1899, there 
was a train at 5.41 p.m. from Audley End Station, stopping 
at Newport at 5.46, Elsenham 5.65, Stansted 6 o'clock, due 
at Liverpool Street, London, at 7.20. The next train started 
from Audley End at 9.20 p.m., Newport 9.26, Elsenham 9.34, 
Stansted 9.40, due at Liverpool Street at 10.56. That is 
the last train up that “night till the early mail the next 
morning, which does not stop at Newport, Elsenham, and 
90 



Evidence for the Prosecution. 

Georse Maylam 

Stansted. The last down train from London is the one 
leaving Liverpool Street at 10.2, due at Stansted at 11.5, 
and did not stop at Elsenham or Newport. 

John Turtle, examined by Mr. Grubbe — I am an overseer 
in the inland section of the General Post Office at Mount 
Pleasant office, London. Since 1885 I have been connected 
with that portion of the Postal Guide which deals with the 
despatch and delivery of letters, and I have the one for the 
four quarters for 1899, including the quarter commencing 
on 1st April, 1899; it shows up to what hours the letters 
can be posted in London to be delivered by the first post the 
next morning at Newport. Quendon is a sub-office of New- 
port, and the same times would apply to both offices. The 
latest times for posting in London for first delivery at Quen- 
don in April, 1899, were 10.45 p.m. at the G.P.O., St. 
Martin's le Grand; 10 30 p.m. at all head district offices, 
except at Paddington; 10 p.m. at Paddington office; 10 p.m. 
at Lombard Street, Gracechurch Street, Mark Lane, Fleet 
Street, Ludgate Circus, Throgmorton Avenue, E.C branch 
offices and pillar boxes in London, except London, E.C. ; and 
8 p.m. at all E.C. branch offices not previously mentioned 
and at E.C. pillar boxes. There is also a late fee posting 
at Liverpool Street Station from 8 to 9.50 p.m. in the station 
letter box and 9.50 p.m. to 10.2 in the box attached to the 
night mail sorting carriage which starts at 10.2. The letters 
for Quendon would be droj^ped at Bishop's Stortford from 
that train. Letters posted later would go by the midnight 
passenger to Broxbourne, and then by goods train to Bishop’s 
Stortford. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Elliott — ^A letter posted at the 
General Post Office in London at St. Martin’s le Grand at 
10.45 would be delivered the next morning by first post at 
Quendon. 

David Scott, examined by Mr. Grubbe — 1 am detective 
sergeant in the Essex Constabulary, stationed at Chelmsford, 
and since 19th March last have been residing at the Moat 
Farm, Clavering. From that date to 27th April I was search- 
ing at the Moat Farm premises and grounds for the body of 

91 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

David Scott 

Camille Cecile Holland, assisted by other ofiScers, which I 
did in consequence of information received and instructions 
of my chief constable. 

On Monday, 27th April, digging operations were going on 
in furtherance of that search. We were engaged in digging 
in an old ditch which had been filled in, marked on the plan 
as running from the horse pond to the small moat, and my 
attention was drawn to a spot in that ditch on that day 
which I have marked in pencil, and I saw a small boot which 
I now produce, a buttoned one, apparently a lady^s left-foot 
boot. I also saw what appeared to me to be part of a 
woman’s dress. I removed some of the soil and saw a second 
boot (produced), and with the assistance of the other officers 
we found the body of the deceased clothed in the garments 
produced. The body was lying on its right side and was 
4 feet below the surface of the ground in a bed of black liquid 
filth It had on a black dress and black stockings. There 
were thorn bushes on the top of the body and a little earth 
under the thorns. On the skull I found a wire frame (pro- 
duced) to which several hair pins were still adhering. There 
was one tortoiseshell pin and one tortoiseshell comb. I pro- 
duce portions of the skirt, bodice, and underclothing. 

On 28th April I showed the body and the clothing to the 
witness Mrs. Wisken in the presence of Superintendent 
Daniels. Before examining she made a statement to us 
describing the dress; she then examined and identified some 
of the articles produced, as well as the body. The body 
appeared to be at the bottom of the ditch, and apparently 
the ditch had been filled in for about three or four years, 
and had the appearance of having been used to drain the 
farmyard. In several places along the ditch we found the 
black filth. There has been an attempt to drain the yard 
in another direction. The left boot had apparently become 
detached in the work of excavation. 

The Moat Farm is a very lonely place, and the surrounding 
country is very thinly populated; the nearest village is, I 
think, Eickling, and the nearest house is about half a mile 
away, which is Eickling Vicarage. The other villages are 
Clavering and Quendon, and they are further off. On 4th 
92 




The Clothing found on Miss Holland’s body 


Evidence for the Prosecution. 

David Scott 

May I found in the Moat Farm a box of 34 revolver cartridges 
loaded; they were in a tin in a shut-up cupboard in the 
kitchen. They were covered with seed, and could not be 
seen until the seed was removed. I have extracted one bullet 
from one of the 34 cartridges, and I produce it. 

At the post-mortem examination I took possession of the 
clothing on the deceased, and, amongst them I found the 
upper portion of a buttoned boot, to which some woolly sub- 
stance still adheres. On carefully washing the woollen under- 
vest I found that there were two together as produced. 

I have had charge of the body and everything connected 
with it since it was discovered, and it is the one which was 
examined by Dr. Sprague and Dr. Pepper. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Elliott — We found live fish in both 
moats. There is no flesh on the face of the body, and the 
features are not recognisable; the head is a skull. The cart- 
ridges were found together in a cupboard in the kitchen, 
where food and crockery were kept; it was unlocked. 

Ee-examined by Mr. Geubbe — ^We found three live fish in 
the small moat, but a large quantity in the large moat; 
they could not get from the small moat to the larger one. 

Did you find any watch, chain, or jewellery upon the 
deceased? — No, not a scrap of anything. 

No purse or money? — No. 

By a Juror — Any gloves? — No, nor any hat. 

Me-examvnat%on contvnued — I noticed that grass was grow- 
ing on part of the ditch as filled in, and had the appearance 
of not having been disturbed for some time; branches from 
stubs of ash and elder spread over the spot where the body 
was found, and I had to cut them off to enable me to dig 
for the body. The spot is between two trees. I produce 
photographs A, B, C, D, and E of the Moat Farm and of 
the spot where the body was found, which is indicated by a 
white handkerchief. 

Further cross-examined — The branches came from growing 
trees or, rather, stubs. 

Dr. Augustus Joseph Pepper, examined by Mr. Gill — I 
reside at 13 Wimpole Street, London. I am a master in 
surgery, London, and a fellow of the Royal College of Sur- 

93 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

Dr A. J. Pepper 

geoDS, England, a surgeon and lecturer on surgery at St. 
Mary^s Hospital, London, and examiner in forensic medicine 
for University of London- 

On 29th April, 1903, I made a post-mortem examination 
of the deceased at the Moat Farm, Clavering, assisted by Dr. 
Sprague, of Saffron Walden The body, which was lying on 
a table in the greenhouse, was that of an adult female. It 
was enveloped in clothes to which a quantity of moist clay- 
like soil was adherent; the body was lying on its right side, 
the left leg drawn up and the right leg slightly bent; the 
head was somewhat bent towards the chest, and the spine 
slightly bent towards the right side. The length of the 
body as it lay was 5 feet 1 inch. It had the clothing on 
which I have seen produced to-day. I took some measure- 
ments in order to arrive at the probable height of the person 
when alive. The length of the thigh bone was 16| inches, 
the right leg bone was I3| inches, the right arm bone was 
11 inches, the length of the feet 8|- inches. The body was 
that of an adult female very much decomposed; the top of 
the skull was denuded of the soft structure and quite bare, 
and so was part of the face. The body must have been in 
contact with wet soil for a very long time. The left foot was 
detached from the body, probably by the removal. I found 
no deformity in the body, and I found what I believed to 
be remains of blood on the left side of the neck. Nearly 
all the soft structures of the body were converted into a 
material called adipocere. Thgre was a considerable quan- 
tity of hair remaining on the body on the part covered by 
the clothes. There was no fracture of the trunk or limbs, 
and no dislocation of the vertebrae. I examined the skull 
last; on the right side, above and behind the ear, there was 
a round aperture, situated 3 inches vertically above the top 
of the mastoid process and an inch and a quarter behind it; 
the margin of the aperture was sharply defined ; the diameter 
was a quarter of an inch. A fragment of the inner table 
of the skull, a quarter of an inch in diameter, was lying 
Just within the aperture. At the aperture was a fine piece 
of lead attached to the bone which had been cut off the bullet 
as it traversed the bone. I produce the piece of lead On 
94 



Evidence for the Prosecution. 

Dr A. J, Pepper 

the left side of the head there was a more or less circular 
aperture, the centre of which was an inch and a half behind 
the external angular process of the frontal hone and one 
inch and a half above the zygoma. The opening was three- 
eighths of an inch wide from before back and half an inch 
from above down. The outer table of the skull was splintered 
o5 more than the inner, especially at the fore part of the 
aperture. There were three portions of detached bone lying 
close to the aperture. 

The bullet produced was found by me in the skull, lying 
immediately below the aperture on the left side ; it was 
elongated in shape, and it weighs 85 grains. The outer 
covering of the brain was still quite tough; the brain was 
remarkably preserved considering the generally advanced 
state of the decomposition of the body. 

Would the wound you saw cause immediate unconscious- 
ness? — ^Yes, 

And that would continue till death ? — ^Yes. 

I should say from the amount of injury done the shot was 
fired near the head, but I cannot say how near in consequence 
of the absence through decomposition of singeing the hair, 
scorching the skin, or blackening by powder. I am certain 
that the bullet entered on the right side, and was arrested 
on the left after driving out the bone on the left side. The 
bullet wound described could not, in my opinion, be self- 
inflicted; the shot must have been fired from behind, because 
the direction taken by the bullet was from above down for- 
wards and to the left. The degree of preservation of the 
brain, in my opinion, points to the body having been interred 
shortly after death, that is, before the usual form of decom- 
position had set in. 

The jaws and teeth are remarkably well formed. All the 
teeth were present except the left upper wisdom tooth, which 
must have been lost for a long time, because the bone, where 
it had been, was much wasted, and the corresponding tooth 
in the lower jaw had grown above the level of the other teeth 
in consequence of there being no tooth opposed to it to prevent 
its growth upwards. Four teeth had been stopped in the 
lower jaw, three in the upper. The teeth of the lower jaw: 

95 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

Dr A. J. Pepper 

(1) large metal stopping on the outer side of the left wisdom 
tooth, (2) a small stopping near the centre of the crown on 
the right wisdom tooth, (3) large metal stopping in anterior 
part of the first right molar, (4) large metal stopping in 
posterior part of second right bicuspid. Teeth of the upper 
jaw : (1) metal stopping in outer side of right wisdom tooth, 

(2) metal stopping in posterior part and outer side of right 
second molar tooth, (3) small metal stopping at the junction 
of the fang with the crown on the outer side of the left 
canine tooth. Some of the internal viscera were recognisable, 
others had quite disappeared 

I formed an opinion as to the age, that the person was not 
less than forty nor more than sixty. I have come to that 
conclusion from certain data which I have discovered. 

The deceased had small feet From my measurements I 
should say the height of the woman when alive was 5 feet 
4 inches — she might have been a little under or a little over. 
From my examination I have formed the opinion that death 
occurred between three and five years ago. I have weighed 
the bullet taken from the cartridge by Inspector Scott, and 
its weight is 87 grains. The piece off the bullet found in 
the skull would weigh 2 or 3 grains, and as far as I can tell 
the two bullets are similar. The part of the bullet which 
did not strike the bone is exactly the same size as the similar 
part of the bullet taken from the cartridge. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Elliott — I had seen reports of the 
case before I was engaged upojt it, but I knew next to nothing 
about it. I had not noticed for how long Miss Holland had 
disappeared, but I might have seen it. To-day is the first 
day I have seen the box and the cartridges. 

I was shown some very small bullets, which could not have 
possibly caused the injury described. I was then shown a 
large pistol. I have not been shown any other skull. The 
wound on the right-hand side of the skull was 2 inches or a 
little more behind the ear. If the wound was self-inflicted 
it was practically impossible for the bullet to have taken the 
direction it did. The fact of interring a body tends to 
preserve the brain. Decomposition generally takes place in 
a healthy body in three days after death, but I have seen them 
96 



Evidence for the Prosecution. 

Dr A. J. Pepper 

badly decomposed in twenty-four hours, and hardly at all 
at the end of a week. The body might have shown the signs 
mentioned and not been buried for three days after death; 
that is possible, but rather improbable. From the condition 
of the body it is impossible to say with certainty the age 
of the deceased at any year within forty and sixty, and quite 
impossible to fix the time of death at any time within three 
and five years. The features were not recognisable — ^there 
were none at all — and it was impossible to identify the body 
from its general appearance. The contour of the head showed 
the shape of the face somewhat. 

Re-examined by Mr. Gill — I am of the opinion that the 
shot which caused death was fired by a person in a higher 
position than the deceased. It might have been fired as the 
deceased was sitting in a cart. 

Dr. William Carr Sprague, examined by Mr. Gill — I am 
an M.D. of Edinburgh and an L.R.C.P. of England, and I 
reside at Safiron Walden. On 27th April, 1903, I went to 
the Moat Farm, Clavering, and in an excavated ditch in the 
farm-yard side of the drive I saw the body of the deceased. 
It was about four feet below the surface and lying in a semi- 
prone position on its right side with the head towards the 
farm-yard. The body was partly covered with decomposed 
straw and boughs of trees; it was clothed with the clothes 
produced to-day. By my direction, after being photographed, 
the body was removed to the house. The body was that of a 
female. I was present and assisted Mr. Pepper on 29th April 
in making a ' post-mortem examination. I have heard Mr. 
Pepper give his evidence to-day, and I agree with his evidence. 
I was present when the bullet was found. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Elliott — I have been to the Moat 
Farm before 

Had you been shown another skull? — Yes, it was found in 
an outhouse at Moat Farm. 

Did you form any opinion as to the age of that skull? — 
was not asked fo give an opinion. 

As a wise man you do not give an opinion until you are 
asked ? — No. 


H 


97 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

Alexander Daniels 

Alexander Daniels, examined by Mr. Grubbe — I am 
superintendent of police for the Walden Division. I produce 
the pair of boots -which have been shown to the -witness Mold, 
and which I found in the Moat Farm in one of the rooms. 

I saw the prisoner write the receipt D150, which is put in as 
a specimen of his handwriting. I have searched at the Moat 
Farm for a revolver, but have not found one. 

George Lee Mold, examined by Mr. Grubbe — am a boot 
and shoe maker carrying on business at 454 Edgware Road, 
London. Miss Holland was a customer of mine during the 
years from 1884 to 1898. On 7th January, 1897, Miss 
Holland ordered a pair of boots from me, and I took particu- 
lars in writing of the order and measure. The boots were 
made at my shop, and were delivered on 21st January follow- 
ing to Miss Holland, c/o Mrs. Nicols, 42 Cornwall Road, 
Bayswater. I observe on the waist of the right boot produced 
my brand Mold.^' The boots produced and which were 
found on the body are lined with curly Iambus wool. I can 
see traces of it. I am sure that the boots produced are the 
pair mentioned which I made for Miss Holland in January, 
1897. I am sure of that, because they were the first ever 
made for Miss Holland with a toecap. They also had If- inch 
heels. 

On 23rd August, 1898, I measured Miss Holland for another 
pair of boots. She was then living at 37 Elgin Crescent, 
London. I took the particulars and measure in writing, and 
when she came on that day sl?e was wearing the boots pre- 
viously produced to me. There was to be a slight difference 
between the two pairs of boots ; the pair then ordered were to 
be higher in the heel, higher leg, and a trifle longer than 
before. The boots now produced by Superintendent Daniels 
as having been found at the Moat Farm* are the pair I made 
for Miss Holland on the order of 23rd August, 1898. They 
have my stamp Mold on the waist; they are lined with 
small curly lamb’s wool. I produce the lasts I made them 
on. The size is 2|- length and 4 fitting, which latter means 
the width. I produce the stamp I use. All the boots I make 


*A different pair of boots, found in the house. — E d. 
98’ 



Evidence for the Prosecution. 

Georsre L. Mold 

are stamped '' Mold in the waist. The photograph pro- 
duced, marked D3, is a photograph of Miss C. C. Holland. 
The 1897 pair of boots are in accordance with the order 
given, glove kid, and the pair made in 1898 glac6 kid. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Elliott — I have been in business 
for thirty years. I have lined boots with similar lining 
before. This lining is used very rarely in the trade. There 
is no peculiarity or deformity about the boots. They are not 
of French manufacture, and they are not size 3. The differ- 
ence between size 2^ and 3 is |th of an inch. There was a 
toe-pin on both pairs which make them nearly the length of 
3^s. The pair found in the Moat Farm are not worn. 

Be-examined — I have not seen Miss Holland since August, 
1898. 

The Court adjourned. 


99 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 


Second Day — Tuesday, 23rd June, 1903. 

George Lee Mold, recalled and further examined by Mr. 
Gill — I made five pairs of boots from the lasts which I pro- 
duced yesterday, and of these three pairs were made for Miss 
Holland. 

Henry John Churchill, examined by Mr. Grubbe — I am 
a gun, rifle, and ammunition manufacturer, and carry on 
business at 8 Agar Street, Strand, London. I have had 
thirty-five years’ experience in my business. I have examined 
the 34 cartridges found at the Moat Farm by Sergeant Scott. 
According to the box they are in, they were manufactured by 
the Union Metallic Ammunition Company, an American firm. 
I have removed several of the bullets from the cases. On 
weighing them with the grease lubricant on the cannelure, 
they weighed 88 grains each, and without the grease lubricant 
one grain less. The bullets are stamped out and not made 
in a mould. The 34 cartridges are, in my opinion, revolver 
.32 calibre. I have made experiments with the cartridges by 
firing at a skull at distances of 1 yard, 2 yards, 2 feet, and 
6 inches. The one I fired at a distance of 6 inches smashed 
up in a very similar way to the bullet found in Miss Holland’s 
skull. 

By Mr. Justice Wright — Have you seen that skull? — ^Yes. 

Examination continued — I^have seen the bullet found in 
the skull ; it is similar to the others, the same size and calibre. 
It is slightly of less weight. I have weighed it with the piece 
in the possession of and produced by the witness Dr. Pepper, 
and they weigh 87 grains. I have seen the apertures in the 
skull of the deceased, and I am of opinion that the bullet was 
fired from a revolver and at a short distance, from 6 to 12 
inches away. If the bullet had been fired at a greater distance 
it would have attained greater velocity, and would most likely 
have gone clean through the skull and would have made a 
cleaner aperture. All revolvers have rifle barrels, and the 
bullet found in Miss Holland’s skull has marks of the rifling. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Elliott — Similar cartridges could 
100 



Evidence for the Prosecution, 

Hetiry J Churckill’ 

be bought in many shops in England, and could be used in a 
rifle as well as a revolver, but I have never seen a rifle made 
to take that cartridge. A very well-known test to determine 
the distances at which a weapon is fired is the appearance of 
scorching or blackening of the skin or hair. Those appear- 
ances are absent in this case. I could say from appearance 
of the aperture whether the revolver was fired at a distance 
of 1 or 3 feet from the skull. I have made experiments at 
those distances in this case. There is an appreciable difler- 
ence in the velocity between 3 and 6 feet. I don’t think it 
is possible that there would have been the same appearances 
at the aperture if fired at 3 feet It would have been much 
cleaner at 3 feet. This is, I consider, a matter of opinion. 

Re-examined — I have had experience with American arms. 

Philip Rowe, examined by Mr. Gbubbe — I am a farmer, 
and reside at Curls Farm, Clavering. At the Coronation 
Sports at Clavering last year I acted as starter, and the 
prisoner lent me a small revolver. It was loaded with blank 
cartridges; the prisoner had promised to make me some for 
the purpose. After the sports were partly over I returned 
him the revolver . 

HEmir Pilgrim, examined by Mr. Gill — I live at Anstey, 
in the county of Hertford, and am a labourer. I worked for 
Mr. Savill at the Moat Farm, then called Coldhams, for about 
twelve months before he left, and I stayed on with the 
prisoner till 8fch June, 1899. * There was a lady living there 
with the prisoner whom I now know as Miss Holland. The 
photograph marked D3 is something like her. I fetched her 
to the farm in April, 1899, I believe, from Market Row, 
Saflron Walden. The lady was missing from the farm for 
about a fortnight before I left. 

Do you remember after you missed Miss Holland another 
lady coming? — ^Yes. 

How did she come? — I went to the Newport Station and 
fetched her, with Mr. Dougal She was younger than Miss 
Holland, and said she was the daughter of the prisoner. 
This was a few days before I left. I went away to Anstey. 
The lady was accompanied by a little girl. 


101 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

Henry Pilsrrxm 

Cross-examined by Mr. Elliott — It was perhaps a fortnight 
from the time the lady left to the time the other came Mr. 
Dougal did not appear to work like an ordinary farmer. I 
do not think he knew much about it. 

Re-examined by Mr. Gill — ^When I first went to work at 
Coldhams there was a ditch running from the farmyard to 
the little moat. The portion of the ditch from the roadway 
to the little moat was filled in during the time I was working 
for Mr. Savill, about level with the adjoining land. The 
ditch between the farmyard and the roadway was open, and 
the drainage ran through the open ditch, through a pipe 
under the part filled in to the little moat. Soon after the 
prisoner took possession he told me he was going to have the 
part from the farmyard to the road filled in. I asked him 
where the drainage was going if he filled up the ditch, and 
he said he was going to have another drain cut across the 
roadway into another ditch, and this new dram would go 
through the cartshed at the end of the barn. He asked me 
where he could get the material from for filling in the ditch 
and I told him up the lane on the other side of the house. 
The prisoner then instructed me to commence filling in the 
ditch with some rubbish I picked up about the yard and some 
from the lane. I cammenced this work about a week, a fort- 
night, or three weeks — I cannot exactly say — after the prisoner 
took possession. I commenced filling in at the farmyard end 
of the ditch. I worked at it at odd times and not every day, 
and I was at times assisted in^ filling in by Law and Flitton. 
The ditch was from 4 to 5 feet deep. I never put any bushes 
in the ditch. 

Have you been shown the spot where the body was found ? — 
Yes, it was under an elder tree. 

When you left in June had the ditch been filled in? — It 
had been filled in nearer the road. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Elliott — The prisoner told me on 
nay first going to the farm that he intended to have the 
ditch filled up. 

Was it during the time that Miss Holland was there that 
he first told you about filling up the ditch Yes, and 
there was a little put in 
10 ^ 



Evidence for the Prosecution. 

Henry Pilgrim 

By way of cominencement ? — Yes. 

Can you tell me whether it was during the time that Miss 
Holland was there that he helped you to fill in the ditch ? — I 
cannot say positively He only helped me once. 

Was the earth brought there in a cart? — ^Yes. 

Did you notice on any occasion when you were helping 
to fill in the ditch whether there had apparently been any 
work done since you had been there and which you had not 
done yourself? — No 

When the dirt was brought in the cart it was simply shot 
in and not rammed in in any way? — No. I usually left ofi 
work at half-past five to six o'clock 

By Mr. Gill — Did you notice at any time that work had 
been done there during the night? — No. 

Alfred Law, examined by Mr. Gill — I am a labourer 
residing at Clavering, Essex I worked at the Moat Farm 
for Mr. Savill, and when he left I went and worked for him 
on other land at Clavering. Later I went to work for the 
piisoner at the end of May oi beginning of June, 1899; the 
witness Pilgrim was working there then. In Mr. Savill's 
time there was a ditch which drained the farmyard into the 
little moat, and the part of the ditch from the roadway to 
the little moat was filled up and was piped to carry the 
drainage. Afterwards Monk and I took up the pipes to 
lay in another direction under the cartshed. When I went 
back to work with the prisoner Pilgrim had commenced at 
the farmyard end to fill in the remainder of the ditch, and 
when Pilgrim left the whole of this portion was not com- 
pletely filled in, and Flitton and I completed doing so. I 
never saw the prisoner help to fill in. I saw Miss Holland 
come with the prisoner before Mr. Savill left. I left the 
prisoner's employ at Christmas, 1901. I did not see Miss 
Holland during the time I was in the prisoner's employ. 

After Dougal came info possession, did you see another 
lady there? — ^Yes. 

Do you know who she was? — ^Yes, his wife. She remained 
there down to the time I left. 

I ^eixt into Mr. Dougal's employ at the Moat Farm about 
the end of May or beginning of June, 1899, and remained 

103 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

Alfred Law 

there in his service until Christmas, il901 I never during 
that time saw any alteration or the appearance of any dis- 
turbance on the surface of the ditch after it had been filled 
up. If the surface of the ditch had been disturbed I think 
I must have seen it, as we used to walk across the place where 
the body was found every day to get food for the horses 
and other animals from the barn. In the autumn of 1899 I 
fetched some shrubs and trees from the Newport Eailway 
Station to Moat Farm, and assisted in planting them on 
the ground from the motor house over the ditch in question. 

I never saw any alteration in the surface of the ditch all the 
time I was there. 

Cross-ezamined by Mr. Elliott — How late did you work 
as a rule? — Until 5.30. Sometimes, I was there until mid- 
night, and was then paid overtime. 

Emma Bltrgess, examined by Mr Grubbe — I am in service 
at 16 West Hill, Highgate I know the prisoner I remem- 
ber him and a lady going to live at the Moat Farm, Claver- 
ing At that time I resided with my parents in the village. 
In April, 1899, I went with Mrs Eead, of Clavering, to 
the Moat Farm, and assisted in putting the furniture 
straight The lady passed as Mrs Dougal, and had golden 
hair I worked there two days only I went back to the 
farm on 2nd June to live there. The lady I first saw had gone 
away, and there was another lady there who was said to be 
Mrs Dougal, and who was much younger than the first lady. 
I never saw the first lady agafn after leaving the house m 
April. I now know her name was Miss Holland. I never 
saw her the whole time I was with Mr. and Mrs. Dougal. 
She never came to the house, and I never heard them men- 
tion her name. The prisoner used to go and meet the post- 
man and take the letters himself. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Elliott — How was it you came 
back into the service of Dougal the second time? — The lady 
sent for me. 

Do you mean the second Mrs. Dougal, as you call her? — 
Yes. 

How long did you stay there the second time? — I really 
cannot say. 

104 




Miss Holland’s body lying in the greenhouse before the inquest 


Evidence for the Prosecution. 

Emma Burgees 

Some months? — ^Yes. 

Did you ever say anything at all to either Mr. or Mrs. 
Dougal about the first lady you saw there? — I believe I 
told Mrs. Dougal I had been there before when there was 
another lady there I never said anything to the prisoner 
about the first lady. 

Was there a little dog there? — ^Yes. 

Which was there in the first lady^s time? — Yes 

And it was there on 1st August? — ^Yes 

When you were at the farm the second time you slept 
there? — ^Yes. 

Re-examined by Mr. Gill — Do you remember speaking 
to Mis. Dougal or the prisoner about the first lady you had 
seen there? — Yes, I spoke to Mrs. Dougal. 

Did }ou ever hear what had become of her? — ^Yes, that 
she had gone on the Continent 

Who told you that? — Mrs. Dougal 

Did the prisoner say anything to you himself as to what 
had become of her ? — No. 

Mrs Frances Louise Morton, examined by Mr. Gill — 
I am the wife of the Rev. Samuel Morton, the vicar of 
Clavering. In June, 1899, I with my husband visited at 
the Moat Farm, At that time I did not see any one 
resembling photograph D2. The prisoner introduced the 
lady living there as his widowed daughter. I afterwards 
ascertained she was his real wife. My husband and I 
visited occasionally. * 

Cross-examined by Mr. Elliott — ^Was the name of Miss 
Holland ever mentioned to you? — ^Yes. 

By whom? — By the lady who was first introduced to me 
as the prisoner’s widowed daughter, but who I afterwards 
ascertained was the prisoner’s wife. 

When was this? — In October, 1899. 

In what way was Miss Holland referred to? — It was in 
the ordinary course of conversation. 

Re-examined by Mr. Gill — I understand that the name 
arose in consequence of a question about some ladies’ 
clothing ? — ^Yes 

What was it that occurred ? — Mrs Dougal showed me some 

106 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

Mrs F. L. Morton 

ladies' clothing which, he said, had been left there by a 
Miss Holland. 

What did it consist of ? — A. complete ladies' wardrobe. 

Was anything said as to where this lady was? — It was 
said she had gone on a yacht . 

Lucy Pittman, examined by Mr. Grubbe — I reside at the 
Quendon Post Office in Rickling parish. I am assistant to 
my mother, who is the postmistress, and have held that 
appointment since February, 1899. At that time the Moat 
Farm was called Coldhams Farm, and was in the occupa- 
tion of Mrs. Savin. Some little time later the prisoner 
came to reside at the Moat Farm. He called and said he 
had changed the name from Coldhams to the Moat Farm, 
and that all letters to the Moat Farm were to be delivered 
there. From that time to the present time letters have been 
addressed to the Moat Farm; some have been addressed to 
Sami^el H. Dougal, some to S. Herbert Dougal, and some 
to Miss Camille C Holland, Moat Farm, Quendon, Essex 

Have those letters been coming ever since April, 1899? — 
Yes. 

Can you tell me about when the last letter came to the 
Moat Farm addressed to Miss Camille C Holland? — ^About 
March of this year Some of the letters have been sealed 
and some have been circulars unsealed. The sealed letters 
have come to about six months from now. I cannot say the 
size of the envelopes, but they might be some big enough to 
take a banker's passbook. during the time since the 
prisoner has been at the Moat Farm different people have 
delivered the letters — Edward Negus at first, for about a 
year. During his delivery all letters addressed to Mr. 
Dougal and Miss Holland would be handed to him to deliver. 
After he left off, for a short time the letters were delivered 
by my brother, Charles Pittman, and then by Robert Clay- 
den for about six months, commencing in September, 1900. 
When he ceased to deliver I delivered the letters. There were 
letters addressed to Mr. Dougal and Miss Camille C. Hol- 
land, and most of the letters I handed to the prisoner and 
some to the servant The prisoner often met me at the gate 
and took the letters. I do not remember seeing Miss Hol- 
106 



Evidence for the Prosecution. 

Lucy Pittman 

land I know Mrs. Dougal. I have seen her at the Moat 
Farm 

The London mails arrive at the Post Office at about five 
o’clock in the morning. Letters to be delivered by the first 
post have to be posted in London at 5.30 or 6 o’clock When 
I delivered letters I used to start at about 7 o’clock, and 
arrived at the Moat Farm at 7.20 or 7.30. I rode a bicycle 
when I delivered letters. If I walked I could not get there 
till 8 or 8 30. When I said that letters had to be posted in 
London at 5.30 or 6 to be delivered the first post next morning 
I was referring to country letters generally posted in London. 
I now find that letters posted later in London would be 
delivered by the first post at Quendon the next morning. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Elliott — Did you not say in a 
previous inquiry that you yourself had delivered letters at 
the Moat Farm as early as 7.20? — ^Yes, by cycling. 

Would you cycle there when the weather was fine? — Yes. 

What time does the London delivery reach you? About 
seven o’clock? — No, five o’clock. 

In the ordinary way you start delivering at seven ? — ^Yes. 

Do you ever have people call for letters ? — Occasionally. 

What time is the office open? — Seven o’clock. 

Do you know the latest time a letter can be posted in London 
for delivery at Quendon next morning? — Something after ten 
at night. 

Re-examined by Mr. Gill — How far is Quendon Post-Office 
from the Moat Farm? — lijitle over 2 miles. 

In 1899 had you a bicycle? — ^No. 

The boys that delivered letters used to walk? — ^Yes. 

Edward Negus, examined by Mr. Grubbe — I live at Rick- 
ling, and am a houseboy. Some time ago I was employed as 
a post boy — over three years ago. I delivered letters from 
the Quendon Post Office, and amongst other places I delivered 
letters at the Moat Farm, Quendon. I delivered all letters 
given to me by the last witness (Lucy Pittman). I 
delivered letters addressed to Miss Holland at the Moat Farm. 

Robert Clayden, examined by Mr. Grubbe — I am a 
labourer and live at Quendon. In September, 1900, I was 

107 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

Robert Clayden 

employed by Miss Pittman at the Quendon Post Office to 
deliver letters for about six months. Amongst other places 
I delivered letters at the Moat Farm, Clavering, and some- 
times there were letters addressed to Miss Camille C. Holland. 
I sometimes delivered the letters to the prisoner in the field 
where he came to meet me, and these included letters addressed 
to Miss Holland. 

Kate Cranwell, examined by Mr. Gill — I am a single 
woman, and am eighteen years of age I live with my parents 
at Mill End Lane, Clavermg In November, 1901, along 
with my sister Eliza, I went to the Moat Farm I saw the 
prisoner and Mrs. Dougal in the conservatory. My sister 
went about dressmaking, and I was engaged as housemaid 
on 9th December, 1901. Hannah Cole was there as general 
servant She is a girl of weak intellect, and she left about 
a week after I got there. My sister Millie, aged sixteen, 
came to take her place, and she stayed there with me until she 
went with Mrs. Dougal to Ballingry Cottage, Biggin Hill, 
on 6th June, 1902. I was then left alone in the house with 
Mr. Dougal. After he became intimate with me he allowed 
me to wear two gold rings; one was set with two blue stones 
and a diamond, the other with a single diamond I was 
there about nine months ; I left in September, 1902. During 
that time letters very often came addressed to Miss C. C. 
Holland. I remember three at Whitsuntide, when the 
prisoner and my sister were aw^y. I noticed that some of 
the linen was marked S. A. Holland '' and some C C. 
Holland,^’ and some underlinen marked C. C. Holland.^' 
I saw one picture marked C. C. Holland.'' There was in 
the spare room a large black trunk with C. C. Holland " 
painted in white on the lid; it contained 15 ladies' dresses, 
some silk, silk shawls, silk gloves, and almost everything a 
lady would require. I never saw the lady represented in the 
photograph marked D2. 

I am not quite sure whether the trunk was marked 

C. C. H." or C. C. Holland." I remember Mrs. 
Dougal leaving the Moat Farm some months before I did, 
and after she left I, by the prisoner's directions, packed 
108 



Evidence for the Prosecution. 

Kate Cranwell 

a quantity of clothing in the trunk I have just referred 
to. I thought they belonged to Mrs. Dougal. There were 
already some clothes there. I do not know whether they 
were sent to Mrs. Dougal, but I think so. The trunk was 
taken away in the prisoner's pony trap. I saw the prisoner 
open the three letters addressed to Miss Holland which arrived 
in the prisoner's absence at Whitsuntide, 1902; I saw him 
read them and throw them into the fire. During the time I 
was at the Moat Farm I saw some firearms, some guns, and 
a revolver ; I saw the revolver in August last, and I saw some 
cartridges. The revolver was given to Mr. Rowe, and was 
used for starting at the Coronation Sports last year at 
Clavering. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Elliott — I have seen the police 
since I last gave evidence about the revolver. As to the under- 
linen, I remember swearing the exact opposite at the inquest 
and saying that there was not any underlinen marked C. C- 
Holland This was incorrect; I remember that there was 
some so marked. When the letters were opened I was attend- 
ing to the tea some of the time. During the time the prisoner 
was away at Whitsuntide, when the three letters arrived 
addressed to Miss Holland, there were several for the prisoner. 
When he opened them he stood with his back to the fire. 
The envelopes were all about the same shape. When he opened 
Miss Holland's letters he only had the three letters in his 
hand. My sister was not in the same room all the time; 
she came in with the prisoner, who opened his own letters 
first. The pistol looked like a new one last year. Before the 
coroner I did not mention the cartridges. When Mr. Rowe 
brought back the revolver it was put into a chest of drawers 
in the prisoner’s bedroom. 

Re-examined by Mr. Gill — I say the revolver was new, 
because it was bright. I assisted to make the cartridges into 
blank ones by putting paper in. 

Eliza Cranwell, examined by Mr. Gill — I am a single 
woman, and reside with my parents at Mill End Lane, 
Clavering. I am a dressmaker. In 1901 I went to Moat 
Farm, and was employed by Mrs. Dougal to do some dress- 
making. I altered a number of dresses to fit Mrs. Dougal; 

109 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

Eliza Cranwell 

they were taken out of a trunk on the lid of which C. C. 
Holland was painted. I never saw the lady represented 
by the photographs D2 and D3 I stayed at the house a 
week at a time to do work. I have seen the prisoner write, 
and I should know his handwriting. I saw three letters 
addressed to Miss Holland come to Moat Farm I saw the 
prisoner open and read the three letters addressed to Miss 
Holland and throw them into the fire. I came with the 
prisoner into the room. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Elliott — I saw Mrs. Dougal take 
the dresses out of the trunk, and I am sure C. C. Holland 
was painted on the lid of the trunk. The prisoner went down 
into the kitchen before opening the three letters. I remember 
that there were three letters for Miss Holland ; there were other 
letters, but I did not see him open them. 

Did Mrs. Dougal leave the house and go away? — ^Tes. 

Do you know whether there were any divorce proceedings 
between her husband and herself? — ^Yes. I served the papers 
myself at Tenby at Whitsuntide. 

Re-examined by Mr. G-ill — I was away with the prisoner 
to serve Mrs. Dougal with divorce papers. We occupied 
separate apartments, and I was paid for my services. 

Mary Elizabeth Nichol, examined by Mr. Grubbb — live 
at Burnt Mill Cottages, Netteswell, near Harlow, and am a 
domestic servant. I was domestic servant to the prisoner at 
the Moat Farm from 6th November, 1902, to 30th January, 
1903, During that time the only residents in the house were 
the prisoner, Georgina Cranwell, and myself, I never saw 
any one answering to the description of the lady in the 
photograph produced marked D3. During my residence 
there I saw three letters addressed to Miss Holland. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Elliott — I cannot say what the 
letters were like — ^whether they were circulars or not I cannot 
say. 

During the time you were there you saw nothing of Miss 
Holland or the prisoner’s wife? — No. 

George Coote, examined by Mr. Gill — I am a solicitor 
carrying on business at 191 Fleet Street, London. I acted 
110 



Evidence for the Prosecution. 

George Coote 

for Mr. Savill in 1900 as solicitor in the sale of Coldhams 
Farm, when we were instructed there was a contract. The 
purchase money had been paid, and Mr. Harrison, of the 
firm of Ingram & Harrison, had acted for all parties, in- 
eluding the mortgagees. In January, 1900, I was instructed 
by the executors of the late Mr. Savill to act for them in 
connection with the sale of the farm, and Mr. Harding 
acted for the prisoner. Mr. Harrison was then dead. 
There were certain difficulties which delayed the completion 
up to the time I was instructed On 26th January, 1900, 

I received the draft conveyance for perusal from Mr Hard- 
ing I could not advise my clients to complete. The deeds 
had been handed over by Mr. Harrison to the prisoner, 
except the conveyance, and my clients had only received a 
small portion of the purchase money The prisoner issued 
a writ for specific performance, a copy of which I produce, 
dated 2nd March, 1900, and marked DlOO, the plaintiff 
being Samuel Herbert Dougal and the defendants Rebecca 
Savill (widow) and Henry Savill. I entered an appearance 
to the writ on behalf of the defendants to the action, and 
I afterwards received the statement of claim produced, dated 
6th April, 1900, and marked DlOl. In paragraph 12 it 
is alleged that there is a contract dated 10th January, 
1899, made between Messrs Rutter, duly authorised agents 
of the defendants, of the one part, and Mr. C. C. Holland, 
the duly authorised agent of the plaintiff, of the other part, 
that the purchase money was <£1550, and that £200 had been 
paid as deposit That acti(in was eventually compounded 
on the terms stated in the paper now produced, dated 14th 
June, 1900, and marked Dil02, one of the terms being that 
the plaintiff should arrange for satisfactory evidence or 
direction as to and from Mr. Holland that the plaintiff is 
entitled to a conveyance in his name. Eventually I received 
the authority produced, dater 18th June, 1900, and marked 
D66, purporting to be the authority of Camille C. Holland 
for the conveyance of the property to S. Herbert Dougal. 
The signature Camille C. Holland purports to be witnessed 
by S. Herbert Dougal, and that of Dougal by Reginald 
T. Harding, 77 Chancery Lane. In due course the con- 
veyance was executed on 20th August, 1900, and handed 

in 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

George Coote 

over to Mr. Harding as solicitor for Mr. Dougal; the con- 
veyance is marked D103 The documents marked D67 were 
handed to me by my clients, and purport to be signed by 
the prisoner. 

Cross-examined by Mr Elliott — I never saw the pro- 
perty. The conveyance of 20th August, 1900, to the prisoner 
is a perfectly legal document, executed, attested, and 
stamped according to law, and conveys the legal estate to 
the prisoner. On 5th April, 1899, .£1350 was paid to Mr. 
Harrison, and there is a recital of it in the deed. 

Francis Manley Bird Ash win, examined by Mr. Grubbe 
— I am an accountant at the Piccadilly branch of the 
National Provincial Bank. We have a customer named 
Camille Cecil Holland. She started her account in May, 
1895. Her address, I think, was Willesden, London. Since 
then her addresses have been Yoxford, Hassocks, Sussex; 
Market Eow, Saffron Walden; Moat Farm, Quendon, Essex. 
I produce her pass book, which contains a correct copy of 
her account in the books of the bank, which I have examined 
myself; it is a copy of one of our ordinary ledgers at the 
bank I produce the cheque marked Dl, which was presented 
at our bank for payment out of Miss Holland’s account, 
and was paid on 2nd September, 1902. That is the only 
cheque on Miss Holland’s account in the possession of the 
bank^ all the other cheques were returned with the pass book 
in an envelope addressed to Miss Holland, sent to the various 
addresses I have just stated. The account is in credit at the 
present time £207 19s 4d. We have some securities belong- 
ing to Miss Holland. 

The cheque produced marked Dl is the last drawn on 
Miss Holland’s account- On 27th January, 1899, I find a 
payment in by William Hart & Co. for £1587 Il8s. The 
cheque produced, marked D4, is the one for this payment. 

On 30th September there is a payment into Miss Holland’s 
account of £940 18s. The cheque produced, marked D5, is 
the cheque for this item. On 10th October there is credit 
entry in her account for £67 3s 9d The cheque produced, 
marked D6, is the cheque for this item. On 20th November, 
1900, there is credit entry for £546 3s. The cheque pro- 
112 



Evidence for the Prosecution. 

Francis M. B. Ashwin 

duced, marked D7, is the cheque for this item. On 13th 
September, 1901, there is a credit for .£1454 10s 6d. The 
cheque produced, marked D8, is the cheque for that item. 
The five credits just mentioned are drawn by Wm. H. 
Hart & Co. in favour of Miss Holland. 

On 5th December, 1898, there is the first payment out 
under the name of Dougal. I find other payments to Dougal 
darter on. On 12th January, 1899, I find a payment out of 
the account for £200 to Rutter. On 5th April following I 
find a payment to Harrison for £1350. On 22nd April I 
find a payment to Savill for £300. I find on 8th June 
following a payment to self for £30 — this was paid out by 
the following Bank of England notes Nos 65070-5, dated 
7th January, 1899 — that is six £5 notes On 9th October, 

1899, I find a payment to self of £30. That was paid in 
six Bank of England notes for £5, Nos 29197-29202, dated 
5th June, 1899. On 26th October, 1899, there is a payment 
to self for £30, which was paid in £5 notes. Nos. 26808-13, 
dated 9'th June, 1899. On 8th July, 1899, I find a pay- 
ment to Sworder for £8 8s. On 3rd October, 1899, I find 
another for £31 9s. On 12th October, 1899, I find another 
for £153 5s. 6d. On 25th January, 1902, I find a pay- 
ment of £12 17s. 8d. to messenger. 

The following payments were made out of Miss Holland's 
account, payable to Dougal, and were paid to the Birkbeck 
Bank: — 31st October, 1899, Dougal, £670; 5th September, 

1900, Dougal, £100; 19th October, 1900, Dougal, £64; 26th 
November, 1900, Dougal, £550; 1st July, 1901, Dougal, 
£100; 27th September, 1901, Dougal, £1400. 

I produce the specimen signature, marked D9, which Miss 
Holland gave on opening her account on 14th May, 1895. 
I have examined the signatures to the thirteen letters pro- 
duced, each marked DIO, dating from 19th September, 1895, 
to 30th April, 1899, and they appear to be all genuine 
signatures of Camille C Holland. Two of them are written 
on bank forms, signed by Miss Holland, and the rest are 
ordinary letters, all in her handwriting. 

The last occasion that Miss Holland called at the bank 
was on 29th September, 1898. I am aware of this, as in 
the ordinary course of our business one of the before-men- 
I 113 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

Francis M. B. Ashwin 

tioned thirteen documents is a form dated 29th September, 

1898, which would be filled up by one of our clerks and 
signed by the customer at the bank. I know the hand- 
writing in this form; it is that of a former clerk who is 
now dead. After the last of the thirteen letters marked DUO, 
the letter produced marked Dll is the next letter we can 
find at the bank with reference to Miss Holland's account — 
it is dated 29th May, 1899, and is written in the third 
person, and asks for a cheque book. In the ordinary course 
of business a cheque book would be sent to the address, and 
I know a cheque book was sent, but I did not see it 
addressed. 

The next letter is the one produced dated 6th June, 1899, 
marked D12, purporting to enclose a cheque, and asking 
for £5 notes to be sent. On the same day a reply was sent, 
a copy of which is produced, marked D13. It contains the 
following request : — I shall be obliged if you will kindly 
confirm the same by signing it afresh in your usual manner,'' 
and it purports to return a cheque payable to Dougal for con- 
firmation. The letter produced, marked D14, dated 7th June, 

1899, is the letter we received in reply, which states that 
the cheque to Mr Dougal was quite correct, and that owing 
to a sprained hand there might be some discrepancy in the 
cheques lately signed On 8th June there was a payment out 
of £30 in £5 notes, to which I have already referred in my 
evidence. In the ordinary course of business the notes 
would be sent to the address given in the letter. On 9th 
June, 1899, I received the fetter produced, marked D15, 
acknowledging the receipt of the notes, addressed from the 
Moat Farm. 

The next communication we had was a note written on 
the back of a circular produced, marked D16, which is a 
request to the bank to forward certificates of Brunner, 
Mond & Go. to the company. 

The next letiier is the one produced, marked D17, dated 
13th August, 1899, asking for her pass book. It is the 
usual custom of the bank to forward the pass book accord- 
ingly to the address given in the letter, which in this case 
was the Moat Farm. 

The next letter is the one produced, marked D18, and 
114 



Evidence for the Prosecution. 

Francis M. B. Asliwin 

dated 18th September, 1899, signed Camille C. Holland, and 
requesting the bank to send certificates for the following 
giiares: — United Alkali, £500, and George Newnes Prefer- 
ence, £400. The reply, a copy of which I produce, marked 
D19, was sent. 

The next letter is the one produced, marked D20, dated 
29th September, 1899, signed Camille C. Holland, purport- 
ing to enclose a cheque for £940 18s. to be placed to her 
credit, which was done, as I have already stated in evidence. 

The next letter is the one dated 7th October, 1899, marked 
D21, purporting to enclose a cheque and asking for notes 
to be sent. They were sent with a letter, of which I produce 
a copy, marked D22. The notes were those I have already 
referred to in my evidence. I received the letters produced, 
marked D23 and D24 respectively, both dated 9th October, 
1899, forwarding a cheque for £67 3s. 9d. to be credited, 
and enclosing a circular to be attended to. The cheque was 
credited as already stated in my evidence. On 11th October, 
1899, we received the letter dated the 10th, marked D25, 
acknowledging the notes for £30 ; it is written on one of our 
bank forms, which it is our practice to forward with anything 
requiring acknowledgment. The next letter is one from 
Camille C. Holland, dated 25th October, 1899, marked D26, 
purporting to enclose a cheque and requesting payment by 
notes. These were sent on the 26th, accompanied by a letter, 
a copy of which I produce, marked D27,* the numbers of the 
notes I have already stated. • 

I afterwards received the letter dated 27th October, 1899, 
marked D28, acknowledging the notes for £30. The next 
letter is one produced, dated 27th November, 1899, marked 
D29, referring to some certificates which had attention. The 
next letter is one produced, dated 6th December, 1899, and 
marked D30, asking for the pass book. The next is a note 
written on the back of a circular dated 3rd August, 1900, 
produced and marked D31, requesting attention. 

The next letter is one dated 1st September, 1900, produced, 
marked D32, written in the third person and asking the 
bank to forward certificates to the gas company, which was 
attended to. 


116 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

Francis M. B. Ashwin 

The next letter is one signed Camille C. Holland, dated 
31st October, 1900, produced and marked D33, requesting 
certificates to be sent of City and West End Property (60), 
Central Uruguay Eastern Extension (15), and Western Ex- 
tension (60). I produce a copy of our reply, dated 1st 
November, 1900, and marked D34:, forwarding the certificates 
and stating that it was Northern Extension and not Western. 
We received the acknowledgment produced, and marked D35, 
on the form which had been sent for the purpose, dated 2nd 
November. The next letter was the one produced written in 
the third person, dated 17th November, 1900, produced and 
marked D36, purporting to enclose a cheque and asking to 
have it placed to her credit. The cheque enclosed was Messrs. 
Hart's cheque for <£546, to which I have already referred as 
placed to her credit on 20th November, 1900. 

The next letter is the one produced written in the third 
person, marked D37, and dated 12th December, 1900, asking 
for her pass book, which was sent. The next letter is the one 
produced, marked D38, dated 10th July, 1901, and written 
in the third person, asking for pass book, which was sent. 
The next letter is the one dated 21st August, 1901, produced 
and marked D39, asking for attention to a document pur- 
porting to be enclosed. I produce a copy of the reply, dated 
22nd August, 1901, and marked D40. The next letter is one 
purporting to be signed by Camille C. Holland, dated 3rd 
September, 1901, and marked D41, requesting us to forward 
to Messrs, Hart & Co., her broilers, £600 Cape of Good Hope, 
1875, 4^ per cent. ; £300 Manila Railway Company 6 per 
cent. Prior Lien Mort. ; £300 Inter-Oceanic Railway of 
Mexico 5 per cent. ; Palace Theatre, £250 10s. ordinary shares. 
The certificates were forwarded to Messrs. Hart accordingly, 
and we wrote to Miss Holland informing her thereof, a copy 
of which letter I produce, dated 4th September, 1901, and 
marked D42. We received the letter dated 13th September, 
1901, marked D43, enclosing a cheque for £1464 10s. 6d. to 
be placed to her account — it is Messrs. Hart & Co.'s cheque, 
to which I have already referred. We received a letter dated 
9th January, 1902, marked D44, asking for a small box in 
brown paper to be forwarded ; it is written in the third 
116 



Evidence for the Prosecution. 

Francis M. B. Asbwin 

person. I produce a copy of the bank’s reply, dated 10th 
January, 1902, and marked D45. The box wrapped in brown 
paper was sent as requested. I saw the box — it was a smallish 
one, and I believe it was a tin box, I should think about the 
size of the one produced. We received the letter produced, 
dated 14th January, 1902, written in the third person and 
marked D46, acknowledging receipt of the box The next 
letter and the last we received is one produced, dated 15th 
February, 1902, written in the third person and marked 
D47, asking for the pass book, which was sent. It is the 
custom of the bank to return cheques with the pass book 
unless we are asked not to do so. 

After 30th April, 1899, we have no record of any other 
address of Miss Holland except the Moat Farm, Coldhams, 
Quendon, Essex, and that is the address I should have written 
to if I had been communicating with Miss Holland at the 
present time and these proceedings had not been commenced. 

Referring to the only cheque produced and marked Dl, 
it is No. 39726, and the cheque book including the cheque 
was issued on 1st June, 1899, numbered from 39681 to 
39740. The account is debited on 1st June with 5s. for the 
cheque book. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Elliott — In my opinion the cheque 
for £28 15s. marked Dl is undoubtedly in the handwriting 
of Miss Holland. I take the same view as to all other docu- 
ments produced and purporting to be written by Miss Holland, 
with the exception of two, .and that view is based on an 
experience of twenty-four years in the banking world. All 
the cheques presented have been invariably paid without 
demur, including the one of 6th June which we wrote about 
after it was paid. Since the account was started m 1895 a 
good many cheques have been drawn, and I and my officials 
have had many opportunities of seeing her signature. I 
believe the endorsements on the five cheques drawn by Hart 
& Co. are in the handwriting of Miss Holland. 

During the time Miss Holland has banked with us she has 
had five different addresses. Some of her letters were written 
from Market Row, Safiron Walden, and the letter of 29th 
April, 1899, was written from the Moat Farm; the bank have 

117 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

Francis M. B. Ashwin 

not kept the envelopes; we only keep them for a fortnight — 
it is impossible to say where the letters were posted. 

When the witness Holland came to the bank he was shown 
the cheque Dl, and he immediately said it was a forgery. 
The other documents produced were placed on the table before 
him, and amongst them some that Miss Holland had signed 
at the bank herself. My recollection is that he said that they, 
including those which had been signed at the bank, were all 
forgeries. He did not, as far as I remember, look at them 
carefully, except the cheque He did not mention to me that 
he had not seen her handwriting for many years. My deal- 
ings were with Inspector Harden, who said he thought they 
were forgeries when he saw them. I think Inspector Marden 
brought me some other handwriting of Miss Holland. In the 
documents marked DIO she addresses her letters in dii^erent 
ways, sometimes addressing the manager by the name of 
manager alone, sometimes Dear Sir,^’ on one occasion 

Dear Mr. Robinson,^' and she varies her signature very 
considerably, but not unusually so. In the remaining docu- 
ments there is a difierence in the way the letters are addressed, 
sometimes in the first person and sometimes in the third — 
sometimes “ the Manager of the National Provincial Bank, 
Piccadilly, and sometimes with the words St. James’s 
Branch added. 

No outside person could possibly get access to the bank 
signature book. The signature to the cheque D1 is exactly 
like the signature to the signature book, the signature to 
some of the letters varying slightly from it. I do not see 
any two exactly alike. The signatures in the letters marked 
DIO vary from the signature in the signature book, and the 
signatures on the forms signed at the bank also vary from 
the signature in the signature book. The signatures which 
are most alike are the signature in the signature book, the 
signature to the form dated 29th September, 1898, marked 
DIO, and the cheque Dl. 

Ee-examined by Mr. Gill— There are about 3000 customers 
at our branch of the bank. The two letters in the third 
person, marked Dll and D12, are not in the handwriting of 
Miss Holland — ^they do not pretend to be. 

118 









The “ Heath ** Cheque, forged by S, H. Dougal 



Evidence for the Prosecution. 

Francis M. B. Ashwin 

In my opinion, Miss Holland wrote the whole of the letter 
sparked D14, and the explanation that she had a sprained 
wrist is sufficient explanation to account for the laboured 
handwriting, I consider the signature perfectly genuine. I 
am of opinion that the signature on D15 is genuine, and 
compares with the signatures of the letters marked DIO. 

The excepted letters are the first letters I have been able 
to find which we received from Miss Holland in the third 
person, and the letter of 29th May, 1899, marked Dll, 
is the first letter which we have been able to find that we 
received not written in Miss Holland’s handwriting, and I 
know of no other We are still searching. In my opinion 
the two excepted letters which are written in the third 
person and are not in the handwriting of Miss Holland 
are in the same handwriting as the entries in the diaries 
produced by Inspector Marden. I am of opinion that the 
letter marked D29 is the handwriting of Miss Holland. 
On looking further into the letters I find that D32 is also 
not in Miss Holland’s handwriting, and that it is in the same 
handwriting as the entries in the diary. As to the letter 
D39, I am of opinion that the whole is in the handwriting 
of Miss Holland I have no reason to doubt it. The 
endorsed signature of D4 is much more like the signatures 
on the 2nd and 4th of DIO. I am not prepared to state 
that the date on the cheque D1 is in the handwriting of 
Miss Holland, but I see no reason to doubt it. I am of 
opinion that Miss Holland could have written the date 28, 
and the figures are not like the 1st and 2nd I observe in 
the diary. I consider that the date bears a stronger 
resemblance to Miss Holland’s handwriting than to the 
prisoner’s. 

With regard to the cheque, Mr. Holland was very positive 
that it was a forgery, and my impression was that he 
believed the other documents were all forgeries — ^but I was 
attending to Inspector Marden and not to Mr. Holland. 

Further cross-examined — D32 is obviously not written by 
Miss Holland, but by some other person. 

Further re-examined — ^I am sure that all the thirteen 
letters, marked DIO, were placed before Mr. Holland when 
he called at the bank, and Inspector Marden saw them. 

119 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

Francis M. B. Ashwin 

On 2oih. May, 1S99, there was a payment out of Miss 
Holland's account at our bank for <£25 ; the cheque was 
cashed over the counter and paid in three £5 notes and 
£10 in cash, the numbers of the notes being D/71 54991 >3, 
dated London, 3rd January, 1899. The following are the 
securities which we hold on behalf of Miss Camille C Hol- 
land : — 20 £20 New Sharlston Colliery, preference; 80 £1 
shares Brunner, Mond, ordinary; £500 Midland Railway, 
deferred ; £500 Midland Railway, preferred. I value the 
above securities at about £1495. 

Isaac Newton Edwards, examined by Mr. Grubbe — I 
reside at The Laurels, Woodfield Row, New Barnet, and I 
am the cashier of the Birkbeck Bank, Chancery Lane branch, 
London. The prisoner, Samuel Herbert Dougal, started an 
account at the bank on 14th October, 1899, with a credit 
of two sums of £35 and £20 respectively. The next credit 
item under date 30th October, 1899, is £670, and I pro- 
duce the credit slip marked D48 for that payment into his 
account; the credit note is dated 28th October, 1899, and 
is in the prisoner's handwriting; this cheque came from 
the National Provincial Bank. On 4th September, 1900, 
there was a credit of £100. I produce the pay-in slip 
marked D49; it is in the prisoner's handwriting, and is 
dated 3rd September, 1900; the cheque came from the 
National Provincial Bank, Piccadilly. On 18th October, 
1900, there is a credit of £64. I produce the pay-in slip, 
marked D50, in the prisondt’s handwriting, dated 17th 
October, 1900. On 24th November, 1900, there is a credit 
of £550 in one amount I produce the pay-in slip, marked 
D51 and dated 24th November, 1900; it was one cheque on 
the National Provincial Bank. On 29th June, 1901, there 
was credited a sum of £123 6s. I produce the pay-in slip 
in the prisoner's handwriting, marked D52 and dated 27th 
June, 1901 ; the payment includes a cheque for £100 on 
the Piccadilly branch of the National Provincial Bank. On 
25th September, 1901, there is credited to the prisoner's 
account £1400 in one cheque, which was drawn on the 
National Provincial Bank, Piccadilly. I produce the pay- 
in slip, dated 24th September, 1901, and marked D53. On 
120 



Evidence for the Prosecution. 

Isaac N. Edwards 

1st September, 1902, he is credited with £28 15s. I pro- 
duce the pay-in slip in the prisoner's handwriting, dated 
30th August, 11902, marked D5i. The cheque produced, 
marked Dl, is the cheque paid in on that occasion; the 
handwriting of the endorsement J. Heath " is like 
DougaTs. The cheque book produced by Inspector Mar den 
is one issued from our bank, and the handwriting on the 
counterfoils is the prisoner’s. I produce the pass book, 
which includes a correct copy of entries in the bank books 
of the prisoner’s account. I produce a bundle of thirteen 
cheques, marked D66, as specimens of the prisoner’s 
signatures 

On 5th March, 1903, a cheque was drawn on the prisoner’s 
account for £305, which practically closed the account; it 
is the last in the bundle D65, and was cashed on the date 
of the cheque; it is payable to bearer, and it was paid as 
follows — £5 notes, Nos. 09041-50 and 09801-11, dated 22nd 
December, r902 ; £10 notes, Nos 84571-80, dated 11th July, 
1902; £20 notes, Nos. 90513-7, dated 15th March, 1902. 

The entries in the diaries produced by Inspector Marden 
are all in the prisoner’s handwriting. The two letters pro- 
duced by Inspector Marden and marked D56 are in the 
prisoner’s handwriting. The body of the letter produced, 
marked D57, dated 20th September, 1899, to Messrs, Hart 
& Co. is in the prisoner’s handwriting, and it is the same 
with the body of the letter D58, dated 27th September, 
1899. The body of the letter produced, marked D59, dated 
29th September, 1899, is, m my opinion, in the prisoner’s 
handwriting. The body of the letter dated 9th October, 
1899, marked D60, and the body of the letter of 2nd Novem- 
ber, 1900, marked D61, are both in the prisoner’s hand- 
writing. The bodies of the three letters marked D62, D63, 
and D64, and dated respectively 17th November, 1900, 31st 
August, 1901, and 3rd September, 1901, are all in the 
prisoner’s handwriting. The body of the letter dated 27th 
November, 1901, marked D65, is also in the prisoner’s hand- 
writing. All the foregoing letters are addressed to Messrs. 
^Hart Co., and are produced by Mr. Hensler. The body 
of the letter produced by Mr. George Coote, dated 18th 
June, 1900, and marked D66, is in the prisoner’s hand- 

121 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

Isaac N. Edwards 

writing. The bundle of letters produced by Mr. Coote and 
marked D67 are all in the prisoner's handwriting. On the 
five transfers produced by Mr. Coote of George Newnes shares 
the attesting witness to Miss Holland’s signature purports to 
be Dougal, and is in his handwriting; the transfers are 
marked D68. The letter produced by Mr. Rutter, dated 
10th February, 1900, and marked D69, is in the prisoner’s 
handwriting. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Elliott — I recognised the hand- 
writing on the documents at once; they were not in any 
way disguised. This applies to the bodies of the letters and 
the attesting witness to the transfers. 

Re-examined by Mr. Grubbe — I produce pay-in slips dated 
14:th October, 1899, for <£35 and £20 respectively, which are 
the first two items in the pass book produced; the two slips 
are marked respectively D146 and D147. I produce pay- 
in slip dated 6th November, 1899, marked D148, for £10. 
The body of the letter D75 is in the handwriting of the 
prisoner. I produce the fourteen cheques, marked D143, 
signed by the prisoner and made payable to Holland 6c 
Barrett. The letters in the third person, marked Dll, 
D12, and D32, appear to be in prisoner’s handwriting. The 
balance to the prisoner’s credit at the bank was 16s 7d. on 
5th March last, and there has been added to it, I believe, 
£3 15s. for interest previously accrued on the current 
account. The endorsement S. Herbert Dougal on the note 
numbered 54992 is, I believe, in the prisoner’s handwriting. 

Further cross-examined — ^The prisoner has, as a rule, kept 
a pretty good balance, but it has gone down. I do not 
profess to be an expert in handwriting. I cannot remem- 
ber seeing the prisoner’s handwriting except on cheques, 
credit slips, and the letter D48. 

Further re-examined — ^We have a specimen signature on 
the opening of the prisoner’s account. The prisoner’s 
balance at the bank has gone down, and then been put in 
credit again. 

Charles James Dodd, examined by Mr. Grubbe — I reside 
at 18 Grange Road, Bishop’s Stortford, and am cashier for 
Messrs. Holland Barrett, grocers and clothiers, Bishop’s 
122 



Evidence for the Prosecution. 

Charles J. Podd 

Stortford. For some years past the prisoner has had a 
small account with my firm, and we have received cheques 
from him from time to time. I produce fourteen cheques 
payable to Messrs. Holland & Barrett, beginning with date 
11th December, 1899, and all marked DUS, drawn by the 
prisoner. The last is dated 10th June, 1902. These cheques 
were passed through our bankers. 

Edward Frank Gribble, examined by Mr. Gill — I am the 
manager of the London and County Bank, Bishop's Stortford 
The prisoner had an account at our bank which he opened 
on 22nd December, 1902. There is now a balance of £4:1 8s. 
9d to his credit. The prisoner also had a deposit account 
opened by a payment-in on 22nd December, 1902, of £300. 
The deposit account was closed by its withdrawal on 5th 
March, 1903, which was passed through his current account 
and withdrawn the same day. I produce an extract of the 
two accounts, marked D136. I have examined it with our 
ledgers, and it is correct. On 4th July, 1899, a Bank of 
England note (£5), dated 7th January, 1899, No. 65070, 
was received by our bank from Thomas Mumford, a customer 
living at Quendon and a grocer. 

John Vincent, examined by Mr. Grubbe — I am the pro- 
prietor of the Central Hotel, Long Lane, London. The 
prisoner stayed at my hotel on the night of 17th March of 
this year, and was there on the morning of 18th March. 
He had some luggage with him, and he asked me to have it 
put into my private office. I asked him if he would require 
his room again that night, and he replied that he did not 
know, as his movements were uncertain. I took charge of 
the luggage, and subsequently handed it to the police. The 
prisoner left the hotel about ten o'clock on the morning of 
18th March, and I afterwards ascertained that he had been 
arrested. 

Charles Burgess, examined by Mr. Grubbe — am a 
labourer, and was employed by the prisoner down to March 
of this year. I last saw him at Moat Farm on Friday, 13th 
March. He never came back after that. 


123 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

Thomas G. Hensler 

Thomas Gordon Hensler, examined by Mr. Gill — I am a 
member of the firm of W. H. Hart & Co., stockbrokers, 26 
Old Broad Street, London, and I am a member of the Stock 
Exchange. Miss Camille Cecile Holland became a client of 
ours in 1894, introduced by a gentleman named Caine. I 
saw her at my office in conjunction with my partner Mr. Hart. 
Subsequently to that date we purchased and afterwards sold 
certain shares in her name. The list produced, marked D70, 
is the list of shares bought and sold in Miss Holland’s name. 
With regard to those transactions, we received the five letters 
marked D7l from Miss Holland, and I received the produced 
letter dated 3rd January, 1899, marked D72, accompanied 
by a list of shares, and asking which we recommended should 
be sold. We advised the sale, and sold 15 shares on 6th 
January, 1899, and 25 shares on 7th January, 1899, of the 
Bank of Liverpool. We sent the transfer to her for signature. 
The letter produced, dated 5th January, 1899, and marked 
D73, is the letter of instructions for their sale. We received 
the three letters produced, marked D74, in relation to the 
foregoing transactions; one of them, dated 19th January, 
1899, asked the cheque to be sent to the National Provincial 
Bank, but for some reason I cannot now state it was sent to 
the address at the head of the letter. The cheque enclosed 
was the cheque marked D4 for £1587 18s. 

On 3rd September, 1899, we sold 43 Great Laxey shares in 
Miss Holland’s name, and in September we also sold 400 
George Newnes preference shasres and £500 United Alkali 
debentures. I have made a search, but have failed to find 
the letter with instructions for the sale of these shares. We 
afterwards sent on the transfers of the Great Laxey and 
George Newnes preference shares to the Moat Farm, Quendon, 
addressed to Miss Holland, and I received the produced letter, 
dated 18th September, marked D75, acknowledging the 
receipt of the transfers, and asking the number of witnesses 
required to the signature. I produce a copy of our reply, 
marked D76, dated 19th September, 1899. I afterwards 
received the produced letter of 20th September, marked D67, 
enclosing the certificates, and I produce a copy of a letter 
sent, I believe, in reply, dated 22nd September, 1899, marked 
124 



Evidence for the Prosecution. 

Thomas G. Hensler 

D77. The letter of 20th September, marked D57, states that 
the certificate for the Great Laxey shares had been mislaid, 
and our reply states that the company would issue a duplicate 
on having the usual indemnity. We afterwards received the 
transfers of the George Newnes preference shares, and acknow- 
ledged them by a letter dated 25th September, 1899, a copy 
of which I produce, marked D78. I also produce a copy of 
a letter which we sent to Miss Holland, dated 26th September, 
1899, marked D79, enclosing transfer for £500 Alkali deben- 
ture stock. I also produce a letter dated 27th September, 
1899, marked D58, returning the transfers and stating that 
the new certificate of the Great Lasey shares would be handed 
to us by the company, and that the indemnity certificate would 
be forwarded to the company that day. On 28th September, 
1899, we forwarded a cheque for £940 18s., marked D5, with 
a letter, a copy of which I produce, marked D80. I produce 
the letter dated 29'th September, 1899, purporting to be signed 
by Miss Holland and to be sent from the Moat Farm, marked 
D59, acknowledging the receipt of the cheque. We wrote a 
letter on 3rd October, 1899, a copy of which I produce, 
marked D81, as to the delivery of the Great Laxey shares, 
and we received a telegram; in consequence, in our ordinary 
course of business, we should obtain a new certificate from the 
Great Laxey Company before delivery. On 5th October, 
1899, we sent the cheque for £67 3s. 9d., marked D6, with a 
letter, a copy of which I produce, dated 5th October, 1899, 
marked D82, and we received the letter marked D60 acknow- 
ledging the receipt of the cheque. We received the letter 
marked D61 instructing us to sell 50 Central Uruguay Rail- 
way Eastern Extension and 60 City and West End Properties 
preference shares, and, having sold them, we sent a letter 
dated 3rd November, 1900, a copy of which I produce, marked 
D83, enclosing contracts for the same. We afterwards wrote 
a letter dated 15th November, 1900, a copy of which I pro- 
duce, marked D84, acknowledging the transfers and enclosing 
the cheque for £546 3s., marked D7, and we received the 
letter of acknowledgment dated I7th November, 1900, marked 
D62. We delivered the transfer to the broker acting for the 
buyer. We afterwards received the letter dated 31st August, 

125 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

Thomas G. Hensler 

1901, marked D63, from the Moat Farm, Quendon, and pur- 
porting to be signed by Camille C. Holland, stating, I am 
anxious to raise £1500, will you kindly give me your opinion 
as to which it would be advisable to dispose of/^ We replied 
on 2nd September, 1901, advising the sale of certain shares, 
a copy of which I produce, marked D85. We received a 
letter dated 3rd September, 1901, marked D64:, instructing 
us to sell Cape of Good Hope, 1875, per cent., £500; 
Manila Railway 6 per cent, prior lien mortgage, £300 ; 
Inter-Oceanic of Mexico 5 per cent., £300; Palace Theatre 
ordinary 250 10s. shares; purporting to be signed by Camille 
C. Holland from the Moat Farm. On 4th September we sold 
the shares and wrote a letter addressed to Miss Holland at 
the Moat Farm informing her thereof and with the contracts ; 
a copy of the letter I produce, marked D86. I received the 
certificates of the above stock from the National Provincial 
Bank. We in due course sent on the transfers of the Palace 
shares, the only ones requiring transfers, to Miss Holland, 
addressed to the Moat Farm, Quendon, and on 12th Septem- 
ber, 1901, we wrote acknowledging the receipt of the transfers 
of the Palace shares, and enclosing the cheque dated 12th 
September, 1901, for £1454 10s. 6d., marked D8. I produce 
a copy of this letter, marked D87. The cheque represented 
the proceeds of the sale of the four stocks. We received the 
letter produced, dated 13th September, marked D88, pur- 
porting to be signed by Miss Holland, acknowledging the 
receipt of the cheque. We afterwards received the letter pro- 
duced, dated 27th November, 1901, marked D65, re the 
Palace Theatre shares, purporting to be signed by Miss 
Holland, and stating that she had not been credited by her 
bankers with the dividend. We later received a cheque from 
Miss Holland for £1 7s 6d., the dividend we claimed. I 
have searched for the letter enclosing it, but have been unable 
to find it. 

Since January, 1899, we have sold for Miss Holland stocks 
and shares which altogether realised £4696 13s. 3d. 

On 13th February, 1894, we purchased for Miss Holland 
£600 de Beers first mortgage bonds, and it would appear 
from her pass book that this bond was paid ofi in January, 

126 



Evidence for the Prosecution. 

Thomas G. Hensler 

1899, producing £515. If the securities in the possession of 
the National Provincial Bank are valued at £1495, this would 
represent a capital invested and realised since January, 1899, 
of £6606 13s. 3d. 

Cross-examined by Mr Elliott — Of this amount £1587 
18a. was realised on the 6th and 7th January, 1899, and the 
letters authorising those sales are dated from Hassocks. I 
have had many years^ experience on the Stock Exchange, and 
of necessity I should see numbers of signatures and receive 
a number of letters from our clients. I was in Court part 
of the time when Mr. Ashwin gave his evidence. I have 
always taken the view that throughout the transactions from 
February, 1894, to September, 1901, the signatures of Miss 
Holland were genuine ; that the letters purporting to be 
written by her were so written; that the signatures to the 
transfers were her signatures. The five endorsements on our 
cheques I should not observe. 

Re-examined by Mr Gill — On receiving the letters and 
documents subsequently to May, 1899, I should not, and 
did not, compare the signatures with the previous signa- 
tures received. We have a large connection, and it would 
be impossible to do this. I produce a cheque dated 7th 
May, 1894, endorsed by Miss Holland, marked D89. There 
is great similarity between this endorsed signature and the 
endorsed signature on the cheque marked D8. On compar- 
ing the endorsed signatures on the cheques D4, D5, D6, D7, 
D8, D89, I find they vary; the endorsement on the cheque 
1)4 varies from the othere, although there is a great 
similarity, but I am not a writing expert In my opinion, 
a person endorsing a dheque would do it more carelessly 
than signing one. 

Thomas HB3MnT Gurkin, examined by Mr. Gill — I carry 
on business at 59 Holborn Viaduct, London, and am an 
expert in handwriting with ninteen years^ experience. I 
have examined the whole of the exhibits in this case, and 
have compared the proved handwriting of the prisoner, 
Samuel Herbert Dougal, and of Miss Holland, and I have 
compared the remainder of the documents which are disputed 
with them. Amongst the other documents I have examined 

127 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

Thomas H Gurrm 

the signature to the cheque marked Dl, and I am of opinion 
that it is not in Miss Holland's handwriting; I am of opinion 
that the writing in the cheque, including the signature, is 
in the prisoner’s handwriting in imitation of the writing 
of Miss Holland I have examined the handwriting on the 
declaration marked Dll 6, and I am of opinion that the 
signature Camille C Holland, the attestation of the justice 
of the peace, the writing on the second line from the top, 
and the words Saffron Walden, 27th September, are all in 
the disguised handwriting of the prisoner. With regard to 
the endorsed signature on cheque Dl, it is in the same hand- 
writing as all the handwriting on the face of the cheque. 
I have compared exhibits Dll and D12, which are the first 
two letters at the bank after the admitted ones, with the 
remainder of the correspondence ending with exhibit D47, 
and I am of opinion that all purporting to be written by 
Camille C. Holland are in the handwriting of the prisoner. 
I have also examined the transfers exhibited; the signatures 
S. H, Dougal are in the undisguised handwriting of the 
prisoner. I have seen a number of letters to the secretary 
of the Laxey Mining Company, and the bodies of the letters 
are in the undisguised handwriting of the prisoner. I have 
also examined a receipt dated list May, 1903, marked D150, 
as one of the specimens of handwriting placed before me. 
I have reported on all the documents put in, and the report 
produced and marked D151 is my detailed report. Speak- 
ing generally, I am of opinion that there is not a signature 
purporting to be Miss C. C. Holland’s which is genuine since 
19th May, 1899 

Cross-examined by Mr. Elliott — The question of hand- 
writing is a matter of opinion, and I form that opinion 
not in any way by the history of the case, but solely by 
the characteristics in the handwriting. In this case I may 
have heard that Miss Holland disappeared on 19th May, 
1899. I have given evidence in many hundreds of cases, 
sometimes called by the Treasury and sometimes by the 
defence, and other experts have been called in opposition to 
my opinion from time to time ; sometimes my opinion has 
been upheld, and sometimes those opposed to me. I have 
seen the photograph of the signature from the signature 
128 




Miss Holland’s undoubted Signatures 


c.-^ c. 

Miss Holland’s disputed Signatures 




Dougal’s Handwriting 



Evidence for the Prosecution. 

Thomas H. Gurrin 

book at the bank. The signature on the cheque D1 does 
resemble the signature in the signature book, and it may 
be a little more like it than like the genuine signatures 
on the letters DIO, but I do not think the resemblance is 
very close I am not sure whether the address and date 
of the letter dated 30th April, 1899, being one of the 
letters marked DIO, are in Miss Holland’s handwriting, but 
all the handwriting purporting to be Miss Holland’s in the 
letters marked DIO is in my opinion genuine I am of 
opinion from a casual glance that the whole of the hand- 
writing in the letter dated 5th April, 1899, being one of 
DIO, IS in one handwriting, but I have not carefully studied 
it except by using it as a basis with the others. 

To the best of my belief the whole of the written matter 
on the document dated 24th January, 1899, being also one 
of DIO, is in the same handwriting Also that the address 
in the letter dated 3rd April, 1899, is in the same hand- 
writing as the rest of the letter. Also that the address in 
the letter of 25th February, 1899, is written by the same 
person as wrote the signature. When the exhibits were sent 
to me I believe all the documents exhibited in the bundle 
marked DIO were fastened together, and I believe the ex- 
hibits Dill to D47 were also all fastened together; and it 
was, I believe, put to me that the documents DIO were all 
in Miss Holland’s handwriting and were to be part of my 
basis, but my letter of instructions gave me no information 
as to the alleged forgeries. I undid DIO and mixed them 
up with the rest promiscuously, and then sorted out with 
the greatest of ease I cannot remember how many I kept 
out of DIO for purpose of examination, as I have examined 
every document I do not say in the declaration purport- 
ing to be taken before Mr. Bell lhat the name Camille Cecile 
Holland at the top is in the same handwriting as the words 
Joseph Bell or in the same handwriting as the signature 
Camille C Holland The address is in the same handwrit- 
ing in the declaration as the signature Camille C. Holland, 
and I am of opinion that the words '' Before me, Joseph 
Bell, justice of the peace for the county of Essex ” are in 
the same handwriting as the signature Camille C Holland. 

Ite-examined — In the letter of instructions from the 
^ 129 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

Thomas H. Gurrin 

Treasury no history was given of the case. I knew that D1 
was alleged to be a forgery, but with regard to the rest 
of the documents I did not know that any particular speci- 
men was alleged to be a forgery. When I made my report 
I had before me the copy of the depositions of the wit- 
nesses Ashwin and Edwards. 

William Richard Percy Lawrence, examined by Mr 
G-rubbe — I am cashier in the issue department of the Bank 
of England. I remember at about 1.30 p m on 18th March 
last the prisoner came to the counter of the Bank of England 
where I was and presented fourteen ^10 Bank of England 
notes, Nos, 13856-60 inclusive, dated 11th July, 1902, and 
Nos. 84572-80 inclusive, dated 11th July, 1902 In con- 
sequence of finding some of the notes stopped, I said, I 
am sorry, but I shall have to ask you to accompany me to 
the secretary's office,’' and he said, Why, are the notes 
stopped?” I said, Some of them are; they will give you 
any information in the secretary’s office, and it will be 
a question which will detain you for a few moments.” I 
then conducted the prisoner to the secretary’s office. One 
of the notes numbered 13860 has the name Sydney Dom- 
ville, Upper Terrace, Bournemouth, endorsed on it, 1 
handed the notes to the gentleman in the secretary’s 
department 

I produce a number of notes dated 1899 The numbers 
of the notes are as follows: — ^No. 26808, dated 9th June, 
1899, paid into the Bank of on 31st October, 1899, 

from the London and County Bank, Bishop’s Stortford. The 
particulars of the others are as follows : — 


Number. 

Date. 

When paid in 

By whom. 

26809 

9tli June, 1899. 

16th Nov , 1899. 

London and County Bank, 
Bishop’s Stortford. 

26810 

Bo. 

4th Bee., 1899 

London and Westminster 
Bank. 

26811 

Bo. 

8th Nov., 1899. 

Union Bank. 

26812 

Bo. 

Do. 

Bo. 

26813 

Do. 

1st Nov., 1899. 

Barclay. 

65070 

7th Jan., 1899. 

5th July, 1899. 

London and County Bank, 
Bishop’s Stortford. 

65071 

Bo, 

27th June, 1899. 

Bo. 


130 



Evidence for the Prosecution. 

William R. P. Lawrence 


Number. 

Date. 

When paid in 

By whom 

65072 

7th Jan , 1899. 

3rd July, 1899. 

Postmaster- G eneral. 

65073 

Do. 

21st June, 1899. 

London and County Bank, 




Saffron Walden 

65074 

Do. 

23rd June, 1899. 

Union Bank. 

65075 

Do. 

30th Aug. , 1899. 

Barclay. 

291971 

290221 

inclusive 5th 
June, 1899. 

17th Oct., 1899. 

Union Bank. 


I also produce three notes numbered 54991-3, dated 3rd 
January, 1899, the first one paid in on 6th June, 1899, by 
the Postmaster-General; the next on© 54992, paid in 23rd 
June, 1399, by the National Provincial Bank; and the third 
paid m on 2nd June, 1899, by the London and County Bank, 
Bishop's Stortford. The note numbered 54992 bears the 
endorsement S Herbert Dougal, also the endorsement F. 
Ellis, 5 York Street, S.W The note 54991 bears the endorse- 
ment H Dougal. Quendon " 

Cross-examined by Mr Elliott — Did the prisoner go quite 
willingly with you to the secretary's office^ — Quite. 

Ronald Clement George Dale, examined by Mr Grubbe — 
I am clerk in the secretary's office in the Bank of England. 
On 18th March last the piisoner was conducted into the 
secretary's office by the last witness, Mr Lawrence. The 
prisoner took a seat, and Mr. Lawrence made a communica- 
tion to me privately and handed to me the fourteen <£10 
Bank of England notes to which he has referred as having 
been given to him by the prisoner. I ascertained that nine 
of the notes had been stopped by the police, and I sent for 
Inspector Cox, who was on duty at the bank Befoi’e he 
arrived I asked the prisoner where he got the notes from, 
and he said he got some of them from the bank. I then gave 
the prisoner the slip of paper produced, marked D135, and 
in consequence of my request to writ© his name and address, 
he wrote the words on it now appearing thereon, viz., Sydney 
Domville, Upper Terrace, Bournemouth. Inspector Cox 
afterwards came, and I made a comniiinication to him, and 
he took the prisoner. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Elliott — The nine notes stopped 
had the stamp of the Biikbeck Bank on them. 


131 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

Henry Cox 

Henry Cox, examined by Mr. Grxjbbe — I am a detective 
inspector of the City of London Police Force. On 18th 
March, 1903, I was on duty at the Bank of England, and 
I was on that day at about 2 p.m. called by the witness Dale 
into the secretary's office, where he handed me nine £10 
Bank of England notes and made a communication to me 
and handed me the slip of paper marked D135 with ‘‘ Sydney 
Domville, Upper Terrace, Bournemouth," written in pencil 
on it. I said to the prisoner, I am Inspector Cox, of the 
City of London Police; how do you account for the possession 
of these nine £10 Bank of England notes'?" I said that 
they were part proceeds of a forgery. He replied, I would 
rather not say anything now." I said he would have to 
accompany me to the detectives' office, 26 Old Jewry, and I 
asked him, showing him the slip of paper, whether that was 
his name, and he said ‘‘ No." I said, Your name is 
DougaU" and he said Yes." I took him then towards 
the detectives' office. On reaching the gates leading to the 
detectives' office he suddenly ran away towards Cheapside, 
and I caught him in Frederick's Place. We both fell to the 
ground, and, with the assistance of P.C. Padghorn, conveyed 
him back to the detectives' office, where he was searched. 
The list produced, marked D144, is what we found upon him; 
he was afterwards conveyed to Cloak Lane police station and 
handed over, with the goods mentioned in the list produced, 
to Inspector Harden. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Elliott — I told the prisoner that 
the notes were the proceeds oi a forgery, but I believe now 
that they were drawn by the prisoner from his own bank. 
The only actual charge was the alleged forgery of the cheque 
for £28 16s.; the prisoner did not protest against going to 
the detectives' station, 

Re-examined — The prisoner was not wearing the amethyst 
ring; it was found in his pocket, as far as I remember. 

Alfred Harden, examined by Mr. Gill — I am detective 
inspector of the Essex Constabulary, stationed at Romford. 
I commenced my inquiries in this matter on 28th February, 
1903, On 16th March I received a warrant for the arrest 
of the prisoner on the charge of forgery. I made inquiries 
132 



Evidence for the Prosecution. 

Alfred Marden 

with the view of effecting the arrest, and in consequence of 
information received I went to London to continue my in- 
quiries. On 18th March I went to Cloak Lane police station, 
London, where I found the prisoner detained by Inspector 
Cox. I charged him with forging the name of Camille C. 
Holland to a cheque and obtaining the sum of £28 15s. in 
August last. I said, ''Do you understand iti’' He said, 
" Yes, that is quite right; I understand perfectly well what 
you mean.'" It was too late to remove him that night. On 
the following day I conveyed the prisoner to Saffron Walden, 
and received from Inspector Cox the articles mentioned in 
the list marked 0144, and I lodged him at the police station. 
On the same day I went to the Moat Farm, Clavering, and 
searched the house and found the diaries produced, portions 
of a diary of 1900, a diary for 1901, 1902, and 1903. In 
the one for 1903 the last entry is made on 3rd March. On 
the 11th April, 1901, there is an entry in the diary, " Gave 
Emma Burgess a month's notice." At the house I found the 
two dies produced, C. C. H., and the small fine nibbed pen 
produced which was in his writing desk. There was also a 
diary for the year 1897 and part of 1898. I have failed to 
find a diary for 1899. I have made a careful search for 
any letters from Miss Holland, and failed to find any. I 
found some correspondence dated in 1902 as to the sale of 
the Moat Farm, and I found the specimens D66 which have 
been put in. The gold cross produced I found in a bag 
which the prisoner requested me to fetch from the Central 
Hotel, London, along with his luggage, in which I found the 
deeds relating to the Moat Farm. I also got some luggage 
from the cloak room, at Liverpool Street Station, with a 
ticket which I had taken from the prisoner. I found at the 
Moat Farm a cheque book and pay-in slip book for the London 
and County Bank, Bishop's Stortford, and a cheque book and 
pay-in slips for the Birkbeck Bank. I also found a letter 
and receipt, marked D145, for payment by cheque for £11 9s. 
given by Newman & Gardner to S. Herbert Dougal for photo- 
graphic apparatus supplied. I found a large quantity of 
other papers. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Elliott — ^I commenced inquiries 

133 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

Alfred Marden 

on 28th February, 1903 ; no inquiries had been made until 
a few days before. I leported to my chief constable After 
my interview with the chief constable Superintendent Pryke 
was directed to make inquiries The matter was reported 
to the public prosecutor on Tuesday, 10th March, and the 
warrant was not applied for till 16th March. The pen pro- 
duced was found in the desk with other pens in the living 
loom, but the others were thicker pens. I did not find a box 
of mathematical instruments I cannot say that the pen 
produced would obviously come out of a box of mathematical 
instruments. I brought this pen, as I thought it could be 
used for very fine writing. 

Did the prisoner give you the address of the hotel he had 
been staying at in London? — No, he simply said, ‘‘ Go to the 
Central Hotel and fetch my luggage.’^ 

Ee-examined by Mr. Gill — The first entry in the diary 
produced is on 13th February, 1897, and the last entry is 
on 16th September, 1898, in the one book. The next is 
a portion of a diary, the first entry being 5th July, 1900, and 
the last 21st September, 1900. I found no diary for 1899. 
The diary for 1901 is a full year, commencing 1st January 
and ending 31st December. The diary for 1902 commences 
on 1st January, and also ends on the 31st December. The 
diary for 1903 commences on 1st January and ends on 3rd 
March. I have read through the diaries and find no reference 
whatever to Miss Holland. 

I have seen the bank notes^ which were paid out of the 
National Provincial Bank in 1899. The endorsement '' S. 
Herbert Dougal appears to be in the prisoner's handwrit- 
ing, and the signature H. Dougal " on the other note 
appears to be in the handwriting of the prisoner's wife. I 
have seen them both write. 

On Thursday, 30th April, the day of the inquest at the 
Moat Farm, the prisoner being already in custody, I charged 
him with the murder of Miss Camille C. Holland on 19th 
May, 1899. I said, Dougal, you know I am a police officer. 
I am going to charge you with wilfully, maliciously, 
feloniously, with malice and aforethought, that you did kill 
and slay Miss Camille Cecils Holland by shooting her in the 
134 



Evidence for the Prosecution. 

Alfred Marden 

head at Clavering on the 19th May, 1899, and afterwards 
burying her body on this farm/’ I said, Do you under- 
stand the charge?” The prisoner replied, Yes, perfectly 
well.” 

I obtained the portmanteau which was produced to Mrs. 
Wisken at the cloak room, Liverpool Street Station, which 
was deposited there in the name of Miss Georgiana Cranwell. 
It is marked very faintly “ C. C. H.” From information 
received from the prisoner’s wife I obtained a trunk on 25th 
April from the London Bridge Station cloak room — it was 
in her maiden name of White.” It had C. C. H. W.” 
on it. One could see that the W.” had been recently 
added ; it was of a different coloured paint. The black trunk 
had a fur cape in it. I searched at the Moat Farm for a 
revolver, but failed to find one. 

Ke-cross-esamined by Mr. Elliott — The diaries deal with 
all kinds of matters — where he stayed and business as well. 

I have spoken to Mrs. Dougal about half a dozen times, or 
perhaps seven or eight times, since the prisoner was in 
custody, and other police officers have seen her in my presence. 
She has not been pressed or offered money by the police to 
give evidence against hei husband. I cannot say where she 
is living now Last week she was at 9 Ivanhoe Koad, 
Camberwell. 

By Mr. Gill — The diaries contain entries of business 
matters, also entries relating to visits to London and places 
other than the Moat Farm. 

Mr. Gill — This concludes ^he evidence for the prosecution. 

Mr. Justice Weight — Do you propose to call any witnesses, 
Mr. Elliott? 

Mr. Elliott — No. 

Closing Speech for the Prosecution. 

Mr. Gill — Gentlemen of the jury, in opening the case I 
gave so many details that I do not propose to sum-up at 
length, for the facts are perfectly familiar to your minds. 
The position of affairs is that you have to deal with the case 
upon the evidence called in this Court. The first thing you 

135 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

Mr Gill 

will make up your minds on is as to the identity of the body 
found on 27th April of this year. I submit, with regard to 
the evidence of identification, it has been proved beyond any 
possibility of question that the body was that of Miss Holland. 
The police were looking for the body of a woman somewhat 
over middle age, who was some 5 feet 4 inches in height, who 
had a well-shaped jaw and good teeth. Dr. Pepper has told 
you that he found that the body was that of a woman of 
over forty years and not more than sixty. It was a well- 
formed body, without any deformity. In life the body would 
have been about 5 feet high, and the skull was that of a 
woman with exceptionally good teeth. If that evidence stood 
alone, I submit that, as reasonable men, dealing with the 
evidence that a woman disappeared about the time when that 
body would, according to Dr. Pepper, have been put in the 
ground, you would think that the evidence was conclusive. 
But the question of identity does not depend entirely upon 
the evidence of Dr, Pepper. Beyond all this you have the 
evidence of the woman who remembers doing work for Miss 
Holland, and the evidence of Miss Whiting, who altered 
and added to dresses for her With regard to that work, 
she has been able to positively identify the portions of the 
garments handed to her in Court. Then there was the extra- 
ordinary piece of evidence that this lady should have been 
wearing upon her head the wire frame, comb, and hairpins 
similar to those found upon the body. Is it possible that 
this witness could be mistaken? It does not rest there, for 
you know that at the Moat Farm were found the boots which 
were made for Miss Holland. Gentlemen, the question you 
have to decide is as to whether or not a murder has been 
committed. With regard to this point. Dr. Pepper has told 
you that the wound was one which could not have been self- 
inflicted. What do we find? The body of a deceased person, 
secretly buried, put in the ground with the clothes upon it. 
The bullet in the skull which passed through the brain is in 
itself, I submit to you, conclusive evidence that the woman 
had been murdered. She was murdered, I submit to you, 
gentlemen, and on this evidence I think you are satisfied of 
the identity of the body. 

136 



Closing Speech for Prosecution. 

Mr Gill 

Then, who alone had the opportunity of doing it? Who 
alone could have any possible motive, or could benefit in any 
way by the death of this unfortunate woman, except the 
prisoner at the bar? 

What are the broad facts with regard to the case ? Shortly, 
these , the prisoner was living in that month of May in that 
house which had been bought with Miss Holland's money to 
the extent of something like £2000. The place was hers, 
and her furniture was in it, and there was everything a 
woman cared for among her belongings. They were living 
in that lonely place with no one in the house except that 
girl you saw yesterday — Florence Blackwell — ^who was there 
only a few days. Miss Holland found herself in the position 
of living with a man to whom she was not married — a man 
who, before that girl had been twenty-four hours there, had 
attempted to kiss her, and who, before the girl had been 
there a week, attempted to assault her in such a way that 
she had to seek the protection of her mistress for the remainder 
of the time she was there, the two women sleeping together, 
whilst the prisoner slept in a room by himself. From the 
Tuesday night when the prisoner attempted to enter this 
girl's bedroom you have heard that the state of mind of Miss 
Holland was such that she was frequently crying. That con- 
dition of things continued on the Wednesday and Thursday. 
The position of things was very strange indeed. 

On the question of motive, the prisoner knew at the time 
that his residence at the farm depended upon the action of 
the woman who, having regard to her relationship with him, 
could have left him at any time. He did not allow her to 
communicate with her relatives. He knew that if she took 
any steps in consequence of his conduct he would revert to 
his original position of being a man without means. He 
also knew what was the position with regard to her pecuniary 
affairs, which had been conducted by herself. And on 19th 
May there was only this woman’s life between the prisoner 
and the enjoyment of the property. On 19th May she was 
in the company of the prisoner, under circumstances which 
would enable him to murder her if he so desired. There was 
no one at the farm to interfere. 


137 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

Mr GiU 

It has been proved that at that time the very place where 
the body was fonnd was ready for the disposal of it. After 
the body had been bestowed there half an hour^s work would 
have been sufficient to hide it from view and to remove all 
traces of a murder having been committed. It is a very 
extraordinaiy fact, gentlemen, that there was nothing found 
upon the body in the shape of a watch and chain, bracelets, 
rings, a purse and money — ^nothing upon it except the articles 
of clothing which have been produced in this Court. Having 
regard to the condition of affairs that I have described you 
will consider this, was the prisoner the man who had the 
opportunity of committing the murder Did he avail himself 
of it? And was there any other human being who could 
have committed this murder or could have had the smallest 
feeling against this woman, who could wish to get rid of her 
with any idea of benefit, except the prisoner? 

Miss Holland was not seen again from the time she left 
the Moat Farm with the prisoner, and the prisoner took no 
steps to trace her. It has been shown that he was at that 
time preparing the way for another woman to come there — 
a younger woman than Miss Holland. 

It has been proved that from the time of her death until 
the time of the prisoner's arrest matters went on as though 
Miss Holland were existing and capable of managing her own 
affairs, one operation following another as though nothing 
whatever had happened. Letters addressed to Miss Holland 
were delivered at the Moat Farm, and were received by the 
prisoner and answered. Miss Holland's stocks and shares 
were sold, and very large sums of money were transferred 
from her account at the National Provincial Bank to the 
prisoner's account at the Birkbeck Bank. When inquiries 
were made into the lady's disappearance the prisoner calmly 
and quietly stated that he had never seen the lady after she 
left him in a tiff. He also said that he had not had either 
shares or stocks, but the thing then came home to the prisoner, 
and he began to realise after Superintendent Pryke's visit 
that inquiries were being made for the missing lady. You 
then find him doing that which would point to his guilt, 
namely, trying to get rid of the Moat Farm and placing 
138 




Mr. George Elliott, K.C. 

(Photo. 6'/ Jb'lUaft cb Fill) 




Closing Speech for Prosecution. 

Mr Gill 

himself in possession of the whole of the money standing to 
his credit, both at the London and County Bank at Bishop's 
Stortford and also at the Birkbeck Bank in London. You 
find him possessing himself of all the articles of jewellery 
which could be easily taken away from the Moat Farm. As 
he truly told the proprietor of the Central Hotel in London, 
his movements were very unceitain. 

Upon these facts I submit that the case has been proved 
on the part of the Crown, and that the facts are consistent 
only with the guilt of the prisoner. 


Speech for the Defence. 

Mr. Elliott — Gentlemen of the jury, it is now my duty 
to address you on behalf of the defendant who stands charged 
before you with the terrible charge of murder. Seldom 
indeed, gentlemen, have I risen with such a sense of deep 
responsibility to make my appeal on behalf of a client who 
now foi so many weeks — almost so many months — has rested 
under this teirible imputation of murder without having an 
opportunity of placing his case before the final tribunal. 
Now that he has reached the final tribunal he would desire 
me, I know, on his behalf, to say this — at any rate so far 
as the learned judge who presides is concerned — ^that in his 
impartial and unimpassioned administration of the law by 
him my client has most complete confidence. And m regard 
to you, gentlemen, I do wi^ him to have, and before I sit 
down I know he will have, the same confidence as he has in 
the learned judge as to the exercise of your jurisdiction over 
the domain of fact. 

For the moment I desire to draw a distinction. I ask you 
to ignore what has taken place since that day in March 
when my client came within the custody of the law. My 
client is conscious— alas I only too conscious— that an attempt 
has been made to try him by a tribunal other than this, and 
that there have been put to the world statements with regard 
to him, arguments and inferences suggested to be drawn with 
reference to him, that have not been all of the fair, judicial 
nature. There is not a man probably in your number who 

139 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

Mr Elliott 

knew that he might be called upon to form part of this Court 
of investigation but what has unconsciously absorbed in the 
course of his reading in the daily press statements, arguments, 
and inferences which ought to have no place in his mind 
apart from the evidence given in this Court It is a matter 
of common knowledge that during the months of March, 
April, and May this case, with all its presumed horrors and 
sensational incidents, formed the daily topic of conversation 
of the nation at large. When in the columns of the press 
opinions are expressed and matters alluded to they cannot 
fail in ordinary circumstances to affect a man in his anticipa- 
tion of judgment. It is quite possible that some of your 
number may have had your minds warped unfavourably to 
the prisoner at the bar, but if the mind of any one of you^ 
has absorbed any statements made in the public press I trust 
that you will try the very utmost in your power to dismiss 
any preconceived notions, and that you will shut out from 
your judgment any knowledge that may have come to you 
from any source foreign to this Court. Then after you have 
listened to what will fall from the learned judge, you will 
decide on the evidence alone 

I am not insensible that the piisoner labours under another 
disadvantage The case has been presented to you on behalf 
of the Crown with great fairness, but, at the same time, with 
great ability and power, and I am fearful somewhat lest 
the ability and experience of my learned friend, Mr. Gill, 
may tell unduly against the prisoner After all that has 
been said, I would ask you, although he has presented a case 
— a terribly suspicious case, which undoubtedly calls for the 
most careful inquiry — I would ask — has he even yet brought 
home to your mind absolute proof of the guilt of the 
prisoner? I shall proceed to show the points by which I 
desire to test the absolute nature of the proof which has 
been adduced, and I trust I shall be able to point out wherein 
the chain of evidence is defective in its links. While I do 
that I trust that you will at least come to this conclusion, 
that, having regard to the terrible consequences to the man 
who now stands on his trial, you cannot take upon your- 
selves the great responsibility of saying that the case is 
proved to you without any possibility or shadow of doubt. 

140 



Mr Elliott 


Speech for the Defence. 

Unless you come to such a conclusion you cannot say that 
the Crown has established its case. 

Until you are satisfied that a murder has been committed 
you cannot go further and examine how much the prisoner 
was concerned. My learned friend has said that you have 
the discovery of a dead body, secretly disposed of, and so 
you may at once presume that a murder has been committed, 
owing to the nature of the injuries the body has received 
Even on that point there may be a mistake. I agree that 
the facts point most strongly to that conclusion, but have 
you not heard or read of cases where bodies have been found 
under circumstances which point to murder, but where later 
on it has been found that the death was due to self-injury 1 
You have listened to the scientific evidence of Dr Pepper. 
I do not for one moment question his hona fides or the 
accuracy of his general statements; but, assuming that the 
person met her death by the violence which has been indicated, 
you have still to satisfy yourselves that this was the body of 
Miss Holland. You must decide whether the body was that 
of Miss Holland before you can venture to take away from the 
prisoner the life which it is alleged he has taken from another. 

The question of the identity of the dead has always been 
one of the most important and perplexing. The difficulty 
is sometimes great enough indeed in regard to the living. 
You could not have a better illustration than the comical 
mistake made by one of the witnesses, Mrs. Pollock, the 
previous day, when that good lady identified the highly 
respectable keeper of the Cburt as the prisoner at the bar. 
Of course, this made no difierence to the honest man pointed 
out by Mrs. Pollock, but you can quite well imagine circum- 
stances where a statement such as that might be fraught with 
the most disastrous consequences. 

In the present case Dr. Pepper has said that the deceased’s 
features were absolutely unrecognisable, and yet you have 
Mrs. Wisken saying, quite apart from the clothes, that she 
identified the features as those of Miss Holland. That 
betrays on the part of this lady a positiveness and deter- 
mination which I venture to say will lead you to regard her 
statements with distrust, however sincerely she may have 
spoken, and I do not desire to say one word against her. 

141 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

Mr Elliott 

In regard to the question of the height, is not a margin 
of 3 inches a very considerable margin between the height 
of the body dead and living? Then as regards age, Dr, 
Pepper said that the body might be that of a lady anywhere 
between forty and sixty. Does that not leave considerable 
room for doubt as to identity Then, Dr. Pepper has said 
that the body was that of a woman well formed and with 
broad hips, whereas you have been told in previous evidence 
that Miss Holland was of slight build 

The question as to the time the body was in the ground 
is of vital importance. If scientific evidence shows that it 
was in the ground for five years or over, then this cannot 
be the body of Miss Holland Mrs Wisken said that the 
comb, the framework for the hair, and the bustle were very 
old-fashioned Does it not occur to you, gentlemen, that, 
while the Crown have said that those were the things Miss 
Holland wore, still the very fact that they were so old- 
fashioned shows that we may be dealing here with a body 
which was much older? 

There is another point that I should like you to consider, 
and that is this, that no mark of identity of any kind was 
found upon any garments found on the body. Does my 
learned friend suggest that these signs or marks were removed 
by the murderer? The clothing was found on the corpse 
clearly as it was worn during life and as it was on the 
poor unfortunate creature when she was huddled into the 
grave. We have been told how careful Miss Holland was 
about everything, and we also know that all the garments 
left in the house were found to be marked. What have you, 
gentlemen of the jury, to say upon this matter? It is one 
of those considerations that no jury can safely pass over. 
If you look at the work which Mrs Wisken said she executed 
with her own hand, you will find that the braiding is of the 
commonest description possible and such as may be found 
in the wardrobe of almost every lady. Are you going to find 
a verdict of life or death on such evidence as that? It is 
true that Mrs. Wisken was positive; but was she not equally 
positive, and yet mistaken, about the belt and the prongs 
upon it? 

The most serious part of the question of identity is the 
142 



Mr Elliott 


Speech for the Defence. 

matter of the boots found upon the body. Although we are 
dealing with a man like Mr. Mold, who has been in business 
for over thirty years and has made hundreds and thousands 
of boots/ and although Mr Mold might produce lasts which 
these boots fitted, still his evidence is not absolutely con- 
clusive There may have been other boots manufactured 
which would fit those lasts, and therefore, you might be led 
into error if you decided this case on such evidence as that 
Is it not possible that years before Mr. Mold made boots on 
the last for some person and has forgotten tlie fact? If you 
are going to decide the question by the identity of the boots, 
then you are entering upon a very serious path of doubt 
I now p^ss on to the nest question, which opens up, if I 
may say so, even still greater difficulty for your decision. 
If you are satisfied with the first two points, if you are 
satisfied that the body was that of Miss Holland, are you 
also satisfied that Miss Holland’s murderer is the man in 
the dock? You do not find a person committing such an 
act unless he has some designs, and here you have a most 
unusual position. The prisoner and this lady had formed 
an intimate relationship, a relationship which was of con- 
siderable pecuniary advantage to the prisoner himself. The 
prisoner’s personal appearance, education, and behaviour 
were such that the lady was attracted to him, and she was 
willing to live intimately with him, absolutely to the ex- 
clusion of her relations and friends. Does that not also show 
that the prisoner must have been more or less attached to 
her? Did not the prisonei; have every desire to continue 
that arrangement, looking to his own circumstances and the 
fact that the lady was maintaining and supporting him? 
When my learned friend Mr. Gill asks you to accept the 
position that it was to the prisoner’s afdvantage to remove 
her from the world lest she might terminate that arrange- 
ment, I venture to think that that is too far-fetched a sug- 
gestion to ask you to believe The prisoner and Miss Hol- 
land were on the most afiectionate terms, and it was not until 
the little incident arose in regard to the servant that we 
are told that the smooth current of affection was in any way 
distuibed. You are asked to believe that the prisoner turned 
round and slew this woman to gain the financial advantage 

143 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

Mr Elliott 

which would accrue. Financial advantage ’ Here is a lady 
of superior birth, culture, and money, and the latter she 
placed at the disposal of the prisoner whenever he desired 
any. Her death meant an end of all her bounty to him, and 
it would be the worst thing that could possibly happen to 
him. Is there a single word of evidence to show that the 
prisoner was tired of the companionship of Miss Holland *2 
Because he kissed the servant and tried to enter her bedroom 
— I admit with the greatest impropriety — are you going to 
say that he is a murderer? 

On that evening oF 19th May you have evidence to show 
that the prisoner and Miss Holland were on perfectly friendly 
terms. But even suppose that they were not, are you, gentle- 
men, going to take the view that Dougal would have been 
so mad as to form the idea that by killing her he could 
enjoy her property? Every article of natural reason leads 
to the conclusion that such an act would speedily lead to the 
termination of everything Do you suppose that he would 
have chosen a time when there was in the house a living 
witness who had shown such an intense aversion to him that 
he could not for a moment count upon her assistance and 
sympathy? And yet my learned friend, Mr. Gill, asks you 
to believe that the prisoner chose the very day before this 
witness, by her own arrangements, would have passed away 
fiom his path, to destroy the life of this woman who has 
been everything to him Could anything have been more 
imprudent than to commit a murder on that night with that 
girl Florence in the house? In# twenty-four hours he could 
have been alone in the house with his victim. 

Then you are asked to believe that the prisoner brought 
the body back to a spot which was visible from the bedroom 
window of the house. In the whole annals of crime there is 
nothing more improbable than that the prisoner, having 
killed his victim, would have brought her to the spot near 
the house where the body was found when at any moment he 
might have been confronted by the vision of the servant girl 
whose evidence would have been fatal to him. Had she 
looked out of that window she would have seen him at the fell 
work that you are asked to believe he did. What a terrible 
risk he must have run! The girl heard no sound of fire- 
144 



Mr Elliott 


Speech for the Defence. 

arms. Do you think that if the prisoner committed that 
murder he would have returned to the house without be- 
traying any sign of what he had done? He must have been 
engaged for a considerable time in that slimy ditch. And 
yet the servant girl has told you that there was no mud, no 
blood on his clothes, and nothing extraordinary about him. 

Miss Holland is said to have been wearing a white sailor 
hat, veil, and gloves, but nothing has been heard about these. 
The corpse is found rifled of everything of value. No 
jewellery or money was found upon it. Do you think that 
the prisoner would have been foolish enough to deprive her 
of all she had in that way, and thus furnish evidence for his 
own conviction? Assuming that the prisoner was the man 
who killed her, is it reasonable to suppose that he would 
have taken jewellery which would have been identified after- 
wards as having been worn on the night Miss Holland went 
away? 

Again, all the furniture in the house was left exactly as it 
was. Would not a man guilty of this crime afterwards 
remove all traces of Miss Holland’s antecedents? A guilty 
man would have desired first to remove not only from the 
house, but from his guilty mind, all trace of that lady 
whose life he had taken in this cruel, cowardly, and despic- 
able way. 

Further, you have this fact that the girl Burgess, who had 
assisted in arranging the furniture with the first '' Mrs. 
Dougal,” was actually asked to come and assist the second 
Mrs. Dougal. A guilty maji would never allow a woman 
who could give such vital evidence to return and remain in 
his house under such circumstances. 

I feel sure that you, gentlemen, when the time comes, will 
ask yourselves all these questions — ^you will ask yourselves 
whether in the face of all these improbabilities you can return 
an answer adverse to the prisoner. Remember, after your 
verdict there is no appeal. If you, gentlemen of the jury, 
say it is proved that the prisoner has the blood of that poor 
creature upon his hands, then your decision is final, and in 
a brief space he will pass to that world from which he can 
never return. If you are satisfied, I do not ask you to 
^ 145 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

Mr Elliott 

shrink from your plain duty; but I know that you will 
pause long, if you have any doubt in your minds, before you 
take upon yourselves the responsibility of this man's blood. 
It is a responsibility for each one t)f you. You are not 
shielded by the fact that there are twelve of you. I ask you 
whether, in the face of the terrible uncertainties of this case, 
you can be justified in concluding his guilt. Mercy is not in 
your prerogative. Your duty is to do justice. And I only 
ask for justice for this man. I beg of you to approach the 
case, not under the influences which have animated those 
who, to their shame, hooted this man on the streets, or have 
written of him as a convicted felon. I know that you, gentle- 
men, will resent all such preconceived judgment, and that 
you will endeavour to the utmost of your individual power 
to give this man's case an Honest, impartial, and fair con- 
sideration. I know that you will shut out of your minds the 
loathsome nature of the charge itself. I know that you 
will look up'on this man as one of yourselves, and ask whether, 
if he were one of yourselves, with no previous charge against 
him, you would convict. If you do that, my client will 
accept your verdict as that of his fellow-men who have risen 
above prejudice and passion. Through me, as a last appeal, 
the prisoner trusts that the jury will be able to say that the 
case has not been proved against him, and he will feel that 
he has had a trial, in spite of the press and the ignoble 
mob, which was fair before his God and his country. 

Charge to the Jury. 

Mr. Justice Wright — Gentlemen of the jury, the learned 
counsel, Mr. Elliott, in an eloquent speech, has taken up all 
the points of the case for the prisoner. The case has also 
been presented with that fairness, courage, and skill which 
always characterise the eminent counsel for the prosecution. 
This case is in a very narrow compass, although it demands 
most careful consideration. In a case of this kind, where 
the evidence is entirely circumstantial, more than usual care 
is required. If there is any link missing, the apparent 
strength of what remains is nothing, unless it has been made 
146 



charge to the Jury. 

Mr Justice Wright 

out in every essential point. If in this case you, gentlemen 
of the jury, consider it to have been made out in every 
essential part, then you need have no misgiving about 
returning your verdict. 

You have had evidence from four important witnesses as to 
identification, and you have also the serious circumstance 
that Miss Holland was at the Moat Farm down to 19th May, 
1899. With regard to the question of identification, unless 
Mrs. Wisken was mistaken, the things found on the body 
were in daily use by Miss Holland Mr. Mold has stated 
that he made five pairs of boots on a certain last, and that 
three of these pairs were for Miss Holland. Unless he was 
mistaken in his identification of the boots found on the 
body, you cannot resist the conclusion that the body was that 
of Miss Holland. If it was not the body of Miss Holland, 
where is Miss Holland? If it was not the body of Miss 
Holland, whose body was it? What have you to go on to 
say that, in the face of all you have heard, it was the body 
of any one else *2 

You will then have to inquire, gentlemen, what was it 
that would cause the prisoner to fire the shot which brought 
about the death of that lady? The evidence about the revolver 
goes but a very little way towards connecting the prisoner 
with the crime. What is important is that Miss Holland 
went away with him on that evening of her disappearance, 
and that the prisoner is the last person who was seen with 
her If the prisoner really gave knowingly false accounts 
of what happened to her, tS.en that, of course, will weigh 
with you very heavily. There is certainly a grave case 
against the prisoner. 

The reference of the prisoner's counsel to the burial of 
the body within sight of the window of the house where the 
servant was is a very strong one; but it must be remem- 
bered that the prisoner was going in and out all that night, 
and in the darkness of night the task of disposing of that 
body would not be a difficult one. You, gentlemen, will 
weigh that point for as much as it is worth. 

I think that considerable weight may be attached to the 
fact that the filling of the ditch had already been arranged 

147 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

Mr Justice Wright 

for while Miss Holland was there, but the answer is that it 
may all have been thought out, pre-arranged. Such things 
are not done hastily, or on the spur of the moment. The 
point as to the furniture of Miss Holland being allowed to 
remain in the house is, I think, a point which is entitled to 
your consideration. The prisoner seems to have been very 
careless by leaving all sorts of traces of Miss Holland about 
the place. But you cannot expect that every circumstance 
should exactly fit. People who commit crimes do not think 
of every circumstance. 

Another p'oint of the defence is this — why did the prisoner 
take a servant who had been at the house with Miss Holland*? 
All these considerations should have their due weight. You, 
gentlemen, must ask yourselves how consistent was the 
conduct of the prisoner after 19th May, 1899, when Miss 
Holland disappeared, with the conduct of an innocent man. 
The prisoner never instituted the slightest inquiry as to 
her whereabouts, when one would have expected that the 
whole country would have been disturbed. If you are 
satisfied that the body was that of Miss Holland, you will 
ask yourselves whether it could have been there without the 
knowledge of the prisoner. 

In such cases as these you must always look for motive. 
A very powerful motive in this matter — it has been sug- 
gested by the Crown — was the lady’s fortune. The prisoner 
was found from September, 1899, dealing with her property 
as his own, so that he got all but some £1500 out of her 
£6000. There is no doubt at all that the prisoner got her 
fortune into his hands. It has also been suggested that prob- 
ably the prisoner desired to live with his real wife again, but 
I do not think there is much substance in that. 

We have now arrived at the end of a very serious criminal 
case. If you, gentlemen, have any serious doubt about it, 
then you must give the prisoner the benefit of it; but if you 
have no reasonable and serious doubt, then you must do your 
duty and act according to your conscience. 


148 




Mr. Justice Wright 

{Photo by Whitlock X Sons) 



The Verdict. 


The Verdict. 

The jury retired to consider their verdict at 3.35 p.m. and 
returned into Court at 4.50 p.m. 

The Clerk of Assize — ^Are you agreed upon your verdict, 
gentlemen ? 

The Foreman — Tes. 

The Clerk — Do you find the prisoner, Samuel Herbert 
Dougal, guilty or not guilty? 

The Foreman — Guilty. 

The Clerk — ^And that is the verdict of you all? 

The Foreman — Yes. 

The Clerk — Samuel Herbert Dougal, you stand convicted 
of the murder of Camille Cecile Holland. Have you anything 
to say why sentence of death should not be passed upon you ? 

The Prisoner did not make any reply. 

Mr. Justice Wright — Prisoner at the bar, it is my duty to 
pass upon you the sentence of the law, which is that you be 
taken from hence to the place from whence you came, and 
from there to a place of execution, and that you there be 
hanged by the neck until you be dead, and that your body 
be buried within the precincts of the prison in which you 
shall have been last confined after your conviction. And may 
the Lord have mercy on your soul I 

The Chaplain — Amen. 


At the close of the case Mr. Justice Wright said he under- 
stood the chief constable had a communication to make to 
him. He thought the statement ought to be made public. 

The chief constable, Captain Showers, then read the follow- 
ing statement : — ' 

May it please your lordship, — have the honour to 
bring to your favourable notice the exceptional work 
done by the several officers engaged in this case I 
commend Detective-Inspector Cox, of the City of London 
Police, for his adroitness in arresting the prisoner and 
for his smartness in re-arresting him when he tried to 
escape. A vast amount of work has been done by 
Detective-Inspector Marden, of this Force, and Detective- 
Inspector Bower, Metropolitan Police, who have been 

149 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

engaged in the case from the commencement; and, I 
am pleased to say, have worked most harmoniously 
throughout the investigation. I may add that the 
officials of the Treasury informed me that Inspector 
Marden, on whom the chief part of the labour fell, had 
merited their highest appreciation in the way he had 
worked in conducting his inquiries. Both of these 
officials deserve every commendation, and I have much 
pleasure in bringing their names prominently before 
you. Sergeant Hewlett rendered able services in the 
investigation, and his knowledge of shorthand was of 
great assistance in the matter. Superintendents Pryke 
and Daniels have done their share of the work to my 
satisfaction, and the facts they gleaned have been most 
useful. Sergeant Scott and Constables Fell, Field, and 
Lindsey must be specially commended. They have been 
unceasing in the search of Moat House and its grounds, 
which has proved a most laborious and unsavoury task. 
I was much impressed during my almost daily visits to 
the farm with their dogged perseverance and unwavering 
cheerfulness under all difficulties, which ultimately were 
rewarded with success. The manner in which these 
officers performed their trying duties is deserving of 
admiration, especially as regards Sergeant Scott, whose 
conduct in the matter is worthy of the highest praise. 
Last, but not least, I have the greatest pleasure in 
bringing to your very favourable notice the excellent help 
and advice I have received throughout this difficult 
inquiry from Mr. Kaglan * Somerset, my deputy-chief 
constable. His sound, practical knowledge of police 
work has been of great assistance to me, and he has 
been most assiduous in this exceptional case. The work 
we have had in connection with this prosecution has 
been very heavy, and the way in which it has been done 
reflects credit not only upon the officers concerned, but 
upon the whole Force to which they belong. 

Mr. Justice Wright — I have no power to do anything in 
the matter, but I shall submit it most favourably to those 
who have. I appreciate the aid I have received from the 
chief constable, and all that which has been successfully done 
in this matter. 

The Chief Constable — I thank you very much indeed. 

150 



APPENDICES 



APPENDIX I. 


PROCEEDINGS BEFORE THE MAGISTRATES. 

Thursday, 19th March, 1903. 

Samuel Herbert Dougal, fifty-five, an Army pensioner, was 
charged at Saffron Walden, Essex, with forging and uttering 
a cheque of the value of £2S 15s., payable to J. Heath, dated 
August, 1902, purporting to be drawn by Camille Holland, 
with intent to defraud. 

Detective Harden stated that he arrested the prisoner at 
the Bank of England on Wednesday, and, on being charged, 
the prisoner replied : That is quite right, and I under- 

stand what you mean.^^ At the time of the arrest he found 
Bank of England notes on the prisoner amounting to about 
£600, 

The prisoner said nothing in answer to the charge, and 
was remanded for eight days. 

Friday, 27th March, 1903. 

Samuel Herbert Dougal was charged at a special sitting 
of county magistrates at Safiron Walden with forging and 
uttering a cheque for £28 15s., payable to J. Heath, and 
purporting to be drawn by "" Camille C. Holland,^' on 28th 
August of last year, Mr. S. Pearce prosecuted for the 
Treasury; Mr. Arthur Newton defended the prisoner; Mr. 
Eeed appeared for Mrs. Dougal; Mr. Wild watched the pro- 
ceedings on behalf of the National Provincial Bank (Miss 
Holland’s bankers). The accused was brought over to Safiron 
Walden from Cambridge Gaol. Mr. Arthur Newton in- 
timated that the prisoner pleaded not guilty.” 

Mr. Pearoe, in opening the proceedings, thought the 
evidence would disclose a somewhat remarkable, certainly a 
very interesting, story, dealing as it did with the mysterious 
disappearance some few years ago of a lady of means andl 
the subsequent dealing by the prisoner with her property 
during a number of years. The actual charge in the warrant 
was but a small part of the case which would be presented 

163 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

to the bench, being only one item in a long series of forgeries 
by means of which the prisoner had manipulated the property 
of this lady. The prisoner was a married man, who, in the 
latter part of 1898, made the acquaintance of Miss Holland, 
a maiden lady, between fifty and sixty years of age, possessed 
of about ^6000 invested in stocks and shares. She also pos- 
sessed a quantity of furniture and jewellery and other efieots. 
In December, 1898, the prisoner and a lady took a furnished 
house, in which they resided for some weeks at Hassocks, 
Sussex, as man and wife. The lady, who was undoubtedly 
Miss Holland, paid the rent with her cheque on the National 
Provincial Bank. In January, 1899, they came to reside in 
lodgings with Mrs. Wisken, at Saffron Walden, while they 
purchased the Moat Farm, and this address would play an 
important part in the case. Miss Holland paid the purchase 
money — ^£1500 — and they went into possession of the house 
on 27th April, 1899, living there as man and wife. Miss 
Holland was not there for more than a few weeks, but the 
prisoner had practically resided there from that time up to 
the present, with two short intervals. Miss Holland left 
about 20th May, 1899, and went away in circumstances which 
tended to show that she intended to return within a few 
hours. There was no evidence to show that she ever came 
back after the date he had mentioned. She was undoubtedly 
gone by the month of June, 1899, because in that month 
the vicar of the parish (Mr, Morton) and his wife visited 
the farm and found the prisoner's own wife installed there. 
She was first of all introduced to the vicar as the widowed 
daughter of the prisoner, but later it was acknowledged that 
she was his wife. She lived at the farm for some considerable 
period — practically until the prisoner began divorce pro- 
ceedings some time last year. ^ 

During the time the prisoner had lived at the farm, from 
April, 1899, up to the present time, letters had been delivered 
to the house in his own name and also in the name of Miss 
Holland, although Miss Holland was not there after May, 
1899. The question arose, and it might be desirable to know, 
what became of Miss Holland? In the absence of any definite 
explanation, it was important for the prosecution to know 
what was the prisoner’s explanation, for he was the person 
who would be expected to have some intimate knowledge. 
The prisoner had given an explanation. He was visited 
(owing to circumstances y^hich came to the knowledge of the 
police) on the ith. of this month by Superintendent Pryke, 
who asked him if he could give any information so that 
Miss Holland might be traced. The prisoner replied that he 
knew nothing about her, that he had not seen her or heard of 
154 



Appendix I. 

her since he left her at Stansted Eailway Station about three 
years ago. He knew none of her relatives or friends, and 
she left nothing belonging to her in his house. They had a 

tiff,'' he went on, a few days before she left in consequence 
of a servant telling her that he had during the night tried 
to get into her bedroom. She was somewhere about forty 
years of age He first saw her four years ago at Camberwell 
Green. She told him that she was secretary to a ladies' club 
in the West End. He lived with her in London, Saffron 
Walden, and at the Moat. She never told him that she had 
been in India, but said that she had travelled greatly on 
the Continent. If she had any money or railway stocks or 
shares he was not aware of it. He had not, he said, received 
any letters addressed to her, but he had received a number 
of circulars He had not signed any papers at all, let alone 
any by the name of Miss Holland, and had not received any 
money or anything else belonging to her. He declared that 
the Moat Farm and lands did not belong to her, as he pur- 
chased them with his own money. Miss Holland, the accused 
added, replying to the police, used to receive letters from a 
man who represented himself to be a sea captain, and she 
received one from him two days before she left. The superin- 
tendent of police said, it is stated, “ She is shut up in this 
house. Will you let me have a look round 1" The accused 
laughed and said, Certainly, look where you like " The 
superintendent did look round. The accused was asked if it 
was correct that he had given some of Miss Holland's clothes 
to his wife and servant, and that they had had them altered. 
He replied, I could not do that, because she left nothing 
behind her," 

That was the prisoner's account of the absence of this lady. 
It was important in this connection to look into the financial 
matter which formed the Subject of these charges Miss 
Holland having disappeared, they would see what became 
of her property, her banking account and securities. Very 
soon after she disappeared the prisoner, in the month of 
October, started a banking account at the Birkbeck Bank, 
where there was placed to his credit at first £670 which came 
from Miss Holland's account at the National Provincial Bank. 
It would be necessary to show the prisoner's dealings in stocks 
and shares, and it would be submitted by the prosecution 
that a large number of documents, by means of which the 
prisoner had appropriated the greater part of this lady's 
property, were forgeries. _ Although Miss Holland was always 
in the habit of dealing with her own affairs, it was peculiar 
that since her disappearance the letters to her stockbroker 
were in the prisoner's handwriting. 


155 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

Miss Holland took care to have the conveyance of the farm 
in her name; but since she disappeared the conveyance was 
transferred to the prisoner, and this conveyance had been 
found at the farm. 

It would be shown that the prisoner had drawn cheques 
for £2284 from Miss Holland's account, made payable to 
Dougal at the Birkbeck Bank. This money was drawn out 
between 31st October, 1899, and 27th September, 1901. 

In the September after Miss Holland disappeared the 
prisoner wrote a letter, purporting to be signed by Miss 
Holland, instructing a stockbroker to sell certain shares. 
This was done, and they produced £1008. The cheque was 
drawn out to Heath," which was supposed to be a fictitious 
name. The cheque to J. Heath, which was the last to have 
been drawn on Miss Holland's account, bi ought a letter from 
the bank on 18th June, 1899 — a month after Miss Holland's 
disappearance.* This letter called attention to the signature 

Camille C. Holland " on another cheque. The bank re- 
ceived the following reply purporting to be signed by the 
missing lady . Cheque to Mr. Dougal quite correct. Owing 
to a strained hand there may be a discrepancy on some of my 
cheques lately." That was a significant letter. After the 
transfer of the accounts the prisoner drew on his own account 
at the Birkbeck Bank, in which he was now credited with 
the very small sum of I7s. 6d. It was significant to know 
that, on the yjerj day after Superintendent Pryke called at 
the Moat Farm to receive prisoner's explanation as to the 
whereabouts of Miss Holland, he drew out practically the 
whole of his balance at the Birkbeck Bank of £305 in gold 
and notes. 

The police proceeded to make investigations, and obtained 
sufficient information to have a warrant granted. The 
prisoner was arrested on the 18fti of this month at the Bank 
of England, where he was endeavouring to change £10 notes 
into £5 notes He was asked by the bank clerk to sign 
his name on the back of the notes, and he proceeded to sign 
‘‘ Sydney Domville." Owing to certain information which 
the bank had as to the numbers of these particular notes, the 
prisoner was detained. On the way to the police station he 
broke away from his guardians, but he was caught after a 
short but smart chase. When he was searched at the police 
station £558 was found upon him in notes and gold, and a 


* This IS, of course, quite incorrect. The letter from the Bank 
drawing atteution to the signature was written in answer to one of 
Dougal’ s enclosing a cheque made out to himself in 1899 The Heath 
cheque was dated 28th August, 1902. — 

156 



Appendix I. 

quantity of jewellery. A curiously shaped ring was also 
found on him; evidence would be called to show that this 
ring was the property of Miss Holland. 

Mr Arthur Newton — It is a gentleman’s ring. 

Mr Pearce — ^Yes, but it was worn by Miss Holland. As 
soon as Dougal was arrested an examination was made of 
the furniture and other effects at the Moat Farm, and it 
would be established in detail before the Court that the 
prisoner's statement that there was nothing of hers at the 
farm was absolutely incorrect. A considerable quantity of 
her furniture and other things were found. In his lodgings 
in London, where he was staying at the time of his arrest, 
was found in his bag a large cross which was undoubtedly 
the property of Miss Holland. A photograph would be pro- 
duced showing the lady wearing it. 

Ernest Legrand Holland, a civil servant employed at 
Somerset House, said he was the son of Miss Holland’s only 
brother. Miss Holland formerly lived at Liverpool, but 
afterwards came to live at Kilburn with her aunt. The last 
time he saw his aunt was in 1893 He knew nothing what- 
ever of the prisoner or of his aunt’s acquaintance with him. 
She was a good business woman, and knew how to look after 
things The signature to the cheque for £28 was not in 
his aunt’s handwriting, nor was any other part of the cheque. 
The witness identified the ring (produced) as his aunt’s, 
and said that he had also recognised the piano at the Moat 
Farm and various articles of furniture of hers. 

Mrs WisKEN, Market Road, Saffron Walden, said that 
the accused and a lady took rooms at her house in January, 
1899, as Mr. and Mrs. Dougal. He told her to take in 
letters which came addressed J:o Miss C. C. Holland ” The 
lady’s linen was so marked She recognised a photograph of 
Miss Holland now produced as that of the lady 

In reply to Mr. Newton, the witness said that the couple 
were upon affectionate terms. 

Police- Superintendent Prtke said that he called at the 
Moat Farm in plain clothes and told Dougal there was a 
scandal about the disappearance of Miss Holland. Dougal 
began to talk freely He said Miss Holland was a woman 
very reticent about her past and connections, and was very 
penurious. She had said she was secretary to a ladies’ club 
somewhere in the West End. The superintendent told him 
there was a rumour that Dougal’s late servant, Kate Cran- 
well, when at the Moat, signed several papers with the words 

157 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

C. C Holland/" Dougal replied, “ Tliat"s false; she never 
did that for me. I have never sent any letters or papers 
away with Miss Holland's signature, and I have never 
received any money belonging to her." Dougal added that 
the farm was bought with his own money, and referred the 
superintendent to Messrs Harrison, solicitors, of Lincoln's 
Inn. He said Miss Holland used to receive letters from a 
man who represented himself to be a sea captain. She 
received one from him two days before she left for good. 

The prisoner mentioned the quarrel over the servant who 
was taken away by her mother just before Miss Holland dis- 
appeared, and went on to speak of his living at Biggin Hill, 
Sevenoaks, and staying with a sister at Upham, Hampshire. 
The superintendent said it was rumoured that Miss Holland 
was confined in a room in the Moat Farm. Dougal 
answered, " Come and look round," and he showed the officer 
various rooms. The prisoner said part of his furniture he 
had brought from Kent, and part he had bought at an 
auction sale. The prisoner added : My late wife is lying, 
and trying to do me all the harm she can. She knows as 
much or more about Miss Holland than I do." The superin- 
tendent then suggested that Dougal's servant had been seen 
wearing a gold watch and chain, and asked if it was Miss 
Holland's. Dougal denied this, and said he had got them 
through buying a pawnticket, and taking them out of pledge. 
Dougal produced the watch and chain. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Newton — The witness said he had 
heard before he went to see Dougal about the sale of Miss 
Holland's shares and the purchase of the farm. The notes 
he made at the interview were not a complete record of 
what took place. He put down only what he considered was 
important. 

Did you intend to use these statements against him? — 
That was a matter for the chi^ constable. 

Did you say to him, ‘‘I want to have a private chat with 
you " ? — ^Yes. 

With the object of inviting his confidence? — ^Yes. 

Why did you go there? — I was instructed to do so because 
of the scandal. The witness said he was given a number 
of questions to ask Dougal. 

Did you read your report to the prisoner? — No; I was 
afraid I would arouse his suspicion. 

Luot Pittman, postmistress's assistant at Quendon, stated 
that letters came addressed to the Moat Farm to " Miss 
Camille C. Holland " from the beginning of the accused's 
tenancy up to six months ago, some of them being sealed 
letters. 



Appendix I. 

Mrs. Morton, wife of the Eev. Samuel Morton, yicar of 
Clavering, bore out counsehs statement as to her visit to 
the Moat Farm. 

KiiTE Cranwele stated that she was on 9th December, 1901, 
engaged as housemaid, a gild named Hannah Cole going 
away. The witness was there about nine months. There 
was a trunk there which contained fifteen ladies' dresses 
(some of them silk), silk shawls, and almost everything a lady 
would require. Being shown a photograph of Miss Holland, 
she said she never saw that lady there 

Francis Manley Bird Ashwin, clerk at the Piccadilly 
branch of the National Provincial Bank, said they had a 
customer of the name of Camille Cecile Holland. She started 
her account in May, ilS95, in London. Her other addresses 
were since then Yoxfoid, Suffolk; Hassocks, Sussex; Market 
Row, Saffron Walden; and Moat Farm, Essex The witness 
produced the cheque for £28. It was presented to the bank 
for payment out of Miss Holland's account, and paid on 
2nd September, 1902. It was cleared by the Union and 
Smith's Bank. The account was now in credit to the amount 
of £207 19s 4d , and the bank had still some securities 
belonging to Miss Holland 

At this stage the prisoner was remanded till Thursday 

The bench refused to allow bail. 

Thursday, 2nd April, 1903. 

Francis Manley Bird Ashwin produced the cheque for 
£28 15s , dated 19th September, 1902, which was the last 
one purporting to be drawn by Miss Holland On 27th 
January, 1899, there was an entry in the books of a pay- 
ment into her account of .£1587 10s. by Messrs. William 
Hart & Co., her brokers On 30th September, 1899, £940 
18s was paid in, and on 10th October £67 3s 9d., the cheque 
(produced) drawn by Messrs. Hart & Co. representing that 
item. On 20th November, 1900, there was an item of 
£546 3s., represented by a cheque (produced). On 13th 
September, 1901, there was a credit for £1454 10s. 6d. 
All the cheques were drawn by Messrs. William H. Hart <fe 
Co. in favour of Miss Holland, and crossed to the National 
Provincial Bank. Taking the debit side of the account, 
the witness said that the first cheque paid to Dougal was on 
5th December, 1898, and there were other payments later 
The witness then went on to give a list of cheques drawn 
payable to various persons, the first on 1st January, 1899, 

159 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

and the last on 25th January, 1902. The witness’s atten- 
tion was next directed to payments made out of Miss Hol- 
land’s account payable to Dougal and paid into the Birk- 
beck Bank The dates and amounts were as follows : — 31st 
October, 1S99, .£670; 5th September, 1900, £100, 19th 
October, 1900, £64; 26th November, 1900, £550; 1st 
January, 1901, £100; 27th September, 19011, £1400 The 
witness produced the specimen signature which Miss Hol- 
land gave to the bank on starting her account in May, 1895. 
The last occasion on which she called at the bank was on 
19th September, 1898, when she wanted an introduction to 
a broker. The witness did not see her himself 

Mr. Newton, interposing, objected to the evi(^nce. 

ExaminaUon contirmed—Th^ witness produ^d various 
letters from Miss Holland. There was one dated 29th May, 
1899, written in the third person, and asking for a cheque 
book in the ordinary course of business. A cheque book 
would be sent, in response, to the Moat Farm. 

Mr. Newton — I object to that. It is not a matter of 

ordinary course of business.” This is a criminal trial. 
€an the witness swear a cheque book was sent? The witness 
said a cheque book was sent. He did not send it, but it 
was sent. He did not see it addressed. 

Mr Peaece argued that that evidence was sufficient. 

Mr. Newton said there was no evidence to show where the 
cheque book went 

The Chaieman thought they must take the statement for 
what it was worth 

Examination contiwaed — On 6th June, 1899, there was a 
letter enclosing a cheque and asking for £5 notes in pay- 
ment. A reply was sent from the bank as follows: I shall 
be glad if you will kindly confirm the same by signing it 
afresh in your usual manner.” The bank received a reply 
dated 7th June, 1899, stating that the cheque to Dougal was 
quite correct, but, owing to a sprained hand, there might be 
some discrepancy between recent signatures and former ones. 
In the ordinary course of business the notes would have been 
sent. On 9th June a letter was received from the Moat Farm 
acknowledging the receipt of the notes. The next communi- 
cation was a note (produced) asking for certain certificates in 
Brunner, Mond & Co. The witness gave particulars of 
further transactions, showing that after Miss Holland left the 
Moat Farm cheques were signed and communications received 
hy the bank purporting to come from her. 

[A long succession of documents was put in, showing that 
Miss Holland had invested her money in Colonial Govern- 
ment stock, in industrial concerns, and in railways, deposit- 
ing the certificates with her bankers, apparently for safety. 

160 



Appendix I. 

Then came letters in her name to the bankers asking for the 
scrip, which was duly sent to the Moat Farm, from which 
she had gone away some time previously. This method of 
procedure went on over the years already named and into 
the year 1902. j 

Cross-examined by Mr. Newton — The ofi&cials of the bank 
had ample opportunity of judging Miss Holland's signature. 
He believed that the endorsements in five cheques drawn by 
Messrs. Hart were in Miss Holland's writing When Mr. 
Holland came to the bank he was shown the cheque for 
£2S 15s , and at once said it was a forgery The witness's 
recollection was that Mr. Holland, looking at the bundle of 
cheques, some of which Miss Holland had signed at the bank, 
said, 'They are all wrong." Mr. Marden (the detective) 
also said they were forgeries. Miss Holland varied her 
signatures considerably 

Be-examined — He was shown various letters, the signatures 
of which the prosecution had alleged to be forgeries, and 
expressed ihe view that they were in the handwriting of 
Miss Holland. 

Isaac Newton Ebwakds, cashier at the Biikbeck Bank, 
said that the prisoner started an account there on 14th 
October, 1899, with a credit of two sums of .£35 and £20. 
On 30th October, 1899, there was a payment of £670 by 
cheque on the credit side, the ciedit slip being in the 
prisoner's handwriting. The cheque was on the National 
Provincial Bank. On 4th September, 1900, there was a 
credit payment of £100, the cheque coming from the National 
Provincial Bank On 18fch October, 1900, there was a credit 
of £64, and on 24th November, 1900, a credit of £550 in 
one amount by cheque on the Piccadilly branch of the 
National Provincial Bank. •On 29th June, 1901, £123 was 
paid in, the slip being in Dougal's handwriting. On 25th 
September, 1901, £1400 was credited to his account, coming 
in the foim of one cheque drawn on the National Provincial 
Bank Then, again, the pay-in slip was in the handwrit- 
ing of Dougal The witness next spoke of the £28 16s. 
cheque dated August, 1902. The pay-in slip was in the 
handwriting of Dougal. The handwriting of the endorse- 
ment, " J. Heath," looked like Dougal's The witness 
added that on 18th March, 1903 (just before the arrest), a 
cheque for £305 was presented on Dougal's account payable 
to bearer, and it was paid in notes. The witness identified 
Dougal's handwriting in letters to Miss Holland's brokers 
and also on transfers as the attesting witness when Miss 
Holland disposed of her shares in George Newnes, Limited. 

M 161 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

Wednesday, 8th April, 1903. 

Thomas Gordon Hensler, of Messrs. W. H Hart & Co , 
stock and share brokers, Old Broad Street, London, and a 
member of the Stock Exchange, stated that Miss Holland 
became a client of his firm in February, 1894, being intro- 
duced by a gentleman named Caine; and the witness and 
his partner saw her at their office. The witness's firm pur- 
chased, and afterwards sold, certain shares for her, accord- 
ing to a list now produced and put in He received from 
Miss Holland five letters with respect to the transactions, and 
he now identified those produced. He received a letter dated 
3rd January, 1899, accompanied by a list of investments. 
In this letter she asked which of the investments he would 
advise her to sell at a profit so as to raise £1600, which 
she required to purchase some landed property He there- 
upon sold for her 40 Bank of Liverpool shares, and trans- 
mitted the transfer to her for signature. She asked for the 
cheque to be sent to her at the National Provincial Bank; 
but somehow it was sent to her direct at Hassocks, the amount 
being £1587 15s., in December, 1899. He also sold in her 
name 43 Great Laxey shares, 400 George Newnes preference, 
and £500 worth of United Alkali debentures He could not 
find the letter of instructions to sell these, but the transfers 
were sent to the Moat Farm, and he received a letter, which 
he now identified, acknowledging their receipt on 16th Sep- 
tember, 1899, and asking a question as to the way to execute 
a deed The witness also spoke to having received other 
letters, purporting to have been sent by Miss Holland on 
dates after she had left the farm, which related to stock and 
share transactions. In September, 1899, he sent to her at 
the Moat Fai'm a cheque for £940 18s., for stock sold, and 
on subsequent dates sold shares in accordance with letters 
coming from the Moat Farm in Miss Holland's name, and 
duly forwarded the transfers to her for signature, and on 
their return signed, sent the cheques. He sold other stock 
in 1900 and 1901 in compliance with instructions received 
in the name of Miss Holland from Moat Farm, and altogether 
he had sold, since January, 1899, £4596 worth of stock for 
Miss Holland. 

Mr Newton — That is important; it corroborates Mr. 
Ashwin. 

ExaminaUon continued — The witness added that, if the 
securities in the possession of the National Provincial Bank 
were valued at £1495, this would represent a capital invested 
and realised since January, 1899, of £6606 113s. 3d 

Cross-examined by Mr. Newton — Have you always taken 
162 



Appendix I. 

the view that in the dealings from February, 1894, to Sep- 
tember, 1901, the signature of Miss Holland was a genuine 
one ? — Yes. 

And that the letters purporting to be written by her were 
so written? — Yes, that was my view. 

Now, look at these signatures to cheques before May, 1899, 
and at these after May, 1899; have you any doubt as to the 
genuineness of those aHer May, 1899^? — They all vary, the 
whole SIX 

But do not those after May, 1899, vaiy from those before 
that time? — There is a di]fference, and yet a great similarity. 

I am not a writing expert. 

John Rutter, of Messrs. Rutter, land agents, of Norfolk 
Street, Strand, London, stated that at the end of 1898 the 
prisoner, who then resided at Hassocks, called upon him and 
negotiated for the purchase of the Moat Farm (formerly 
known as Coldhams) The prisoner was alone on the first 
occasion, but said that he was acting for a lady (Miss Hol- 
land) he was about to marry He said that he had no money 
himself. The price of ^61550 was eventually agreed upon, 
and a contract was sent to the prisoner, and the witness 
afterwards got it back with ^ cheque for the deposit, £200. 
The cheque was signed by Miss Holland A day or two 
afterwards Miss Holland called and made a communication, 
as the result of which the witness altered the contract, and 
a fresh one was written out and she signed it, her name being 
in it as the purchaser. The first contract, which was in 
DougaFs name, was torn up by the witness. The new con- 
tract was signed in January, 1899. There was considerable 
delay in the completion of the purchase, a valuation having 
to be made of the stock, which was fixed at about £280 to 
£290, payable to the vendors. The witness afterwards saw 
the prisoner and Miss Holland at the Moat Farm. In the 
early part of 1901 he got a letter from the prisoner, which he 
had now lost, offering the farm for sale in response to an 
advertisement 

Cross-examined by Mr. Newton — -Are you quite sure Miss 
Holland ever called upon you at all? — Oh, yes; at any rate, 
a lady called who said she was Miss Holland, 

Look at these letters of yours; some are addressed to '' C. 
Holland, Esq.^’? — That is a clerical error. 

Will you pledge your oath that the prisoner ever said that 
he had got no money; did he not say, It is to be bought 
for a lady of means whom I am hoping to marry ? — I asked 
Mr. Dougal a plain question, “ Are you the purchaser; have 
you any means?’' He said, Miss Holland will be the 
purchaser." jgo 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

You say Miss Holland called in January, 1899. Do you 
know that she was then living at Hassocks? — ^Yes. 

Did you ever see the prisoner and Miss Holland at the 
Moat Farm after they had taken possession ? — No. 

G. CooTE, solicitor, Fleet Street, London, who acted for 
the vendors of Moat Farm (the Savills) in 1900, was called, 
and spoke to the transference of the property to the purchaser. 
Owing to delays in completion of the contract the prisoner 
issued a writ in March, 1900, but the action was eventually 
compromised. On 18th June, 1900, the witness received an 
authority for conveying the property from Miss Holland to 
Dougal. The signature of Miss Holland in that document 
purported to have been witnessed by Dougal. In due course 
the conveyance was executed on 20th August, 1900. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Newton — Is this conveyance a per- 
fectly legal document? — ^Yes. 

It conveys the legal estate to the prisoner ? — ^Yes. 

Mr, Sparrow, cashier to Messrs. Sander & Sons, auc- 
tioneers, Bishops Stortford, said he had known the prisoner 
three or four years. In July, 1899, the witness received a 
cheque for eight guineas for a bicycle, the cheque being 
signed Camille C. Holland.^^ In September, 1899, the 
witness’s firm held a sale of farm stock, and the prisoner 
purchased there £31 9s. worth of stock, payment being made 
by means of a cheque drawn by Miss Holland on the National 
Provincial Bank. At other sales he purchased stock valued 
at £56 and £88, the cheque in payment being also drawn 
by Miss Holland. 

Mr. Pearce asked for an adjournment till Thursday, 16th 
April. 

Mr, Newton asked leave to make an application as to the 
property of the accused; the position, he said, had been 
altered since last week. The prisoner had been advised to 
take proceedings against certain newspapers, and on Tuesday 
the Lord Chief Justice granted a rule nui calling upon one 
editor to show cause why he should not be committed for 
contempt in publishing articles tending to prejudice the fair 
trial of the prisoner. The prisoner wanted funds, and the 
application now was that the remainder of the, £120 of his 
own money should be given to him. 

Mr. Pearce opposed the application, saying the prisoner 
had already had £76. The accusation against him was that 
he had had thousands of this lady’s money, and that he had 
obtained it improperly. 

Mr. Newton said that there were wealthy newspapers 
164 



Appendix L 

against this man, and certain portions of the press had mis- 
represented him. Therefore, he should have money to defend 
himself. 

Mr. Aokland also opposed the application, which was 
refused by the bench. 

Thursday, 16th April, 1903. 

William Meredith, of Waterloo, near Liverpool, gave 
evidence having further reference to Miss Holland's invest- 
ments. The witness, who is a clerk in the United Alkali 
Company, spoke to a transfer of 500 shares in that company 
purporting to be signed by Miss Holland in September, 1899. 
The witness to the signature was S. H. Dougal, Clavering, 
Esses, gentleman." 

John Jameson Truran, secretary of the Great Laxey Mining 
Company, produced transfers of shares in that company 
purporting to be signed by Miss Holland and dated Sep- 
tember, 1899. The witness also produced a letter purporting 
to be signed by Miss Holland on 23rd September, 1899, 
saying that the certificate had been mislaid and asking for a 
duplicate. The usual indemnity form was sent and the 
transfer was made When the certificate was lost a declara- 
tion was required with a magistrate's signature. 

Joseph Bell, J.P., Saffron Walden, was shown the de- 
claration in question, which he was supposed to have signed 
as having been made before him. 

Is the signature ‘‘ Joseph Bell " in your handwriting? — No. 

Eeplying to a question in cross-examination, he said that 
the signature did not bear any resemblance to his. He did 
not know Dougal. . 

[Other witnesses connected with companies gave evidence 
showing that after Miss Holland had left the Moat Farm her 
shares in various undertakings were disposed of, the necessary 
documents for the purposes of transfer bearing what pur- 
ported to be the lady's signature.] 

Mrs. Florence Blackwell, Waltham Cross, Essex, said 
in May, 1899, she was unmarried; her name was Florence 
Havies On the 9th of that month she was engaged by a 
lady, whom she then knew as Mrs. Dougal, but whom she 
now knew to be Miss Holland, as a domestic servant, and 
took up her situation at the Moat Farm on 13th May. She 
was the only servant. The occupants of the house were her- 

165 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

self, Miss Holland, and the prisoner. On the 14th she got 
up at six o^clock and commenced her work, no one else being 
up at that time. About half an hour afterwards Dougal 
came downstairs and entered the scullery where witness was. 
He came close up to her. 

Mr. Newton — A re we not travelling an enormous length 
away from the issue, which is forgery? Anything that 
happened between the prisoner and this young woman in 
1899 cannot have any bearing upon the inquiry here, whether 
it be to the man's credit or otherwise. 

Mr. Peabce — I am entirely in the hands of the bench, 
but Superintendent Pryke said that the prisoner had told 
him the circumstances under which Miss Holland left the 
farm, and the prisoner also made a statement with regard 
to what he alleged to be a false accusation made by the girl 
against him. Therefore this is material to show exactly 
what took place. 

Mr. Newton — ^When the proper time comes I shall ask the 
Court to strike out the whole of the evidence of Superinten- 
dent Pryke on grounds decided by more than one judge. 

Mr. Pearce — This evidence shows the circumstances under 
which Miss Holland was last seen at the farm 

Mr. Newton — Suppose he did flirt with a servant girl four 
years ago, why rake it up now? 

' The Chairman — We want to get to the bottom of it, and 
I think we must take the evidence. 

ExaminaUon continued — ^What happened ? — Mr. Dougal put 
his arm round my waist and kissed me, at which I was much 
annoyed. 

Did you on the same day, as soon as you saw Miss Holland, 
make a complaint to her? — ^Yes, and I told her that I must 
leave that day. 

Do you remember Tuesday evening, 16th May? — ^Yes; I 
retired to bed about nine o'clock, and Miss Holland also 
retired at the same time to her bed. 

Soon after you got to your bedroom did anything happen ? 
— Yes; ten minutes afterwards there came a knocking, and 
Mr. Dougal called Florence " in an undertone. I knew 
his voice. He called '^Florence" three times in an undertone. 
I asked him what he wanted He was pulling my door as 
hard as possible, and I screamed for Mrs. Dougal. He nearly 
wrenched the bolt ofl. * 

Did Miss Holland come to your door then? — ^Yes, and I 
had hysterics. Then, after coming to, I made a complaint 
to her. Miss Holland and I, in consequence of what hap- 
pened, afterwards slept together. Miss Holland pressed me 
to stay, saying it should not occur again, and I did stay. 

166 



Appendix 1. 

On Friday evening, 19th May, about 6.30, Miss Holland 
came into the kitchen and made a communication to me. 
Miss Holland was then dressed to go out. 

Did you see her go? — ^Yes, from the front door. The 
prisoner was with her. I saw them drive away in the pony 
and trap. 

Did you see any luggage? — No, she had no luggage. 

Was anything said by Miss Holland or the prisoner when 
they drove away? — No; only Miss Holland, when she went 
out of the door, said, Good-bye, Florrie, I shall not be 
long.’’ 

Did you ever see her again? — No. 

Were you expecting her back that evening? — Yes. 

What happened next? — The prisoner returned alone about 
8.30. I said, Where is the mistress ” He replied, “ She 
has gone to London, but she is coming back again, and I 
am going to meet her.” He stayed in only a few minutes, 
and then went out. He came back again about nine o’clock, 
stayed about ten minutes, and then went out again, saying 
that he was going to meet the mistress. He came back again 
in about half an hour, saying she had not come, but he sup- 
posed she would come by the next train, something after 
ten He said he was going to meet that train, and went 
out again. About half an hour afterwards he again came 
back, said she had not come, and that he supposed she would 
come by the twelve o’clock train. He went out once more, 
and came in again at 12.46. He said that the mistress had 
not come, and I had better go to bed. I do not know whether 
the pony was put in the stable I went to my bedroom, 
and stayed there all night without undressing. I was awake 
all night. At 6.30 the next morning there was a knocking 
at my door. I went downstairs and saw the prisoner, who 
had apparently got the breakfast ready in the kitchen. The 
prisoner in the kitchen said he had a letter from Mrs. Dougal 
(Miss Holland), and that she was going to have a little holiday 
and would send a lady friend down. The same day my 
mother came, in consequence of a communication I made to 
her the night before, and I left that day. 

Did you see the way they went in the trap? — saw it go 
out of the farmyard. It is the usual way to drive down the 
winding lane. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Nbwton — It was at seven o’clock in 
the morning when Dougal said he had had this letter from 
the lady. Miss Holland and Dougal lived together as man 
and wife. 

Have you^ remained angry with Dougal for four years 
because he kissed you ? — No, I am not angry with him. I was 
at the time. 


167 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

Mrs. Florence Pollock, Elgin Crescent, W., said that 
Miss Holland lived with her as a paying guest from 17th 
June, 1898, till 9th December of that year She had very 
few visitors, and was out a great deal. A gentleman called 
on two occasions in the afternoon just before she went away, 
and witness and others were under the impression that she 
was going away to marry this man. Miss Holland spoke 
of him as the captain,'' and asked for tea to be provided 
in the drawing-room. 

Do you see the person in Court? — Yes, I think that is he 
(pointing to the dock). He is a little stouter. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Newton- — I am sure of the prisoner. 
I have good reason to remember him. I do not remember 
seeing a portrait of the prisoner in the papers. 

What i Surely you must have done ? — I might have seen 
one, perhaps. 

There; you see what a little persuasion will do? — Don’t 
you think you can persuade me 

And when you saw it did you recognise this gentleman? 
— Gentleman ! 

Don't be rude? — I have every reason to remember him for 
the way he treated me in the hall 

I don't know what that was? — It made an impression upon 
me I have not been able to get over. 

Did you look into the dock when you came in? — Where 
is the dock? I looked all over the place. I looked there 
(indicating the bench). I looked everywhere. 

Edward Pilgrim, labourer, Anstey, Hertford, who was 
employed by Dougal till June, 1899, at the Moat, said he saw 
there a lady something like the photograph of Miss Holland 
now produced. When he left in June, 1899, he had not 
seen the lady for a fortnight. He afterwards met the 
prisoner and a younger lady than Miss Holland at Newport 
Station, and drove them home. She said she was the 
prisoner's daughter. It was about two weeks after Miss 
Holland left that the other lady came. 

Emma Burgess said she remembered the prisoner arriving 
at the Moat Farm in April, 1899, accompanied by a lady. 
On 2nd June witness commenced to go there daily to work, 
but the lady she saw when she first went in April was not 
there in June There was a younger lady there, -and a little 
girl. She knew this younger lady as Mrs Dougal. She 
never saw the elderly lady again. 

William Richard Percy Lawrence, cashier in the issue 
department of the Bank of England — I remember that on 
168 




Dming=rooin at the Moat Farm 


Appendix I. 

18th March last the prisoner visited the Bank of England. 
He presented fourteen £10 Bank of England notes. Finding 
that some of them were stopped notes, the witness asked 
Dougal to accompany him to the secretary's oflS.ce. He said, 

Why? Are the notes stopped “2 Witness replied that 

some of them were, and conducted him to the secretary’s 
office. 

E. Dale, clerk in the secretary’s office at the Bank of 
England, said that, finding that nine of the notes presented 
by Dougal had been stopped by the police, he sent for 
Inspector Cox Before his arrival Dougal told witness that 
he had got some of the notes from his bank. Witness asked 
Dougal to write his name and address. He wrote Sydney 
Domville, Upper Terrace, Bournemouth.” 

Thursday, 23rd April, 1903. 

Mr. Scrivener, manager of the London and County Bank, 
Bishop’s Stortford, said the prisoner opened an account 
there on 22nd December, 1902. There was now a credit 
balance of £4 3s. 9d in his account. The prisoner also 
had a deposit account opened by the payment in on 22nd 
December, 1902, of £300, and this was closed by the with- 
drawal of that sum on 5th March, 1903. 

Frederick G. Mackett, accountant in the service of Mr. 
William Paul, Eoyal Nursery, Waltham Cross, said that in 
August, 1901, his firm received two letters signed by prisoner 
from the Moat Farm ordering goods, and they were sent by 
rail, together with other goods to the value of about £6. 
This sum was paid by cheque in the October following. 

Mr. Taylor, of Messenger & Co., Ltd., horticultural 
builders, Loughborough, said that his firm received an order 
from Dougal for heating materials in November, 1901. The 
goods were paid for by cheque for £12 on 24th January, 
1902, the cheque being signed '' Holland.” 

F. J. PiTSTON, Saffron Walden, chief clerk to Thursgood 
& Sons, auctioneers, said that on 18th October, 1899, he 
received a ^cheque for £14 13s. from the prisoner in pay- 
ment of an account for goods bought at an auction. The 
cheque was signed by Camille C Holland, and was accom- 
panied by a letter. On l7th October, 1901, he received 
another cheque from the prisoner. He believed the cheque 
was drawn by Dougal. 


169 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

Herbert William Knowles, clerk to the secretary of the 
Great Laxey Mining Company, said that on 26th September, 
1899, he posted a letter addressed to Miss Holland at the 
Moat Farm, 

Police-Superintendent Pryke, recalled, and questioned by 
Mr. Newton, said that his interview with the prisoner at 
the Moat Farm was on 4th March. He went to Dougal to 
have a friendly chat with him and to get his confidence. 
There were certain points he was requested by the chief 
constable and the deputy chief constable to interrogate him 
upon Up to that time he had had nothing to do with the 
investigation of the matter. He told the chief constable 
afterwards that he believed “ it was all village gossip.'' He 
did not know then of the grave suspicion respecting the 
prisoner He knew there was a scandal. When he left the 
prisoner he thought he had told the truth. He believed in 
him and continued to do so up to Sunday, 8th March, and 
then he made up iiis mind he was wrong, owing to what 
Detective Mar den showed him. He wrote and told the chief 
constable so. 

Henry Hbmsley, Miss Holland's solicitor, said that he 
had acted for her aunt, and he made Miss Holland's will. 
The witness sp'oke to having in his possession the certificate 
of Miss Holland's Great Laxey shares, which had been sup- 
posed to be lost She must have left them with him or sent 
them. He got a letter purporting to be from her in January, 
1894, and he had the documents in his possession since 
1894. 

Detective Marden, Komford, gave evidence of serving the 
warrant on the prisoner. At the Moat Farm later he found 
three diaries (produced), a portion of a diary for 1900, one 
for 1901, one for 1902, and another for 1903. The last 
entry in the diary for the last-named year was 3rd March. 
The witness also found at the house two dies marked 

C. C. H." There were also diaries for 1897 and a part 
of one for 1898, but he could not find one for 1899 (the 
year in which Miss Holland left). He found no letters from 
Miss Holland. 


Friday, 1st May, 1903. 

Mr. Pearob said that since the last hearing a discovery 
had been made by the police at the Moat Farm, which it 
would be idle for him to pretend was not within the chair- 
man's knowledge. The discovery had necessitated, and would 
170 



March. (3rd Month, 31 Days.) 

2 Monday 


1903 . 




3 Tuesday 


/>K6/ Hd/-/ 



4 PVednesday (fit ’502) 


Last Entry in DougaTs Diary 




Appendix I. 

necessitate, a considerable alteration in the nature and extent 
of the case, and the form of its presentation, and, that being 
so, it had been arranged between counsel on either side 
that no evidence should be taken that day. He, therefore, 
had to apply to the bench for a remand. 

Wednesday, 6th May, 1903. 

Mr Pearce remarked that when the prisoner was formally 
before the magistrates on Friday it was indicated that, owing 
to the investigations made by the police at the Moat Farm, 
there would be some extension of the case against the prisoner. 
Since they last took evidence the prisoner had been formally 
charged by the police with the murder of Miss Holland, and 
the evidence now to be placed before the bench would be 
directed to that charge. The bench had been investigating 
various matters surrounding the death of this lady, all of 
which weie very material in support of the charge, and it 
was not necessary to take all the evidence again It would 
be sufficient to read it over in order that Mr. Newton might 
put any further questions to the witnesses in the light of the 
fresh development that had taken place 

The Clerk then formally charged Dougal with the murder 
of Miss Holland on 19th May, 1899, at Clavering. 

The Prisoner pleaded “ not guilty.'^ 

Frank Whitmore, surveyor, Chelmsford, produced plans 
of the Moat Farm, which, he said, was surrounded by water. 
The ditch where the body was found was 173 feet from the 
house. 

Detective-Sergeant Scott, of Chelmsford, said that he had 
been living at the Moat Farm from 19th March up to 27th 
April, and had been searchling in the grounds for the body 
of Miss Holland, under instructions from the chief constable. 
The witness then repeated the evidence given at the inquest 
relative to the finding of the body on 27th April. Con- 
tinuing, the witness said he had found a box of revolver 
cartridges loaded. He found six others in a tin among 
some seeds. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Newton — The features of the body 
were quite .unrecognisable. There was no flesh on the face. 

Mrs. Wiskbn repeated her evidence given at the inquest as to 
how she visited the Moat Farm on 28th April last, and saw 
the body. Some of the clothing she had already described 
to the police. Now, on being shown a portion of the skirt> 

171 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

the witness identified it as part of a dress worn by Miss 
Holland when she lodged with her at Safiron Walden, The 
witness also identified various other garments and combs as 
being similar to Miss Holland's. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Newton — Miss Holland was with 
her three months. She had always had a very remarkable 
memory even as a child The police asked her to tell them 
everything she could remember, and she did so, as far as she 
could. 

Although you could not remember a single thing in March 
excepting the dress, since then whatever the police have shown 
you, you have recognised? — No, that is not so There are 
several things I cannot identify 

Do not you agree that the articles you identify as belonging 
to Miss Holland are of the most ordinary kind, which could 
be bought in numbers of shops? — ^Yes. 

And they have no name or mark to enable you positively 
to identify them? — That is so 

Were you able to remember when you gave your statement 
in March that Miss Holland wore two vests together ? — I could 
not remember it then, but it came to me afterwards 

Was not that when the police said that they had found 
two together on the body*? — ^No, it was not; it was three 
weeks or a month ago that I came to remember it. 

Before the coroner did you say, I recognise the 
features "? — Yes. 

What did you mean by swearing you recognised the 
features when they do not exist? — Because I could recognise 
the head and the teeth and the small feet. 

Is there any peculiarity about the work on this particular 
dress *2 — It is my work. 

But what is the peculiarity? — Nothing in particular, but 
it is my work 

Dr. A. J. Pepper, Wimpole Street, London, stated that 
on 29th April he made a post-mortem examination of the 
body at the Moat Farm, assisted by Dr. Sprague, of Safiron 
Walden. When he saw the body it was clothed, with a 
quantity of moist clay-like soil adhering. It was lying on 
the right side, with the left leg drawn up, and the right leg 
slightly bent, the head being somewhat bent towards the 
chest and the spine bent to the right side. The length of the 
body was 5 feet 1 inch. The length of the feet was inches. 
The body was that of an adult female, very much decomposed. 
The top of the skull was quite bare, and also part of the 
face. There were indications that the body had been in 
contact with wet soil for a very long time. The left foot 
172 



Appendix I. 

was detached from the body — probably in the removal. On 
the right side of the skull, above and behind the ear, there 
•was a round aperture, the margin of which was sharply de- 
fined. The diameter of the aperture was a quarter of an 
inch. A fragment of the inner table of the skull a quarter 
of an inch in diameter was lying just within the aperture. 
At the aperture was a fine piece of lead, which had been cut 
off the bullet as it traversed the bone. It was attached to 
the bone. On the left side of the head there was a more or 
less circular aperture, the centre of which was an inch and 
a half behind the external angular process of the frontal 
bone. The opening was three-quarters of an inch wide The 
outer table of the skull was splintered off more than the 
inner, especially at the fore part of the aperture. There 
were three portions of detached bone lying close to the aper- 
ture on the left side. The bullet had been elongated in 
shape, and weighed 85 grains. The outer covering of the 
brain was still quite tough. The brain was remarkably pre- 
served considering the generally advanced state of decom- 
position of the body. The bullet wound would cause imme- 
diate insensibility, and that would continue till death. He 
found what appeared to be the remains of blood on the left 
side of the neck. He found no fracture or dislocation of 
the vertebrae. He should say the shot was fired comparatively 
near. He could not say how near, because of the absence, 
through decomposition, of singed hair, scorching of the skin, 
or blackening by powder. The bullet entered on the right 
side and was arrested on the left, after driving out the bone 
on the left side. The bullet wounds could not have been self- 
inflicted. The position of the wound indicated that the shot 
had been fired from behind. The direction taken by the 
bullet was from above, down forwards, and to the left. The 
state of preservation of th& brain indicated that interment 
had taken place soon after death — ^before the usual form of 
decomposition had set in. The teeth were remarkably well 
formed All the teeth were present except the left upper 
wisdom, which must have been lost a long time. The age of 
the person was not less than forty and not more than sixty. 
He had formed the opinion that death occurred between three 
and five years ago. The weight of the bullet Sergeant Scott 
had produced was 87 grains The particles that came off the 
bullet found in the body would weigh 2 or 3 more grains. 
The other bullet found in the body weighed 85 grains. The 
wound on the right would be roughly 2 inches, or a little 
more, behind the ear. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Newton, who suggested it would 
be possible for a person to shoot herself in that way, the 

173 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

witness said it was not so in this case — judging from the 
direction of the bullet Further cross-examined, he said 
signs might possibly be consistent with the body having been 
buried three days after death 

Dr. Carr Sprague, Saffron Walden, described finding the 
body on 27th April. He agreed with Dr Pepper in his 
evidence 

Cross-examined — Some weeks ago he was shown an old 
skull found in an outhouse at the Moat Farm. He had de- 
clined to give any opinion about it excepting that it was a 
very old skull 

Mrs. Blackwell, a former servant of the prisoner, was 
called, and the evidence given by her on the charge of forgery 
against Dougal was read over 

Superintendent Prtke, of the Essex Police, recalled, had 
read over to him the evidence which he gave in the forgery 
charge. 


Wednesday, 13th May, 1903. 

Kate Cranwell, servant at the Moat Farm, having had 
her evidence read over, 

Do you know whether the revolver was used last year? — 
Yes I it was used at the Coronation sports last year at 
Clavering for starting. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Newton — ^Your memory gets rather 
better as we go on ? — ^Yes ; I think more about it 

You talk it over with the police, I suppose? — No, I do not 

Have you not seen them since 4ast week ? — They only came 
up and asked if I could remember anything more about the 
revolver, and I remembered Mr. Dougal taking lead out of 
the cartridges and I putting paper in. 

So that they might be blank'? — ^Yes, for starting 

You said last time at this Court that you remembered some 
underlinen marked C. C.,’’ but at the inquest you said 
there was not any such linen? — I thought about it since 

You swear the exact opposite at different times?— You baffle 
me so 

Was this revolver a new one? — ^Yes, it looked like a new 
one. 

You said nothing about cartridges before the coroner I 
suppose that has come back after a few magio moments with 
the police? — I was not asked about it before the coroner. 

174 



Appendix I. 

Thomas Mumford, grocer, Quendon, said he remembered 
the prisoner coming to live at the Moat Farm. He became 
a customer in May, 1899, and continued so for some time 

[Other evidence, including that of several labourers who 
assisted to fill in ditches and divert the course of the drain at 
the Moat Farm, was taken ] 

Friday, 22nd May, 1903. 

T H. Gurrin, expert in handwriting, said that the 
signature on a cheque for £28 16s , dated 18th August, 1902, 
purporting to be the signature of Miss Holland, was really 
that of the prisoner A signature, too, on a declaration pur- 
porting to be that of Joseph Bell, a justice of the peace for 
Essex, relating to some Great Laxey shares, was also a 
counterfeit. It was in the prisoner's handwriting disguised. 
All the documents he had examined since May, 1899, pur- 
porting to be in Miss Holland's handwriting, were not in her 
handwriting. 

Cross-exarmned — To tell the characteristics of handwriting 
is largely a matter of opinion based on experience When 
the Treasury communicated with him on the subject no indi- 
cation was given to him as lo which documents were forgeries 
and which not. 

Ke-examined — He knew that a certain cheque had been 
forged, but that) was all. 

George L Mold, bootmaker, Edgware Road, said Miss 
Holland was a customer of his for many years. He identified 
the boots found on the body buried at the Moat Farm as those 
which he made for Miss Holland. 

Cross-examined by Mr. SJewton — D o not think for a 
moment that I am doubting what you say, but Mrs. Wisken 
positively swore that Miss Holland always wore French boots, 
and these are not French And Mrs. Wisken also says that 
the size was 3, and you have positively sworn to this size 
being 2J? — Well, there was a toe-pin put on the boots which 
made them nearly the length of 3's. 

Lucy Pittman, assistant postmistress at Quendon, corrected 
a statement •she had previously made that letters must be 
posted before 6.30 pm. in London for first delivery in the 
Quendon district the next morning. She now found that 
they could be posted afterwards. 

George Matlam, chief clerk in the time-table department 
of the Great Eastern Railway Company, gave evidence as to 

175 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

the manner in which the trains ran from the Audley end to 
London in May of 1899. 

Henrt Churchill, rifle and ammunition maker, Agar 
Street, Strand, said he had examined the 34 cartridges found 
at the Moat Farm The bullet found in the skull of the body 
which was buried was similar to the 34 which were found. 
The bullet in the skull was slightly less in weight, but it had 
been a little skimmed ofl. The shot in the skull was 
fired from a revolver, and at a short distance. All revolvers 
have rifled barrels, and the bullet found in the skull had 
marks of rifling. 

Detective-Inspector Harden, of the Essex Constabulary, 
stated that he obtained a portmanteau at Liverpool Street 
Station in April which was in the name of Georgina Cranwell, 
and it was marked C C. H."’ On 25th April he obtained 
a black trunk at London Bridge Station cloakroom. It was 
there in the name of White, the prisoner's wife’s maiden 
name The trunk bore the initials C. H W.” ; the W.” 
had been recently added, and it was of a different shade of 
paint. 

Cross-examined by Mr Newton — Has Mrs. Dougal not been 
pressed to give information against her husband? — Never. 
On the other hand, she has volunteered to give us the informa- 
tion she has given. 

Has she been ofleied money to do it? — ^No. 

Friday, 29th May, 1903. 

Alfred Lewis, upholsterer, Carlton Vale, Kilburn, said 
that he knew Miss Holland for some years. In September, 
1895, he stored her furniture at his house, and it remained 
there till 28th March, 1899. Miss Holland called upon him 
some time before that, accompanied by a gentleman. 

Do you see him in Court? — ^Yes, the prisoner. She intro- 
duced him as Mr. Dougal. Continuing, he said Miss Holland 
gave him instructions to send two cases of her goods by rail 
to Hassocks, and they were sent on 9th December, 1898 In 
March, 1899, she called upon him, accompanied by the 
prisoner, and gave instructions for the remaining part of the 
furniture to be sent to the Moat Farm. This was done. 
There was sufficient furniture for seven or eight rooms. In 
March or April of this year he visited the Moat Farm, and 
there saw the greater part of the things he sent down 

Mrs. Martha Havies said that in April, 1899, she lived 
at Bishop’s Stortford, and now lived at Waltham Cross. 

176 



Appendix I. 

She was the mother of one of DougaFs former servants, now 
married, named Florence Blackwell On 20th May, 1899, 
she received a communication from her daughter Floience, 
in consequence of which she proceeded to the Moat Farm, 
where she saw her daughter. Afterwards slie saw the 
piisoner, and told him that she had come to fetch her 
daughter away in consequence of his conduct towards her. 
Prisoner denied that he had done any harm to her daughter. 
She went to help her daughter to pack, and while doing this 
she saw prisoner drive away. She and her daughter left 
shortly afterwards for Newport Station. They met the 
prisoner, who was on his way back. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Newton — What it amounts to is 
this, your daughter made a complaint, and he denied it — 
He said he had not hurt my daughter 

It was never said that he had. W© have heard nothing 
about kissing in the scullery; but whatever it was he denied 
it? — All I remember is h© said he had not hurt my daughter. 

Sydney Butler, Waltham Cross, said that he had been 
employed by Mr. Hobson, a builder, of Stansted, Essex. In 
May, 1899, Dougal called at his office and asked about a house 
which was to be let at Stansted; he inquired the rent, and 
took the house from May, 1899. The first week witness 
collected the rent he found a lady in possession as Mrs. 
Dougal The house was given up on 4th September, 1899, 
and that was when the last week^s rent was paid by Dougal. 
He could not say whether the house was occupied up to the 
end of the tenancy There was generally some one there 
when he called for the rent, which was on a Monday morning, 
but he noticed that the furniture was done up in bales and 
not unpacked 

Miss Annie Whiting, We^bourne Park, London, said that 
in 1898 she laiew Miss Holland, who then lived at Elgin 
Crescent, and in June of that year Miss Holland employed 
her to do some dressmaking, including repairs. [Detective 
Scott here produced a mouldy and tattered skirt or petticoat.] 
Witness, glancing at it, said she relined the garment, she also 
dyed one similar to that produced 

Do you remember a gentleman coming to see Miss Holland 
while you were working at Elgin Crescent ? — ^Yes, and to the 
best of my belief it was the prisoner. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Newton — This garment has been 
buried for a long time, you know? — I know it by the cloth, 
which is peculiar, and by the fashion, which is now old. 

Old fashions become new again, you know? — It is a tailor- 
made garment. 

N 


177 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

Detective Scott, recalled, said, with regard to the place 
where the body was found, he noticed that grass was 
growing on the ditch filled in, and it appeared not to have 
been disturbed for some time. Ash and elder trees had 
spread 'over the spot. He produced photographs of the place, 
which were handed to the bench and studied by the magis- 
trates. 

Mr Pearce announced that this was the case for the prose- 
cution. He asked the bench to commit the prisoner for 
trial at Chelmsford Assizes on a charge of wilful murder, 
and also on a charge of forgery. 

Mr. Newton then addressed the bench. He took, first, a 
legal objection t'o the admissibility of the evidence of Super- 
intendent Pryke, saying that it was not right to interrogate 
a man under suspicion as this officer had done. 

Mr. Pearce argued that the evidence was quite admissible, 
and had been already properly admitted. The objection 
could be taken at a later stage before the judge at Assizes. 
The statement by the prisoner to Pryke was a voluntary one, 
made to a man he knew to be a police officer. 

The Chairman said that the evidence of Pryke must 
remain, as it had been taken. 

Dougal was then ordered to stand up, and was formally 
charged by the clerk with the wilful murder of Miss Holland 
on 19th May, 1899, at Clavering. A long list of charges of 
forgery for various amounts spoken to in the course of the 
case was also read over, as well as the charge of forging 
the name of Mr. Bell, the magistrate. Dougal was then 
cautioned, and asked whether he wished to say anything. 
He replied, in a firm voice, Pam absolutely innocent. 

Mr. Newton then addressed the Court on the evidence. 
He complained that gross prejudice had been imported into 
the case against the prisoner, who had been inveigled and 
trapped into making statements which had afterwards been 
used against him. He complained of the action of the police 
in going to DougaPs wife and questioning her, and he also 
denounced “ a certain class of newspaper for starting and 
maintaining a campaign against the prisoner, and omitting 
anything which might tell in his favour, such as the fact that 
he was for twelve months in a lunatic asylum. Was it not 
horrible to think that, for the purpose of selling newspapers 
and putting money in their pockets, people should do this 
sort of thing, even mentioning a charge of arson of which the 
178 



Appendix I. 

man had been acquitted? He hoped that the people who 
were then in Court were n'ot among those who had thrown 
eggs at Dougal, and who had hooted and hissed a man who 
had spent twenty years in the Army and was facing a 
terrible trial He contended that the allegations of perjury 
had failed He questioned the identity of the remains, and 
said it had not been proved that they were those of Miss 
Holland In reply to the clerk, Mr. Newton said that he had 
no witnesses to call. 

[The bench retired at a quarter to one to consider their 
decision, and returned after five minutes' deliberation.] 

The Chairman — The magistrates have decided to commit 
the prisoner for trial at the next Assizes at Chelmsford, on 
the charge of both murder and forgery. 

Mr. Newton applied for £175 which had been obtained as 
the result of selling produce from the farm, which he said 
was Dougal's own money and was required by him for his 
defence. 

Mr. Ackland opposed the claim, and said the executors 
ought to have the money to carry on the farm. 

Captain Showers said the police held the money, and 
would retain it till they had proper authority from the 
higher Court as to what should be done with it. 

Witnesses were bound over to attend the Assizes on 18th 
June. Dougal was then conducted from the dock, and left 
the Court between two policemen. 


179 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 


APPENDIX II. 


PROCEEDINGS AT THE CORONER’S 
INQUEST. 

Thursday, 30th April, 1903. 

Mr C. E. Lewis, coroner for West Essex, held an inquest 
on the body. The inquiry took place in a large barn in the 
farmyard where a very primitive Court-room had been 
arranged by the police. It consisted of an old-fashioned 
mahogany table, a small oak table, and half a dozen chairs, 
arranged in the centre for the Coroner, Captain Showers (chief 
constable of the county), Mr. Pearce (representing the Trea- 
sury), Mr. Newton (who watched the case for the prisoner 
Dougal), Mr. B. L. Ackland (who appeared for the next-of-kin 
to Miss Holland), Superintendent Daniels, and other officials. 
Dougal was provided with a seat by the side of his solicitor. 
Seats consisting of plain boards nailed to a number of boxes 
were erected on one side for the jurymen, and a double bench 
was constructed on the other side for the large number of 
pressmen. 

The Coroner, addressing the jury, said they were sworn 
to inquire into the circumstances attending the death of one, 
Camille C. Holland. He thought the facts leading up to the 
discovery of the remains — it would be their duty to ascertain 
whether they were the actual remains of Miss Camille C. 
Holland — were well known to them. Their first duty would 
be to satisfy themselves as to the identity of the remains, and, 
having done so, their next duty would be to ascertain by 
what means she came by her death. He hoped they would, 
in considering the case, endeavour to forget the statements 
which had been made public up to the present time, and that 
they would arrive at their verdict solely and entirely on the 
evidence which would be placed before them. 

[The jury were then conducted to the greenhouse to view 
the remains, which had been placed in a coffin.] 

Mr. Pearce said he appeared at this inquiry on behalf of 
the Director of Public Prosecutions to render what assistance 
he could. Certain matters had been investigated by the 
police, and this information which was in their possession 
would be placed at the disposal of the coroner. An examina- 
180 




The Barn arranged for the inqnest 




Appendix II. 

tion was being made as to the cause of death by an eminent 
expert who had been instructed by the Director of Public 
Prosecutions, and he was not in a position to lay the result 
of his examination before the jury that day, but this would 
be done on a subsequent occasion. He proposed to lay evidence 
before the coroner and the jury as to the finding of the body 
and its identification only. 

David Scott, detective sergeant of the Essex Constabulary, 
stationed at Chelmsford, said he had resided at the Moat 
House since 19th March last. Since that date he had been 
engaged searching for the remains of Miss Camille Holland, 
on the instructions of the chief constable of Essex. On 22nd 
March he took entire charge of the house and premises, and 
he had other officers to assist him in the search. On Monday, 
27th April, digging operations were going on in furtherance 
of the search He was engaged excavating what had formerly 
been a ditch on the farm prem-i^,* leading from the barn 
to the lower moat, when hi's attention was drawn to a spot 
in the ditch about 8 yards, from the opening of the trench. 
The first thing he saw wag a small boot, which he produced. 
It was a lady^s button boot, made for the left foot. He also 
saw a small piece of what appeared to be a woman's dress. 
With the assistance of other officersffie carefully removed the 
soil, and subsequently found the remains which had been 
viewed by the jury. The remains were enveloped in a dress 
of blue or black material. The body was lying on its right 
side, about 4 feet deep in the ditch from the surface of the 
ground, in a bed of black liquid filth. There were some thorn 
bushes lying on the top of the body. On the skull he found 
the wire framework he now produced, with several hairpins 
still adhering, among them being a tortoiseshell pin. He 
carefully preserved the fr^tm© and the earth covering the 
head, and he then had the body photographed. In the pre- 
sence of Captain Showers (chief constable) and Mr. Somerset 
(deputy chief constable), he, with the assistance of other 
officers, removed the body to the greenhouse, where it was 
now lying The body was that of a female. The right boot 
was on the right foot attached to the body. There were 
stockings upon the legs and feet. 

On Tuesday morning witness showed the body as it had 
been found to Mrs. Wisken, in the presence of Superintendent 
Daniels Before Mrs. Wisken examined the body or the dress 
she made a statement to witness and described a dress. She 
then examined the dress (one of the parts of the jacket bodice 
he produced) and identified it by the silk work. She also 
identified the cuff of a sleeve as being some of her own work, 

181 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

and also identified a further portion of the dress by some 
braid she had herself put on the bottom of it as being a dress 
which belonged to a lady who with a gentleman stayed in 
her house at Safiron Walden in 1899 as '' Mr. and Mrs. 
Dougal. The wire framework and the tortoiseshell pin she 
also identified as the property of the lady. Mrs. Wisken had 
also that morning further identified a bustle which witness 
saw taken from the body the previous day when the post- 
mortem was made by Dr. Pepper. Witness took possession 
of these articles of clothing at the post-mortem esamination. 

By Mr. Newton — The trench, at the end of which the 
body was found, led into the little moat. From the appear- 
ance of the soil he thought the ditch had been filled in three 
or four years. The trench when open carried ofi the drainage 
of the farmyard. The farm buildings were now drained in 
another direction, or appeared to be, but, as a matter of 
fact, the pipes were higher in the middle than at the ends, 
and the water therefore could not flow. Witness found a 
quantity of fish in the large moat, but he only found three 
small fish in the lower moat. He could not say whether the 
braid on the dress was quite ordinary braid or not. 

By a Juryman — The left boot had evidently been detached 
from the body in the course of excavating. 

Mrs. Wisken, widow, 4 Market Eow, Saffron Walden, said 
on Tuesday last, 28th April, she went to the Moat Farm, 
Clavering, where Sergeant Scott pointed out to her a body. 
He also showed her the clothing now produced, consisting 
of a portion of a skirt and bodice, also a wire frame and a 
pair of boots. Since then Sergeant Scott had shown her the 
bustle produced. She identified ihe skirt and bodice as worn 
by a lady whom she knew as Mrs. Dougal, and who, with 
Mr. Dougal now in Court, stayed at her house from 26th 
January to 27th April, 1899. She identified the braid on 
the skirt as having been placed there by herself. She was 
a dressmaker. She also identified the frill by the silk upon 
it, which she stitched on herself. The bodice produced she 
identified by the frill round the collar and the revers. She 
also identified the pocket which she herself had relined. The 
boots were similar in size and appearance to those worn 
by the lady she knew as Mrs Dougal.’’ ‘‘ Mrs. Dougal ” 
had a small foot and took No. 3 in boots. She* was sure it 
was No. 3. Witness had a pair of iron plates placed on a 
pair of button boots while '' Mrs. Dougal ” was living with 
her, similar to the iron plates on the boots produced. The 
lady wore a frame in her hair similar to the one produced, 
and also a tortoiseshell pin similar in size to that produced. 

182 



Appendix II. 

The bustle produced was also similar to one the lady wore. 
Witness identified the hearthrug produced as one witnesses 
daughter made which witness sold to the lady. Witness had 
seen the body, and, to the best of her belief, it was that of 
Camille Cecile Holland. The photograph produced was that 
of the lady. 

On the evening of 26th January, when they first came to 
witnesses house, the lady retired to bed first, and afterwards 
Mr. Dougal cam© to witness and said, If there should be 
any letters in the morning addressed to ^ Miss C. C. Holland ' 
will you take them in'? They will be all right. On the 
following morning a letter was delivered at the house 
addressed to Miss C C. Holland, and witness took it upstairs 
and placed it under the door of the bedroom occupied by 
Dougal and the lady Subsequently other letters came, which 
witness delivered either to Dougal or the lady. On 27th 
April, 1899, a man named Pilgrim came for the lady with a 
horse and cart and drove her away. The hearthrug was 
placed in the cart. The lady promised to call and see witness 
again in a fortnight or three weeks, but witness never saw 
her again. The lady wore a black elastic belt. 

By Mr. Newton — Witness remembered when giving evi- 
dence before the magistrates that she said Dougal and the 
lady lived on very affectionate terms This was correct. It 
was the first week in March last when witness first mad© a 
statement to Sergeant Hewlett about this matter. She knew 
at that time that a search was being made for Miss Holland. 
The police officer asked her to tell them everything she could 
remember, but she did not then tell the police she could 
identify Miss Holland by all the different articles she had 
now mentioned. She told the police about the work she had 
done to the lady’s dress On 27th April she knew that 
search was still being macje. The next day she heard the 
body had been found, and after hearing this she was driven 
over to the Moat Farm for the express purpose of identifying 
the dress. There was a peculiarity about her stitch ; she could 
distinguish her stitches from those of any other dressmaker. 
She would swear to her work anywhere. She could point out 
to the jury an extraordinary peculiarity in her stitch which 
enabled her to identify it The peculiarity she referred to 
was because the work was don© properly The work on the 
skirt and bodice was of an ordinary description. She had 
often seen similar material to that of which the dress and 
bodice were made. She had used a lot of it, and it could 
be bought in a great many shops. So far as witness had 
examined the articles of clothing produced, she had not found 
any name or initials upon them. The braid was similar to 

183 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

that which witness had put on a number of dresses. The 
wire frame was similar to a number she had seen from time 
to time. There was no peculiarity about the pin, but she 
was quite positive it was Miss Holland's. 

The peculiarity about the boots was the size, No. 3, and the 
iron plates upon the heels She could not say that the boots 
were of French manufacture, but Miss Holland always told 
witness that she wore French boots Witness had seen the 
remains and she could recognise the features. 

Do you seriously mean to tell the jury that you can 
recognise those poor remains'? — ^Yes, I can recognise the 
features. 

Re-examined by Mr Pearce — The frill upon the bodice was 
the only one of that description she had ever done She was 
able from the ‘general appearance to identify her own work. 
The lady used to wear an elastic belt similar to the one now 
produced 

By Mr Newton — She had only just been shown the belt 
produced The belt Miss Holland wore was made of black 
elastic; it had a buckle, and fastened with three or four 
prongs which stuck into the material. 

Mr. Newton — Then this is not the belt at all, as this belt 
has only two hooks and does not fasten to the material. It 
simply hooks on to the other portion of the buckle 

By a Juryman — The silk frill to the sleeves witness put on 
herself. 

By Mr. Ackland — The dress was not a new one when 
witness made these alterations to it. She could swear that the 
alterations she mad© were those she now saw on the dress 
produced The lady had a pet dog while she lived with 
witnessi, and this dog she now saw on the farm. 

Mrs Florence Blackwell, wife of Alfred Blackwell, 7 
Swanfield Road, Waltham Cross, said in May, 1899, she was 
unmarried, and her name was Florence Havies. In that 
month she was engaged as domestic servant by a lady whom 
she then knew as Mrs. Dougal, and whom she now knew was 
Miss Holland. She took up her situation at the Moat Farm 
on 13th May, 1899. The occupants of the house were Mr. 
and Mrs Dougal and herself Dougal and the lady occupied 
on© bedroom in the front of the house, and witness occupied 
a bedroom at the back. The next morning witness got up 
at SIX o'clock and commenced her duties, and a little later 
Dougal came to where witness was in the scullery, took her 
round the waist and kissed her. Miss Holland had not then 
come downstairs. 

On 16th May witness retired to bed at nine o'clock, and 
184 



Appendix II. 

Miss Holland went to her room about the same* time Dougal 
remained downstairs After witness had been in her room 
about ten minutes Dougal came to her door and called 
Florence three times in an undertone After the third 
time she said, '' What do you want? '' and then she screamed 
for Miss Holland. She heard Dougal try her door. She 
held it, and found Dougal was pulling at it, trying to get in 
The bolt of the door was nearly pulled off. Miss Holland 
then came to the door, and witness became unconscious. 
When she recovered Miss Holland told her that Dougal had 
been giving her some whisky. She made a complaint to 
Miss Holland, and in consequence of that complaint witness 
and Miss Holland occupied the spare room that night. 
Witness had made up her mind to go home, but, being pressed 
to stay by Miss Holland, she agreed to stay on Miss Holland 
cried when witness told her she .should not stay. 

On 19th May Miss Holland came into the kitchen about 
6 30 in the evening and said, Do you mind me going into 
the town to do a little shopping? Witness replied, No, 
not if Mr. Dougal is going with you.'^ Miss Holland said 
she should not be gone more than an hour or so. On leaving 
the house Miss Holland said on the front doorstep, Good- 
bye, Florrie, I shan^t be long.’^ Miss Holland was already 
dressed when she came into the kitchen; she was dressed in 
a dark costume, with sailor hat and white veil. Witness saw 
a horse and trap outside the front gate, in which Dougal and 
Miss Holland drove away. This was the last time witness 
saw Miss Holland. There was no luggage in the trap 

At 8.30 that evening Mr. Dougal returned, and witness 
immediately asked Where's the mistress? " Dougal replied, 
“Gone to London." Witness said, “What! Gone to 
London and left me here all alone? " And he replied, 
“ Never mind. She's comkig back, and in a little while I 
am going to meet her." Dougal went out and came in about 
nine o'clock. He stayed in the house for about ten minutes, 
and then again went out saying that he was going to meet 
her, witness understood, at Newport Railway Station. 
Witness did not hear him drive away. In about half an hour 
Dougal entered the house again and said, “ She has not 
come ; I expect she will come by the train something after ten 
o’clock." Pougal went out again, saying he was going to 
meet that tram, and after being out for about half an hour 
he again came in and said, “No. She has not come; I 
expect now that she will come by the twelve o'clock." Dougal 
went out once more and returned at 12.45 saying, “ No; 
she has not come. You must go to bed." Witness went up 

185 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

into the spare room and stayed there all night without un- 
dressing. She kept awake all night. 

At 6-30 next morning Dougal knocked at the door. She 
went downstairs at seven o’clock and found that Dougal had 
prepared breakfast in the kitchen. Dougal said, “ I have 
had a letter from the mistress, and she is going to have a 
little holiday and is going to send a lady friend down.” 
Witness’s mother came that morning, and witness left the 
Aloat Farm with her the same morning. Dougal paid her a 
month’s wages and railway expenses for both herself and her 
mother, and he then drove away, leaving witness and her 
mother the sole occupants of the house. 

On 28th April last witness viewed the body of the deceased. 
She saw a skirt, a bodice, and the boots produced, and they 
were similar to those Miss Holland was wearing when she 
left the front door of the house on 19th May, 1899. 

By Mr. Newton — Witness was only in service at the Moat 
Farm 'one week Witness could not say whether the dress 
Miss Holland wore when she left on 19th May was blue or 
black; it was a dark dress. She could not say whether the 
lady wore a blouse or not, nor could she remember whether 
her boots were lace or button. She could not remember 
whether they were shoes or boots. Miss Holland wore very 
small boots or shoes with high heels Witness was hysterical 
after Dougal knocked at the door, and she had been hysterical 
since she had spent that dreadful week there.” She was 
hysterical when Sergeant Scott showed her the body of the 
lady on Tuesday this week. She was not hysterical before 
she came to the Moat Farm. The window of the spare room 
where witness stayed that night looked out at the front of 
the house. She stood looking out of the window all that 
night. The window was shut. She did not hear Dougal go 
to bed that night. A dressing-table stood in front of the 
window. She could not say whether it was a bright moon- 
light night or not. 

By a Juryman — During the time witness was at the Moat 
Farm she did not know the deceased by any other name than 
that of '' Mrs. Dougal ” 

Thursday, 7th May, 1903. 

Dr. Pepper, of St. Mary’s Hospital, London,^ who made 
the post-mortem examination of the remains, repeated the 
evidence he had given at the police court. He reiterated 
his opinion that the shot must have been fired at a com- 
paratively short distance, because of the amount of injury 
done to the head by the bullet. He was convinced that the 
186 



Appendix II. 

injuries could not have been self-inflicted. It appeared from 
the examination he made of the skull that the shot must have 
been fired from behind. He produced a bullet handed him 
by the police, who found it with others in a box at the Moat 
Farm. This bullet, he said, was exactly the same weight 
as the one found in the skull, minus the small piece stripped 
off the latter bullet in its passage through the head. So far 
as he could judge, the two bullets appeared to be of a similar 
description. 

By Mr. Newton — Do I understand that the bullet and the 
piece of lead you found in the skull weighed 87 grains'? — 
Yes, that is eo. 

Is it not printed on the box that the weight of each bullet 
is 88 grains'? — ^Yes. The shape of the skull, as it now 
appeared, would certainly give an indication of the appear- 
ance of the head during life The features could not be 
recognised, as there was no flesh on the face. 

By Mr. Pearce — He did not expect to find any initials on 
the clothing of the body on account of the very long time it 
had been buried in wet, black soil. 

By the Foreman — ^Is there any mark on the bullet to show 
that it had been shot out of a smooth bore or a grooved 
rifle? — There is no such mark. Any mark of that kind 
would have been obliterated by the passage of the bullet 
through the brain. 

By a Juryman — ^Would death ensue immediately after the 
infliction of the injuries you have described? — Not perhaps 
immediately, but soon after. 

Some days? — In one or two cases death might not take 
place for a few days, but no one could possibly recover 
from these wounds. 

Detective-Sergeant Soott stated that the bullet shown Dr. 
Pepper was one t)f thirt;f-four he found in a box among 
some seed at the Moat Farm. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Newton — He found the box in an 
unlocked cupboard where food and crockery were kept. The 
seed was in an uncovered tin dish. The box with the bullets 
was covered by the seed. 

[After ^ Dr. Sprague, who assisted at the post-mortem 
examination, had given his evidence in corroboration of that 
tendered By Dr. Pepper, the Treasury-Solicitor called an 
assistant from the post office at Quendon to detail the arrange- 
ments made by Dougal for the delivery of his letters at the 
Moat Farm. Letters came both to him and to Miss Holland, 
and were delivered at the Moat Farm in the ordinary 
course.] 


187 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

Mrs. Morton, wife of the Kev. Samuel Morton, the vicar 
of Clavering, said that in June, 1899, she visited the Moat 
Farm in company with her husband. Witness had seen a 
photograph of Miss Holland, but had never seen anybody at 
the house resembling her. There was, however, a lady at 
the house, who had been introduced to her by Dougal as 
‘‘ his widowed daughter. Afterwards I found that the 
widowed daughter was DougaPs wife. She showed me her 
marriage certificate After that we only visited the house 
occasionally. 

Kate Cranwell, Clavering — ^In November, 1901, I went 
to the Moat Farm in company with my sister, who was a 
dressmaker. The following month Mrs. Dougal engaged me 
as housemaid, and 1 stayed on until September, 1902. Miss 
Holland had disappeared on 19th May, 1899, but during the 
time I was at the house letters came addressed to Miss 
Holland. I took them in and gave them to Dougal. At 
Whitsuntide last year, when he was away, I took in three 
letters addressed to Miss Holland, and he opened them on 
his return 

Was there a large black trunk in the house marked C. 
C. Holland ? — ^Yes; but I cannot say whether the inscrip- 
tion was C. C. H or C C. Holland.^' 

You have seen a photograph of Miss Holland Did you 
ever see any one resembling her at the house? — No. 

Who left first, you or Mrs. Dougal? — Mrs Dougal. 

Did you send her anything afterwards? — Yes; the large 
black trunk, which contained clothes. Dougal instructed me. 
I put other clothes into the box which I thought belonged to 
Mrs. Dougal. The clothes which were originally in the trunk 
were left there. 

Was any address on the box?-*-There was a label, but I 
do not recollect the address. 

During the time you were at Moat Farm did you see any 
firearms? — ^Yes, guns, and a bright-looking thing, which I 
took to be a revolver. I cannot remember where I saw it, 
but I think it was in DougaFs bedroom, in a chest of 
dr awers. 

When was that'^ — After the Coronation sports at Clavering 
in the autumn 

By Mr. Newton — I did not mention the revolver before 
the magistrates, because the question was not asked. I cannot 
say whether I was getting the tea while Dougal was opening 
Miss Holland's letters. The fact is I was looking at him 
(pointing to prisoner). I could see the writing on the 

envelopes as prisoner opened them. They were addressed 
188 



Appendix II. 

to Miss^ Holland, and I saw Dougal opening them while he 
stood with his back to the fire and the envelopes in his hand. 

By the Foreman — I f these letters were addressed to Miss 
Holland, why did you take them in ?— They always had been 
taken in. 

Have you seen other letters besides those you mentioned 
addressed to Miss Holland taken in at Moat Farm? ^Yes. 

Francis Ashwin, accountant at the Piccadilly branch of 
the National Piovincial Bank, stated that various sums had 
been withdrawn from Miss Holland's account during the last 
few years. A balance of about £200 now stood to the credit of 
the account He produced a bundle of letters with specimens of 
Miss Holland's signature. The bank on one occasion ques- 
tioned a signature purporting to be Miss Holland's In 
reply a letter came from the Moat Farm offering the explana- 
tion that, Miss Holland having sprained her hand, there 
might be some discrepancy in the cheques lately signed. 

By Mr. Newton — The bank accepted this explanation, 
because it appeared to be a very natural one. The signature 
on the cheque dated 28th August, 1902 (which Dougal has 
been charged with forging), was more like the signature 
of Miss Holland in the bank's signature book than in any 
of the letters admittedly in the lady's handwriting. 

By Mr Pearce — Since May, 1899, the bank had no reason 
whatever to doubt the signatures The cheque the bank 
queried would have been paid if it had not been crossed, and 
then confirmation of the signature would have been asked. 

By the Coroner — If the signature on the cheque dated 
August, 1902, was not Miss Holland's, it was a very clever 
imitation. 

Arthur Edwards, cashi^ at the Birkbeck Bank, said 
Dougal opened an account in the bank in October, 1899. 
Cheques purporting to have been drawn by Miss Holland on 
the National Provincial Bank were paid into prisoner's 
account at the Birkbeck Bank. On 5th March, 1903, Dougal 
withdrew a sum of about £300, leaving a credit balance of 
only 16s Id. 

Eliza Cranwell stated that she had been employed at 
Moat Farm in 1901 to do some dressmaking for Mrs. Dougal. 

[Mr. Pearce was asking a question as to a dress for Mrs. 
Dougal when Mr Newton objected. Mrs. Dougal, he main- 
tained, could not give evidence under any circumstances, and 
Mr. Pearce was now adopting an ingenious method of getting 
evidence which was not admissible.] 


189 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

The Coroner — Do you mean, Mr. Newton, that Mrs 
Dougal could not be called here*? 

Mr. Newton — I do not think you could call her to this 
Court. 

The Coroner — But if I choose to issue a subpoena summon- 
ing her ^ 

Mr Newton — And if she did not attend there would be 
no remedy. 

Exarmnation conUnued — She had seen the letters referred 
to by her sister Kate. She saw Dougal read them, tear them 
up, and put them in the fire. 

By the Coroner — Did you see the letters for Miss Holland 
arrive *2 — No, I was away with Dougal from the Friday to 
the Tuesday 

In what capacity were you away? — I went with Dougal 
to seive divorce papers on Mrs Dougal at Tenby. 

Did you occupy separate apartments? — Yes 

Did you stay at the same hotel? — Yes. 

Police-Superintendent Pryke^s evidence at the police court 
was read over to that officer for confirmation. He ques- 
tioned Dougal at Moat Farm before the latter^s arrest 
Prisoner said to him on that occasion, Mrs. Dougal knows 
as much or more about Miss Holland than I do.’^ 

Mr. Newton protested against the admission of the 
superintendent's evidence, which, he argued, had been 
obtained in irregular fashion. Mr. Pryke had sworn that he 
went to Dougal with the view of having a friendly chat, 
for the purpose of getting his confidence." Surely a state- 
ment made by Dougal under those circumstances could not 
be accepted as evidence. 

The Coroner — ^Don't you think it would be better to raise 
that ob3ection at the trial? 

Mr. Newton — No, sir; I shoiild like to wipe his evidence 
out altogether. 

Friday, 15th May, 1903. 

Luct Pittman, assistant postmistress of Quendon, repeated 
her evidence before the magistrates to the efiect that the 
first post letters from London were delivered at the Moat 
Farm about eight o'clock. Letters to catch this delivery 
would have to be posted in London by six o'clock*the previous 
evening. 

By Mr Newton — Do you seriously say that letters must 
be posted in London by six o'clock the previous evening to 
catch this delivery? — ^Yes, without an extra stamp. 

Do you know as a fact that letters can be posted in the 
190 



Appendix II. 

city by 9 p.m. for the delivery in the country the next morn- 
ing? — It is with a late fee. 

Have you not said before the magistrates that if the person 
delivering the letters rode a bicycle the letters would be de- 
livered at the Moat Farm by 7 20 or 7.30 m the morning? — 
Yes, but in 1899 a bicycle was not used. 

Geokge Coote, solicitor, 191 Fleet Street, London, re- 
peated his evidence as to the conveyance of the Moat Farm, 
He was instructed by the executors of the late Mr. Savill in 
January, 1900, At the time he was instructed there had 
been a contract signed and the purchase money had been 
paid. Mr. Harrison, of the firm of Ingram & Harrison, who 
had been acting for all parties, died before completing the 
matter. Mr. Haiding, solicitor, was acting for the prisoner. 
There were certain difficulties in the way of completion, and 
the prisoner then issued a writ for the specific performance 
of the contract This action was eventually settled on con- 
dition that the prisoner obtained authority from C. C. 
Holland for the conveyance of the property to himself 
This authority was first produced without the signature of a 
witness, and it was afterwards produced witnessed by S. 
Herbert Dougal.^^ The property was then conveyed to the 
prisoner. This was in August, 1900. 

By Mr Newton — You have no doubt Miss Holland had 
paid the balance of the purchase money before May, 1899 ? — 
I have no doubt whatever 

Eknest Legrand Holland, civil servant, Somerset House, 
said he was nephew to Miss Camille C. Holland. His aunt 
possessed between £6000 and £7000, which she inherited, 
and while witness was at school he spent a good deal of 
his time in visiting her. She was a good business woman, 
and was very careful about rmoney matters He knew nothing 
of the prisoner or his aunt^s acquaintance with him. Since 
the prisoner’s arrest he had visited the Moat Farm and had 
identified a large quantity of his aunt’s property, some of 
the pictures there being painted and signed by her, and a 
large quantity of silverplate and household linen bearing 
her name or initials. He had seen the remains which had 
been found at the Moat Farm, but he was unable to identify 
them owing to their condition. He did not know what 
clothing his ’aunt wore in 1899 . He had found no circum- 
stances to lead him to suppose that the remains were not 
those of his aunt He had accepted the remains as those of 
his aunt and had buried them The signatures produced 
were not his aunt’s 

By Mr Newton — ^Did you hear Mr. Ashwin, of the 

191 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

National Provincial Bank, state in evidence that when you 
were shown the bundle of documents, including some which 
had actually been signed by Miss Holland at the bank, you 
declared them all to be forgeries ^ — I did not declare them all 
to be forgeries. It is quite inaccurate. I was not shown 
them. 

Do you mean to say that what Mr Ashwin said is untrue? 
— Absolutely untrue 

At the time you went to the bank how long had you heard 
your aunt had disappeared? — Only two days. 

I suppose you were upset to hear of her death? — I had 
not heard of her death. 

You were not upset to hear that she had disappeared? — No, 
not a great deal 

Had you made the smallest inquiries about your aunt -for 
four years? — No 

Can you remember when you last stayed with her ? — No, I 
cannot. 

When you last stayed with her what was her address? — 
Kilburn Priory, 

When you went to the Moat Farm a few weeks ago were 
you shown a skull there? — I was shown part of a skull. 

Did you not place your hand on the skull and say you 
believed it was the skull of your aunt? — No, I did not. 

Did you not say in the presence of several persons, as 
you were coming out of the gate, that you believed it was 
the skull of your aunt? — No. 

Did you say anything of the kind? — Something of the 
kind. 

Were they words to that effect? — No. 

The last time you received a letter from your aunt was 
in 1896?— Yes. 

By Mr. Pearce — But other members of your family heard 
from your aunt up to March or April, 1899? — ^Yes, from 
Market Row, Saffron Walden. 

And none of them has heard from her since April, 1899? — 
No. 

By the Coroner — Can you tell us anything more about her 
appearance in life? — She had rather a good figure and had 
very small feet She did not look so old as she really was. 

By Mr. Newton — Do you know where your aunt was born? 
■ — ^Yes, in India. * 

He3S[RY Pilgrim, labourer, who formerly worked at the 
Moat Farm, repeated the evidence already given by him 
before the magistrates as to the filling in of the ditch. 

By a Juryman — ^When you went to work in the morning 
192 



Appendix II. 

did you ever notice that any part of the ditch had been 
filled in overnight? — No. 

Did you ever notice that any bushes had been put in the 
bottom of the ditch? — No 

How did you get the earth there? — With a horse and cart. 

Did you notice the appearance of the bottom of the ditch 
when you shot the fust load each morning? — The bottom of 
the ditch was clear. There was a little water still running. 

Was not the earth first shot on the bunk of the ditch? — No. 

Did you not leave a barrowload or two by the side of the 
ditch overnight? — No. 

By the Coronee — ^You told us Mr. Dougal helped on one 
occasion to level the earth ^ — ^Yes. On that day there were 
three of us assisting to fill in the ditch, and the prisoner 
helped to level the earth. 

What was the depth of the ditch? — About 4 or 4^ feet. 

By a Juryman — Was it not 6 feet deep at the top end? — It 
might have been 

The earth was not rammed down — No. 

So that after it was shot into the ditch it would be easy 
to move it with a shovel ? — ^Yes 

By the Foreman — Could you tell in the morning whether 
any one had been working at it during the night? — I do not 
remember noticing anything. 

By the Coroner — It would have been quite possible for 
some one to dig out the earth again and you not notice 
it ? — Yes 

The Coroner, addressing the jurymen, said their first duty 
was to satisfy themselves as to the identity of the remains, 
and, having done so, their next step was to ascertain how 
deceased came by her death, and, if by violence, who was 
responsible for it. The facts were these : the deceased and 
Dougal first came to Saffron Walden in January, 1899, and 
stayed with Mrs Wisken. They arrived together, and after 
they had retired to rest the first night Dougal came down- 
stairs and said to Mrs. Wisken, If any letters come 
addressed to Miss C. C. Holland they will be all right. 
Please take them in,'’ That clearly proved that the lady 
who was with Dougal was Miss C. C. Holland. 

W^hen Miss Holland left Mrs. Wisken's on 27th April that 
year she was driven to the Moat Farm by the witness Pilgrim. 
She left, telling Mrs. Wisken that she intended to come and 
see her in the course of two or three weeks, but that was 
the last Mrs. Wisken saw of her. During the time Miss 
Holland was- at Mrs. Wisken’s the latter did certain repairs 
to dresses for her, and she noticed several articles of wearing 
apparel which Miss Holland was in the habit of wearing. 

0 193 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

After Dougal and Miss Holland arrived at the Moat Farm, 
the next person who came upon the scene was Florence Black- 
well, the servant, who entered her situation there on 13th 
May, 1899, having been engaged by a lady whom she then 
thought was Mrs Dougal,’’ and who she now knew was 
Miss Holland. On il9th May, 1899, about 6.30 in the even- 
ing, Miss Holland made a communication to the witness 
Blackwell. She said, Do you mind me going into the town 
to do a little shopping?” Floi’ence Blackwell replied, No, 
not so long as Mr. Dougal goes with you ” Miss Holland 
said, Yes, he is going to drive me.” Miss Holland also 
said she should not be gone more than an hour or so, which 
showed that she intended to return. Dougal and Miss Hol- 
land then left in a pony cart, and the witness Blackwell 
said she noticed no luggage whatever in the cart. She also 
noticed that Miss Holland was wearing dark clothes. That 
was the last occasion the witness Blackwell saw Miss Holland. 

Dougal returned to the Moat Farm, according to the 
witness’s statement, about 8.30 that evening, without Miss 
Holland. The witness Blackwell was naturally surprised, 
and she at once asked, Where is the mistress?” Dougal 
replied, She’s gone to London,” and Florence Blackwell 
then said, What ’ Gone to London and left me here all 
alone?” Dougal replied, Yes, but never mind, she is 
coming back, and in a little while I am going to meet her.” 
Dougal then went out, saying he was going to feed the pony, 
and came in again at nine o’clock. After staying in the 
house a little time he went out again, saying he was going 
to meet the mistress. He came into the house several times 
that night saying the mistress had not come, and eventually 
at 12.45 Dougal directed the witness Blackwell to go to bed. 
She went upstairs to her room, hut did not undress, and 
stayed there, standing by the wii^dow all night. Next morn- 
ing when she came downstairs at seven o’clock Dougal had 
breakfast ready for her. He told her he had received a 
letter from the mistress stating that she was going to have a 
little holiday and to send a lady friend down. During that 
morning Florence Blackwell’s mother came for her. Dougal 
gave her a month’s wages, and also paid her own and her 
mother’s railway fare home. Dougal then left the house 
with his pony cart, leaving the witness Blackwell and her 
mother the sole occupants, and when they left 4;o go home 
there was no one in possession. 

The next person on the scene was the lady whom the witness 
Pilgrim fetched in a pony trap from Newport Station. Then 
there were also two maidservants at the house, Kate and 
Eliza Cranwell. Kate in her evidence said she saw some 
194 



Appendix II. 

dresses and other articles of wearing apparel in a trunk 
bearing Miss Holland’s name or initials; and also on one 
occasion she saw three letters, addressed to Miss Holland, 
in the prisoner’s hand, and that after he had opened and 
read the letters he put them in the fire. That statement 
was corroborated by Eliza Cranwell, who was a dressmaker 
and altered some of the dresses for a lady who was there 
after Miss Holland’s disappearance. 

With regard to Mrs. Dougal, he (the coroner) could have 
called her as a witness at this inquiry had he thought fit to 
do so; but he thought, taking into consideration the circum- 
stances of the case, that it would be best not to do so She 
would not have been a competent witness at the prisoner’s 
trial. 

After that came Superintendent Pryke’s visit, and the 
explanation Dougal gave him as to Miss Holland’s disappear- 
ance was that she left the Moat Farm some three years ago, 
and that the last he (Dougal) saw of her was when he drove 
her to Stansted Kailway Station with her luggage. Dougal 
also told Superintendent Pryke that Miss Holland left nothing 
behind in the house belonging to her, and that they had a 
tifi before she left in consequence of some scandal about a 
servant. Dougal said he had never received any of Miss 
Holland’s money, and that the Moat Farm and land did 
not belong to Miss Holland, but was purchased by himself 
with his own money. 

Then came the story of the finding of the body and the 
identification of it. Mrs. Wisken had positively identified 
her own work upon the clothing found on the body. One 
particular thing Mrs. Wisken said she identified was a frill 
upon the dress which she made for Miss Holland while the 
latter was staying with her, and which was the only frill of 
the kind she had ever made^ 

Having satisfied themselves upon that point, the next duty 
of the jury was to say what was the cause of death. This 
was perfectly clear. It was due to a bullet wound in the 
head. Dr. Pepper had told them that it was not a self- 
inflicted wound, and that the bullet was fired from behind. 
The bullet Dr. Pepper found in the skull and the small 
piece of lead he found attached to the bone where it entered 
the skull weighed together 87 grains. This weight corre- 
sponded exactly with the weight of a bullet taken from a 
cartridge found in a box at the Moat Farm. Dy. Pepper 
also told them that the end of the bullet he found in the 
skull corresponded exactly with the end of that taken from 
the live cartridge 

The jury having arrived at the cause of death, their next 

m 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

duty was to decide who caused her death. Suspicion had 
fallen upon one who occupied the Moat Farm. They must 
ask themselves, What object had he to dispose of this lady's 
life'^" Certain evidence had been called which he (the 
coroner) thought showed a very great motive If Miss Holland 
died on 19th May, 1899, he thought it was perfectly clear 
that all these documents which purported to bear her signa- 
ture were forgeries, and that her money had been obtained 
by forgery Furthermore, there was a contract signed, and 
the purchase money had been actually paid by her. Certain 
delays occurred, Dougal brought a certain action, and ulti- 
mately the property was conveyed to him on an authority 
purporting to be signed by Miss Holland. If Miss Holland 
was dead in 1899, the authority must have been a further 
forgery. The prisoner thus got possession of the farm which 
Miss Holland during her lifetime had purchased with her 
money, and he believed the property was still in the prisoner's 
name. If the jury were satisfied that these facts were correct, 
was there not a motive for Dougal to dispose of this person? 
If satisfied with the evidence, he thought he might safely 
say that it was their duty to return a verdict of wilful 
murder against Dougal; and, if they found there was a 
'prvma facie case against the prisoner, it would be his (the 
coroner's) duty to commit him for trial at the next Essex 
Assizes on the charge of murder. 

The Jury, after a few minutes' private consultation, found 
that the remains were those of Camille Cecile Holland, and 
returned the following verdict : That Camille Cecile Holland 
died on 19th May, 1899, from a bullet wound in the head 
inflicted by Samuel Herbert Dougal, and, further, that 
Samuel Herbert Dougal did feloniously, wilfully, and with 
malice aforethought kill and murder the said Camille Cecile 
Holland." 

The Prisoner — Gentlemen, I am a perfectly innocent man. 

The Coroner committed the prisoner for trial at the next 
Assizes on the charge of wilful murder. 


196 



Appendix III. 


APPENDIX III. 


Trial of S. H. Dougal for Theft. 

Easter Quarter Sessions, Oxford. 9th April, 1895. 

Samuel Herbert Dougal (foity-eight) was charged for that 
he, the said Samuel Herbert Dougal, on 19th February, 1895, 
at Northend, in the county of Oxford, unlawfully did steal, 
take, and carry away one linen duster, two tea cloths, and 
four yards of dimity bed furniture, value five shillings and two 
pence, the propeity of Emily Maria Booty, against the peace 
of our Sovereign Lady the Queen, hei Crown and Dignity. 

The Prisoner pleaded not guilty. 

Evidence for the Prosecution. 

Emily Maria Booty, examined, said — I am a single woman 
I first met the prisoner in August, 1894, in London. 1 was 
coming out of a bank in Camberwell and he came up and 
spoke to me. He said he was a widower, and an acquaintance 
sprang up between us 

Soon after this he went to Ireland, and wiote to me from 
there asking me to send him some money I wrote to him 
and complained about his asking for money so soon, but later 
I sent him some He returned from Ireland about September, 
and our acquaintanceship was continued. I told him he was 
really a married man He admitted it, but said he was 
separated from his wife. 

We agreed to take a house, and took Northend House, 
Watlington, on a three years* lease in his name I paid 
£2 2s for the agreement. I also paid £10 to move my 
furniture from Caiuberw6ll,*and I. gave him two £10 notes 
to buy furniture at Whiteleys. He had nothing except one 
table and two chairs. When we first met I had £90 

Later he brought his wife and three children to Northend 
House, with the result that I stopped living with him as his 
wife, but continued living in the house. 

In February, 1895, I took advice, and started to pack my 
boxes with a view to leaving the place. On 19th February, 
1895, he us^d violent threats to me, and I ran out of the 
house terrified. I ran out without a hat on to a neighbour's 
cottage over a fence, and sent for the police. I then re- 
turned with Superintendent Hawtin and a van to the house, 
and with great difficulty removed my things. The superin- 
tendent demanded the dagger and gun with TOich the prisoner 
had threatened me, and he handed them over to him. I 
found the drawers of my bedroom ransacked and a diamond 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

ring missing. The articles in question were found in the 
prisoner's wife’s box. She told me that Dougal had given 
them to her to put there The prisoner charged me with 
moving some of his things in the van, but the case was 
dismissed. 

The money sent to Ireland was returned with a note from 
the prisoner saying he was a married man, and that he was in 
the habit of duping women for money. When he threatened 
me I went out and took the key with me to prevent him lock- 
ing me out. I wrote to friends and announced my marriage 
to him, including the name of the church, at his dictation 

Questioned by prisoner — ^Did your friends congratulate 
you ? — ^Yes. 

[Prisoner stated that he only wished to say that Miss Booty 
said she was married to him at the Church of St Mary the 
Virgin, Henley, by the vicar ] 

Superintendent Haw tin, examined, said — Northend House 
is on the boundary of Buckinghamshire He went with the 
prosecutrix on the day in question to the house and saw the 
van laden. The prisoner objected to the removal, and wit- 
ness told Miss Booty to take what was hers. At her request 
he searched prisoner’s boxes and found the articles in ques- 
tion. Miss Booty had previously wanted to charge prisoner 
with obtaining £75 by false pretences, and he had referred 
her to the magistrates’ clerk. 

Evidence for the Defence. 

Emily Dougal, examined, said — I am twelve years of age. 
On 118th February, 1895, I got up at 6.30 a.m. and got the 
breakfast ready. Mother told me that she had some of Miss 
Booty’s tea towels in her room, but father was out when they 
were put in the box. ^ 

Charlotte Laener, examined, said — live at Northend. 
On 19th February, 1895, Miss Booty came to me half-dressed 
and said Dougal was out to kill her. She asked me to send a 
telegram. She said she wanted to see the handcuffs on Dougal 
before she felt safe. 

Prisoner stated — I served in the Koyal Engineers for 
twenty-one years, and have a pension of £50 a year. If I am 
convicted of stealing a penny I shall lose every ^enny of my 
pension. The dimity was bought from a traveller, and was 
not paid for till after this charge was made. 

Verdict. 

Not guilty. The prisoner’s conduct to Miss Booty was 
bad in the extreme. 


TQQ 



Appendix IV. 


APPENDIX IV. 


Trial of S. H. Dougal for Forgery. 

Central Criminal Court, London, 9th December, 1895. 

Samuel Herbert Dougal (forty-eight), forging and utter- 
ing an order for the payment of £35 with intent to defraud. 
Mr. Lawless prosecuted, and Mr Leycester defended, at the 
request oi the Court. 

Viscount Frankfort de Montmorency — I am a Major- 
General Commanding the Forces in the Dublin district. 
During the whole of this year I have been signing documents 
that go through Kilmainham Hospital. I do not recognise 
the prisoner. I have an account at Cox^s Bank. I did not 
sign this cheque or give any authority to sign it. I was 
looking over my passbook and found this entry, and I com- 
municated with Cox, and they sent me this cheque. 

Cross-examined — The cheque is simply signed Frank- 
fort.'" That is how I generally sign cheques and all army 
documents. It is not at all a good imitation of my signature; 
it resembles it in a sort of way. The forged cheque has 

Frankfort " with Major-General " underneath. I 
generally sign '' Frankfort, Major-General." 

Bernard Hennbghan — I am superintending clerk in the 
office of the Royal Hospital, Kilmainham The prisoner was 
in employment there up to 24th September this year. On 
that day he was suspended, and subsequently discharged. 
During the early part of the year and until 24:th September 
he was daily on duty there as a messenger Colonel Childers 
had a room in the establishment, the prisoner had access to 
it. Colonel Childers is now called away on foreign service; 
he was assistant military secretary. I have been in and out 
of his room; I have seen a cheque book in the drawer on the 
right-hand side of his table as he sat there. I have seen the 
prisoner in and out of that room I have frequently seen 
the prisoner write; I know his writing. This letter G " 
is in his wfiting I brought it from Dublin In the middle 
of the list is the word Greenfield.^' I believe that the 
writing on this cheque and the endorsements on these bank 
notes, J. H. Greenfield, Ballymena," are in the prisoner's 
writing ^ The word Greenfield " in this diary is in the 
same writing; all the writing in the diary is the prisoner's. 

109 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

Grcss-exarmned — This list would come into my hands in 
connection with my ordinary business in the hospital. The 
prisoner kept a list of all letters despatched by Lord Wolseley; 
this is part of the list. I know nothing of the prisoner's 
career before he came to the hospital I have seen Colonel 
Childers use his cheque book. I cannot say that the cheque 
book produced is the same one. 

Frederick William Hodges — I am a cashier at Messrs. 
Cox & Co.'s Bank, Charing Cross. Lord Frankfort of Mont- 
morency and Mr. Childers and Mrs. Childers are customers 
of ours. This cheque book was issued in September, 1890, 
to Mrs. Childers. No cheque has been drawn according to 
this since November, 1890. Four cheques and counterfoils 
are missing from this book. This forged cheque comes from 
this book. The forged cheque was produced to me on 16th 
October by a man. I cannot identify the prisoner. A 
month afterwards at the police court he was put among other 
persons for identification. I picked him out as a man of 
that build, but I could not speak positively to him. On 
16th October the man took the cheque from his pocket, and 
on unfolding it he tore it. I asked him to stick it together, 
giving him a piece of gummed paper for that purpose, and 
to write '' accidentally torn " and sign it, and he did so. I 
cashed the cheque by three £10 notes, K174333, 74334, 74335, 
and £5 in gold. I cashed the cheque about 2.30. 

Cross-examined — It was an open cheque. It had already 
been endorsed in the name of Greenfield, which was 
unnecessary. I should have cashed it if it had not been 
endorsed. I have had several years' experience in writing, 
constantly having to examine signatures. It did not strike 
me that the endorsement and the body of the cheque were in 
the same writing; if it had I sjhould have had no option 
about paying it, it being payable to bearer. It might have 
occurred to me if I had noticed a resemblance that the 

Frankfort " might be forged; but I considered the signa- 
ture Frankfort " was not in the ordinary writing of the 
person who wrote Greenfield." I think there is a similarity 
between the writings, but it did not strike me at the time 

Re-examaned — There are several letters that seem to be 
foimed in the same way, and I should be very much sur- 
prised if the face and endorsement were not ifi the same 
hand. The body of the cheque is written- in a feigned hand, 
I believe, and therefore must be studied before you can see 
the similarity. 

By the Jury — Whoever got it cashed could have had all 
the money in gold. It is not usual to take such an amount 
200 



Appendix IV. 

all in gold. All our cheque books are made out with 25 and 
50 cheques, and four have been torn out from the end of this. 

William Perot Lawrence — I am a cashier in the Bank 
t)f England Issue Department. These three £10 notes were 
cashed there on 16th October by me about three o’clock, 
towards the close of the day, which is four o’clock. A man 
cashed them. I do not identify the prisoner. The man wrote 
his name and address on the back of the notes when re- 
quested to do so. 

Cross-examined — We always require the endorsement, but 
a man piesenting a note for gold would not be bound to 
endorse it; if he lefused to endorse it, we should cash the 
note Just the same Very few do refuse, and they do it more 
for a joke, I think. 

Florence Tapp — I am an assistant in the boot depart- 
ment of the Civil Service Supply Association, Bedford Street. 
On 16th October about five o’clock I made out this bill for 
boots and shoes for a man who was rather big; he gave me 
the address, Mrs. Dougal, 2 Liffey Street, Inchecore, Dublin. 
The boots and shoes were to be sent there I put it on the 
bill. 

By the Court — I was asked if I could recognise the person 
on 14th November. I do not recognise the prisoner’s 
features, but he is about the same size as the man who bought 
the boots and shoes I have hundreds of transactions daily, 
mostly with ladies. 

Cross-examined — This bill produced is the one I should give 
to the customer who would take it No invoice would be 
sent with the goods. 

Charles Richards, inspector C.I.D., Scotland Yard — 
About four o’clock on 12th November I went with two 
sergeants of the Irish Police to the prisoner’s house in Pros- 
perous Village, Co. Kildare, with a warrant for his appre- 
hension. We saw the prisoner. One of the sergeants said 
to him, “ Your name is Dougal.” The prisoner said, 

Yes.” The sergeant said, I airest you on a warrant for 
forging and uttering a cheque.” The prisoner said, All 
right. I said,^ '' Dougal, I am an inspector from Scotland 
Yard; if you listen I will read the warrant to you,” I 
read the warrant; he made no reply. Five minutes after, 
while I was searching the house, he said, Who is bringing 
the charge? ” I said, Messrs. Cox & Co. ; it is for forging 
the signature of Lord Frankfort to a cheque.” He said. 

All right.” I afterwards brought him to London. When 

201 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

charged at Bow Street he made no reply. On searching his 
house I found this diary, this receipt for payment for shoes 
on the billhead of the Civil Service Supply Association, and 
this brown paper bag with seventeen sovereigns in it. At the 
police court I put him with eight others. From the diary a 
piece under the date 17th October is carefully cut out. I 
found letters at his house addressed to him at 2 Liffey Street, 
Inchecore, Dublin, and dated 22nd October, 1895. The entry 
in the diary on 16th October is At home most of day, 
went to town and made a few small purchases, called in at 
the Institute and looked at the papers.’^ That part under 
the 17th, which is not cut out, is Attended Masonic Lodge 
in evening with Brother Shore; no business. There is a 
note in the diary on 25th October, 1895, Paid rent 3s., 
and gave notice to leave Lifiey Street on the following 
Friday. 

Cross-examined — found his papers showing that he had 
served twenty-one years seventeen days in the Army. He had 
reached the rank of quartermaster-sergeant His pension 
was 2s 9d. a day, payable quarterly on and from 1st January. 
One quarter would be payable on 1st October. On 3rd 
October £12 11s. Id. is entered in the diary as having been 
received. 

W. P. Lawrence, re-examined — This brown paper bag is 
identical with those we give out, but I am not prepared to 
say that I gave this to the prisoner. Other bankers use bags 
of this sort ; they are very commonly used for keeping gold 
in. 

Thomas Henry Gurrin — I am a professional expert in 
handwriting, of 59 Holborn Viaduct. I have had before me 
this cheque, the list of names and addresses, the diary, and 
the bank notes. I believe that all the writing on the cheque, 
the body, the signature, and the endorsement, is by the same 
person. I believe there is an attempt to imitate the signa- 
ture of Lord Frankfort. It is an imperfect imitation. In 
my belief these writings are by the same person. (The witness 
pointed out various similarities.) I have had nearly twelve 
years’ experience in comparing handwriting. 

Cross-examined — I was consulted after the matter was 
before the magistrate, I believe. I know it was suggested that 
the cheque was forged by the writer of the other paper shown 
to me. It would have made no difference. I have frequently 
been consulted in criminal cases before, and appeared as a 
witness for the prosecution. Sometimes juries have disagreed 
with me, but not very often; I think in about three cases 
202 



Appendix IV. 

out of 800 in eleven years, and it does not mean that in those 
three cases they meant to diametrically oppose me, because 
sometimes my evidence lequiies corroboration I have not 
changed my opinion with regard to those three cases. 

y er diet. 

Guilty. Strongly recommended to mercy by the jury on 
account of his previous good character. Inspector Richards 
stated that the case of another forged cheque was under con- 
sideration by the Irish police. The recorder stated that he 
should postpone sentence in order that it might be ascer- 
tained if this was an isolated case against the prisoner. 

Sentence . Twelve months. 


203 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 


APPENDIX V. 


Petition in favour of S. H. Dougal, Convicted of 
Forgery.* 

We, the undersigned, humbly petition the Commissioners 
of Chelsea Hospital to consider the case of the under-men- 
tioned man who has been deprived of his pension, which was 
awarded for life, in consequence of his having been convicted 
of forgery. Your memorialists humbly pray that his case 
may be considered with a view to the restoration of his 
pension. 

No. 8739 Quartermaster- Sergeant Samuel Herbert Dougal, 
Royal Engineers, who enlisted on 6th March, 1866, served 
at Chatham and Cork Harbour for some time, was then trans- 
ferred to the Ordnance Survey as a surveyor, did some excel- 
lent work in the survey of Aberdare, Glamorganshire In 
1868 was transferred to the Chester Division, and did some 
valuable work in surveying the counties of Flint and Den- 
bighshire, was promoted to be an examiner, a position much 
sought after. In 1872 Joined the staff of the Royal Engineer 
Department as a temporary clerk, was promoted lance- 
corporal, afterwards 2nd corporal, and in 1874 was promoted 
staff-sergeant and 3rd-class military engineer clerk, was 
transferred to Ireland later in the year, and in 1877 was 
gent out to Halifax, Nova Scotia, served there for ten years, 
having been promoted in the meantime to quartermaster- 
sergeant. In 1884, after eighteen years^ service, was awarded 
the silver medal for long service and good conduct, was 
specially recommended on two occasions for warrant rank in 
consequence of extra zeal shown in the performance of his 
duties, having for some time been chief clerk there (vide 
attached extract of letter dated ), was 

transferred to the Aldershot District, and became chief clerk 
in the office of the Commanding Royal Engineer at that 
station, was discharged on the expiration of twenty-one years 
seventeen days' service on 22nd March, 1887, w^th a very 
good character. Immediately after discharge Joined the firm 
of Messrs. Defries & Sons, 147 Houndsditch, E.C , as a 
traveller, calling upon officers and N.C O.'s messes for the 


* This is the petition drawn up by Dougal himself on a piece of 
grocer's wrapping-paper. It was never signed. — ^Ex>. 

204 



Appendix V. 

sale of plate, cutlery, glass, and china, and was also instru-^ 
mental in introducing a better means of lighting the lines 
of the South Camp, Aldershot, at that time. Eeference can 
be made In 1888 was employed as storekeeper to the private 
tiaining ship '' Mercury, Ryde, Isle of Wight, maintained 
at the expense of C. A R. Hoare, Esq , the banker — v%dt 
testimonial In 1889 and 1890 was steward of the Stroud 
Green Conservative Club, London, N . — vide testimonial 
attached. In 1891 was steward of the Southend-on-Sea Con- 
seivative and Unionist Club — reference can be made there. 
In 1892 was employed on the rebuilding of the Royal Bar- 
racks, Dublin, as a quantity surveyor — vide testimonial. In 
1893 was employed in the preparation of plans and specifica- 
tion for the erection of some houses at Biggin Hill, Cudham, 
Kent — vide testimonial attached. 

In 1895 took up the duties of messenger in the oj3ice of the 
Commander of the Forces, Royal Hospital, Dublin; was dis- 
charged from this position in September, 11895, in conse- 
quence of a threat used towards a clerk in the Adjutant- 
GeneraFs office Then moved to Prosperous, Co. Kildare, on 
the estate of Chas M. Bury, Esq., J.P., where he was 
shortly after apprehended on a charge of forgery, removed 
to London, was tried in December at the C C C., and found 
guilty on slender circumstantial evidence, judgment respited 
until January Sessions, on the 14th of which month he was 
sentenced to twelve months’ hard labour On arrival at 
Pentonville Prison he voluntarily gave the information to the 
authorities that he was a pensioner, and was medically 
examined, and found in such a state of mind that he was 
placed under observation On 26th January he made a very 
determined attempt to hang himself, and was only rescued 
in time to save his life. He was afterwards — 29th January, 
1896 — certified by the Prison Commissioners as being insane 
and removed to the Cane Hill Asylum, where he remained 
under treatment until 8th December, 1896, when he was con- 
sidered to be convalescent and discharged. Your memorialists 
would urge that this man was already suffering from insanity 
before discharge from the position of messenger at the Royal 
Hospital, as it is impossible to reconcile the fact that he was 
previously competent to fill the position of chief clerk in a 
Commanding Royal Engineer’s Office, whereas he was, accord- 
ing to the letter attached, dated from 

Lord Wolseley, incapable of performing the duties of mes- 
senger in his office. Your memorialists therefore suggest 
that the mental aberration from which he afterwards suffered 
had already shown itself, and therefore they think that he 
was certainly not responsible for his actions at the time the 

206 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

forgery is supposed to have taken place, and your memorialists 
humbly pray that as he is now unable to obtain employment, 
and is therefore practically destitute, that the Commissioners 
of Chelsea Hospital will reconsider his case, having regard 
to his previous thirty years' uninterrupted good character, 
and restore his pension is the humble prayer of 

(Signed) 


206 






Letter forged by S. H, Dougal 



Appendix VI. 


APPENDIX VI. 


List of Property found on Prisoner, S H. Dougal, when 
Arrested by the Police on the 18th March, 1903 

83 £6 Bank of England notes. 

8 £10 Bank of England notes. 

£63 m gold. 

2 4s postal orders. 

2 5s. postal oiders. 

1 7s 6d. postal order 
Postage stamps value 2s. 3Jd. 

1 £5 gold com. 

1 pocket case and memo. 
il gent.^s large diamond ring. 

1 double snake gold ring. 

5 ladies’ rings. 

2 ladies’ gold watches 

2 gent.’s silver watches. 

1 gent.’s gold watch and chain. 

1 yellow metal chain 
1 Masonic pendant. 

1 pearl and diamond pin 
1 pearl brooch. 

1 amethyst brooch (stone missing). 

1 pawn duplicate for ring. 

1 cigar cutter 

1 knife 

2 pairs eyeglasses. 

1 railway cloak room ticket. 

6 moonstones 

1 walking stick. 

1 fountain pen. 

1 pipe and tobacco pouch. 


207 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 


APPENDIX VII. 


Presumption of Miss Holland's Death. 

In the Probate Court on 22nd April, 1903, Sir F. H. 
Jeune heard an application made by Mr. Bargrave Deane, 
K C., on behalf of the executors of Miss Camille Cecile 
Holland, who mysteriously disappeared from Moat Farm, 
Clavering, some four years ago. The learned counsel said he 
wished for leave to presume the death of the lady to have 
occurred on 18th May, 1899. The lady suddenly disappeared 
from the farm, and was last heard of in May, 1899. On 
that occasion she left the farm in a pony cart, accompanied 
by Mr. Dougal, stating that she was going out to do a little 
shopping. Mr. Dougal returned, but Miss Holland had never 
been heard of since. She left a will, dated 16th February, 
1894, by which she appointed Mr. Helmsley, her solicitor, 
and her nephew, Mr. Edmond George Holland, her executors. 
That will, the proving of which was the ob 3 ect of the present 
application, was left in the custody of her solicitor. The 
solicitor, in his affidavit, said he believed that the property 
ought to be protected, as it consisted of a farm and a quantity 
of livestock and other materials on the premises. The pro- 
perty would in a short time, when the police left it, be with- 
out protection, and it might be that the man Dougal might 
do what he liked with the property. He (Dougal) was now in 
custody. 

Sir F. Jeune — And she has nc^t been seen since she left. 

Mr. Peane — No, my lord. The matter has been circulated 
far and wide and far more advertised than would have been 
the case in the ordinary mode of advertising. 

Sir F. Jeune — I have heard something to the effect that a 
young woman went with her 

Mr. Deane — There was, my lord, a maidservant, who gave 
an account of how the lady left home, and never returned. 
There were tw'o nephews who made affidavits The first one 
was that of the executor, Edmund George Holland, who stated 
that from June, 1894, to 1899, when the lady disappeared, 
he was always on good terms with his aunt. In March, 1899, 
his child was ill, and he had sympathetic correspondence with 
the presumed deceased. That child died on the 22nd March, 
1899, and he quite expected his aunt to be at the funeral. 

208 



Appendix VII. 

He wrote to her and received no reply. In the same ajS^davit 
Mr, Edmund Ge'orge Holland also gave an account of his 
recent negotiations with the police. Mr. Ernest Le Grand 
Holland in his affidavit also gave an account of his dealings 
with the police at Saffron Walden, and also with the bankers 
of his aunt with regard to certain cheques. 

Sir F. Jbxjne said, under the circumstances, he granted the 
application of Mr Deane, giving leave to presume the death 
on 18th May, 1899.-^ 

* An error, perhaps, in tbe reporting. Miss Holland was last seen 
alive on 19tli May. — ^E d 




209 



Samuel Herbert Dougal 


APPENDIX VIII. 


Extracts from Banking Accounts. 


Dotigal’s A/c. at 

Birklaeck. 

Miss Holland’s A/c. at 

Nat. Provincial. 

Credit, 

Debit. 

1899. 

1899. 

Oct. 30— Cash, £670 0 0 

Oot. 31— Dougal, £670 0 0 

1900. 

1900. 

Sept. 4— „ 100 0 0 

Sept. 5 — „ 100 0 0 

Oct. 18— „ 64 0 0 

Oct. 19— „ 64 0 0 

Nov. 24— „ 550 0 0 

Nov. 26— ,, 550 0 0 

1901. 

1901. 

June 29 — „ 123 6 0 

July 1 — „ 100 0 0 

Sept. 25— „ 1400 0 0 

Sept. 27 — „ 1400 0 0 

1902. 

1902. 

Sept. 1— „ 28 15 0 

Sept. 2 — Heath, 28 15 0 

£2936 1 0 

£2912 15 0 




210 



Appendix IX. 


APPENDIX IX. 


Certificate op Discharge of No. 8739 (Rank) Qr.-Mr.-wSergeant. 


(Name) Samuel H. Dougal, 

Royal Engineers. 

Born in the Parish of Bow, near the Town of London, in the 
County of Middlesex. 

Attested at Chatham on the 6th March, 1866, for the Royal 
Engineers, at the age of 19-^ years. 

He IS discharged m consequence of the termination of his 
second period of limited engagement. 


He has served 21 years 17 
days, of which 21 years 17 days 
reckon towards Pension. 

Service Abroad, years. 

Medals and . 
Decorations, 

Medal for 
doing Ser- 
vice and 
Good 
Conduct. 

V. 

His conduct and character 
while in the service have been 
according to the records : — 

Special qualifications for 

Very good. 

employment ■ 

' — ' 

A very good Clerk. 

He is in possession of a 
Second-class School Certificate. 

th 




(Place) Aldershot. 

(Date) bth March^ 1887. 


(Signature of 
Commanding 
Officer), 


F. B. Maingut, 
Colonel. 


Discharge confirmed at Aldershot 

Service towards engagement — 

Army, 21 years 17 days. 

Reserve, „ „ (Signature) R. Walmbb, Major, 

D.A.A. General, 

Total, 21 „ 17 „ (Date) March, 1887. 


211 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 


APPENDIX X. 


Eeports op Medical Officers of Cambridge and Chelmsford 

Prisons 


Gentlemen, 


H.M Prison, 

Cambridge, June 21st, 1903. 
Ee Samuel Herbert Dougal. 


I have the honour to report that durmg the time the above-named 
Prisoner was in custody in this Prison his behaviour was most 
exemplary & his mental condition perfectly normal. 

I have the honour, &c , 


I. Buckenham, M E C S , &c , 
Medical Officer. 


To the Governor. 


H.M. Prison, 

Chelmsford, June 21st, 1903. 
3891 Samuel H. Dougal. 


The above-named was admitted to this Prison 29 May, 1905. He 
was at once placed in the infirmary under special observation On 
admission he was in good health, of good physique, & free from orgamc 
disease; he talked well, his memory was apparently good & clear, he 
showed no sign of mental weakness or disease. Since he has been in 
the infirmary he has slept well, eaten ^ell, behaved quietly & well. 
He talks easily & freely, his memory seems to be quite good. 

In my opinion he has shown no sign of mental disease & no sign 
of insanity since he has been under my charge here. 

H W. Newton, 

MO. 


212 



Appendix XL 


APPENDIX XI. 


Letter from Miss Holland to her Nephew 

Mademoiselle Hubert, 

4 Eue Espagnole, 

Place Van Eyck, Bruges, 
Belgium, 17th November, 1895. 

My dear Edmund, 

I have justi received your paper, & your letter came yesterday. I 
am so sorry to hear of your suffering, for I know what it means when 
my tooth was broken by the Dentist, but I do hope that it will pass 
away very soon & you will all again feel well. I know how trying 
the bad weather in London is, and I am thankful to be here, the 
houses are so warm & comfortable 

I am writing now to tell you not to mind about going to see Lewis 
yet. I shall have to pay him about Xmas, & I will write to you 
again from Brussels next month, he is I am sure all right, & as he 
wrote me a nice letter I feel guitt satisfied, & it may be a good 
excuse for you to see him later on when you can manage the journey 
conveniently & give a XmaS box to old Mrs Williams & the money 
I will send for Dog’s license when I am settled in Brussels. Bruges 
is rather a primitive place, but there are such beautiful things in 
some of the shops & so cheap that one feels inclined to buy a whole 
heap and sell them again in London where they would fetch double 
the price, although perhaps the duty would be a disadvantage. 

I trust Esther will get rid of her cold, it is very hard for you I 
am sure just now. Give my love to May & Jussie. I am glad 
Marquis is good and fond of you all; I thought he would' be happy 
with you. 

It seems a long time since I left. I wish you had a more lucrative 
position & not so much work, but never mind, although we all have 
so many drawbacks we have many blessmgs, & our Heavenly Father 
IS so good to us & always helps us & leads us in all our ways, & all 
works for our good. His ways are pleasantness & Peace I & your 
wife and children must be a great pleasure such as, you see, I have 
not, & however happy our surroundings may be it is lonely not to 
have one’s own home With much love to you all 

Ever your affectionate Aunt, 

Camille C Holland. 


213 



Samuel Herbert Dougal 


APPENDIX XII. 


COBBESPONDENCE. 


(A) Lettebs fbom Dotjgal and fbom Miss Holland. 


Dear Madam, 


Parkmore, Hassocks, 
Susses, 30th December, 1898. 


Be Coldhams Farm. 


Yesterday I "visited your son at Coldhams Farm & had a good 
look over the land with him, and having talked the matter over with 
my wife have decided to increase my previous offer (which doubtless 
Messrs. Butter have informed you) for the Farm, timber mcluded, 
to £1550, and will pay for crops and other things by valuation. I 
can arrange with your son as to the purchase of any stock, &c , that 
I may require, and also as to the time of taking the farm over, should 
you decide to accept my oSer 

I take this opportunity of writing direct to you, as I have addressed 
several letters to Messrs Butter, but they do not appear to have 
referred them to you. 

Yours faithfully, 

S. Hebbbbt Dougal 


P.S — Allow me to express my sympthy with you in your sad loss. 

S. H. D. 


Dear Madam, 


Parkmore, Hassocks, 
Sussex, 2nd January, 1899 


I am m receipt of your letter of tne 31st December offering me 
Coldhams Farm of 97 acres for £1550, for which I thank you My 
offer to you of £1550 was for the whole Farm of 101 acres. 

I am afraid there has been some confusion in the acreage, caused 
by Messrs Butter's ambiguous letters to me I forward them for 
your perusal 

Their monthly Begister, page 21, of November (enclosed), shows the 
Farm as having 101 acres, for which I offered Messrs Butter £1500 
on 20/12/98. They wrote on 27/12/98 stating that the lowest their 
client would accept was £1600 (letter enclosed), no acreagfi mentioned. 
On the 29th they wrote again stating that the farm now contained 
101 acres, as Mr SaviU (Senior) had added the 4 acres to the 97, 
“ just before he died ” — vide letter enclosed. 

When I wrote Messrs. Butter offering the £1500 for the 97 acres 
timber included I was under the impression from their letter that was 
all the acreage there was in the Farm, until your son showed me over 
214 



Appendix XII. 

the whole 101 acres on Thursday last, when I decided to increase my 
offer for the whole Farm of 101 acres to £1550, timber included 
I am sorry to give you so much trouble in the matter. I think 
you will see it is not entirely my fault 

Yours faithfully, 

S Hebbert Dotjgal. 


The Manager. 


Parkmore, Hassocks, 
Sussex, 8th January, 1899 


Hear Sir, 

Please let me know by return if you hold my Certificate for my 
Bank of Liverpool Shares^ If not, I will enclose and forward you 
the key of my hox, m which it will be found Kindly forward it to 
Mr William H Hart, 

Stockbroker, 

26 Old Broad St., 

City, 

who has just sold 40 shares for me 

Yours sincerely, 

Camille C Holland. 


Market Bow, 
Saffron Walden, 
Essex, 22nd March, 1899 

The Manager 


Hear Sir, 

Kindly forward my Pass book to this address & oblige 
Yours faithfully, 

Camille C Holland. 


The Manager 


Market Bow, 
Saffron Walden, 
Essex, 3rd April, 1899. 


Hear Sir, 

Please forward me enclosed amount £30 0 0 & oblige yours 
Very truly, 

Camille C. Holland. 


, (B) The Eobgebies. 

Miss C. C Holland presents her compliments to the manager and 
will be glad if he will forward her a new Cheque Book. 

The Moat House, 

Coldhams, Quendon, 

Essex, 29th May, 18^. 


215 



Samuel Herbert Dougal 


£30. 

Miss C. C. Holland presents her compliments to the Manager & will 
feel obliged if he will forward her the amount of enclosed cheque in 
fi^es. 

The Moat House, 

Coldhams, 

Quendon, 6th June, 1899 


The Moat House, 
Coldhams, Quendon, 
Essex, 7th June, 1899. 

Dear Sir, 

Cheque to Mr. Dougal quite correct. Owing to a sprained hand 
there may be a discrepancy in some of my Cheques lately signed. 

Yours truly, 

Camille C. Holland. 


Miss C. C. Holland presents her compliments to the Manager and 
will be glad if he will kindly forward her Pass Book 

The Moat House, 

Coldhams, 

Quendon, 18th August, 1899 


The Moat House, 
Coldhams, Quendon, 
Essex, Septr. 18th, 1899. 

Dear Sir, 

I shall be glad if you will be kind enough to forward to me the 
Certificates of my Shares in United Alkali £500. 

George Newnes pref. 400 
Great Laxey Mines 43. 
at your earliest convenience. '' 


Yours faithfully, 

Camille C. Holland. 

The Manager, 

National Provincial Bank, 

St. James' Branch, 


Camille Cecile Holland, The Moat House, Quendon, Essex, do 
solemnly and sincerely declare that I am the holder of Forty-three 
Shares, numbered 4202 to , 2632 to 2636, 1635 to 1644, 12293 

to 12302, 4526 to 4530, 12857 to 12861, 5429 to 5430, in the Great 
Laxey Mining Company, Limited. 

I believe the aforesaid Share Certificate has been lost or mislaid 
by me. I have caused all reasonable endeavours to be made to 
216 






Letter forged by S- H, Dougal 



Appendix XII. 


discover the same and have been unable to do so. I also declare 
that the Shares in question have not been assigned or in anywise 
encumbered by me, and that I am now absolutely and beneficially 
entitled to the said Shares and the Money secured thereby for my 
own use, free from all encumbrances And I make this solemn 
Declaration conscientiously believing the same to be true, and by 
virtue of the provisions of an Act made and passed in the Session 
of Parliament of the fifth and sixth years of the reign of his late 
Majesty Kmg William the Fourth, intituled “ An Act to repeal an 
Act of the present Session of Parliament intituled ‘ An Act for the 
more effectual abolition of Oaths and Affirmations taken and made in 
various Departments of the State, and to substitute Declarations in 
lieu thereof, and for the more entire suppression of voluntary and 
extra-judicial Oaths and Affidavits, and to make other provisions for 
the abolition of unnecessary Oaths 

Camille C. Holland 


Subscribed and Declared at Saffron Walden this 27th day of Septr., 
1899, before me 

Joseph Bell, 

Justice of the Peace for the County of Essex. 


The Moat House, 
Coldhams, Quendon, 
Essex, 29th Sept , 1899. 

Dear Sir, 

Herewith I forward cheque value £940 18s , which please place to 
the credit of my account & oblige. 


Yours faithfully, 


The Manager, 

National Provincial Bank, 
Piccadilly. 


Camille 0 Holland. 


Miss C C. Holland presejjts her compliments to the Manager & 
would be glad if he would have the attached attended to. 


The Moat House, 
Coldhams, 
Quendon, 9/10/99 


The Moat House, 
Quendon, 

Essex, 18th October, 1899. 

Dear Sir, 

Herewith please find cheque for £14 13s. in payment for articles 
bought at your Sale yesterday. 

Yours faithfully, 


S. Herbeht Dougal. 


Messrs Thurgood & Son, 
Auctioneers, &c. 


217 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

The Moat House, 
Coldhams, Quendon, 

£50. Esses, 25th October, 1899. 

Dear Sir, 

Will you kindly forward me notes for the enclosed cheque & oblige, 
Yours faithfully, 

Camille C Hollajtd. 

The Manager, 

National Provincial Bank, 

St. James’ Branch, 

Piccadilly 

F B — Please let me have my Pass Book at your convenience 

C. C H 


The Moat House, 
Coldhams, Quendon, 

Essex, 27th November, 1899. 

Dear Sir, 

Will you be kind enough to cause the enclosed document to be 
corrected, as I have had several of the certificates from you, and some 
new ones have been deposited, and oblige 
Yours faithfully, 


Camkxe C. Holland 

The Manager, 

National Provincial Bank, 

St. James’ Branch. 


Miss Holland presents her compliments to the Manager & will be 
glad if he will be good enough to forward her Pass Book 

The Moat House, 

Coldhams, Quendon, 

Essex, 6th December, 1899. 


The Moat House, 
Quendon, 

Essex, 18th June, 1900 

The Executors of the 

late Mr. W. SaviU. 

Please convey the properties known as Coldhams and Shortlands to 
Mr. S. Herbert Dougal 

Camille C. Holland 

Witness — 

S. Herbert Dougal, 

The Moat House, 

Quendon. 

Witness to Mr Dougal’s signature — 

Eeginald P. Harding, 

97 Chancery Lane, 

Solicitor 


218 



Appendix XII 


Moat House, 
Coldhams, Quendon, 
Esses, 31st October, 1900. 

Dear Sir, 

Will you kindly send me the Certificates of my shares in City & 
West End properties (60), The Central Uruguay, Eastern Extension, 
Railway (15), and Western Extension (50), and much oblige 

Yours truly, 


Camille C Holland 

The Manager, 

National Provincial Bank, 

St James’ Branch, 

Piccadilly. 


Miss Holland presents her compliments to the Manager & begs he 
will be good enough to place the enclosed Cheque to her credit. 

The Moat House, 

Quendon, 

Essex, 17/11/00 


Miss Holland presents her compliments to the Manager & will 
feel obliged if he will forward her Pass Book. 

The Moat House, 

Coldhams, Quendon, 

Essex, 12/12/00 


Miss C. C. Holland presents her compliments to the Manager & 
would feel obliged if he will kmdly forward her Pass Book 

The Moat House, 

Coldhams, Quendon, 

Essex, 10th July, 1901. 


Miss C C. Holland preseni^ her compliments to the Manager & 
will be much obliged if he will kindly attend to enclosed. 

The Moat House, 

Coldhams, Quendon, 

Essex, 21st August, 1901. 


(C) Letters of Dotjgal. 

The Moat House, 
Clavering, 

Essex, 20th August, 1901. 

Dear Sirs, 

Send me on the number of plants you suggest in your letter of the 
17th inst , and perhaps you may have a few other plants to stand the 
winter to come on in early spring ; if so, include them. 


219 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

I shall want a few climbing plants to cover my house, such as Boses, 
Ampelopsis Vetches, variagated Ivies or other, have you such’ or is 
it too late to plant these I have had my house re-fronted, hence the 
want of a few to cover it 

Yours faithfully, 

S Herbert Dotjgal. 

Messrs. Wm Paul & Son, 

Waltham Cross. 


Dear Sir, 

Herewith Cheque £4 4s. 6d. 
yesterday. 

Yours 

Messrs Thurgood & Son, 
Auctioneers, 

Saffron Walden. 


for Lots 442, 
faithfully, 

S 


The Moat House, 
Clavering, 
Essex, I6/IO/O1. 

449, & 543 at Sale 


Herbert Dotjgal. 


The Moat House, 
Quendon, Clavermg, 
Essex, 22nd November, 1901. 

Dear Sirs, 


Boiler and fittings duly received to-day. I find there has been 
some mistake in cutting the pipes for the return (near the door) into 
the syphon. Please see my figures on plan, the door is only 4 ft. 
6 in from outside. 

Yours faithfully, 

S Herbert Dotjgal. 

Messrs Messenger & Co , 

Loughborough 


P.S — Please send me the stove pip^ bends as arranged. 

S. H. D. 


The Moat House, 
Quendon, 

Essex, 20th January, 1902. 

Dear Sirs, 

I have unfortunately mislaid your account. Will you kindly send 
me another bill and I will send cheque * 


Yours faithfully, 

S. Herbert Dotjgal. 

Messrs. Messenger & Co., 

Engineers, 

Loughborough. 


220 



Appendix XII . 

(D) Dotjgal’s Letters from Prison when awaiting Trial, and 
Letters written to him at the same period 

Chelmsford Prison, 6th June, 1903. 

Dear Miss L ,* 

Many thanks for your letter of the 4th inst and enclosures I 
don’t know when Albert will he returning, as he does not mention the 
subject in his last letter (which I send you herewith) which you can 
retain. He would, no doubt, be glad of a letter from you I will, 
when I am able, send him a watch, as I have a very good American 
Waltham in strong silver cases, j'ust the thing for him ; you may 
remember it, one I used to wear myself, with monogram on back 
In fact, I might get Mr. Newton to send it out to him if he can 
get it from the Police, who at present have charge of all my property 

I am not troubled with many letters from Mrs D , but when she 
last wrote Olive was well and happy 

When you leave Wilton Road don’t forget to let me have your 
address. It is a pity I am not any disengaged now as we could 
have a run round together and visit some of our old haunts, friends, 
etc. Henley and the old river must be nice j‘ust now You are near 
the forest and can have a ramble therein at your sweet will. Many 
a time I have run through there on my car, and also on a bicycle; 
have you taken to one yet ’ You should, now you have the leisure to 
do so and the time of the year also favourable I expect my trial 
to commence about the 22nd, and may take some days Monday, I 
thmk, IS the 22nd. There are a lot of witnesses agamst me and the 
circumstances look very dark, but let us hope there will be a light 
cloud following I am, at any rate, keeping up my spirits to meet 
the charge. 

What a wonderful memory you have to be sure Such events as 
you mention appear fresh in your mind. I had quite forgotten, but 
I do remember the day you first accompanied me over Northend 
House, when I was about to take it, and you hoped I would, of 
course; you remember although many changes have occurred since 
then. 

Kindest regards to you and enquiring friends. 

Yours faithfully, 

S. Herbert Doitgal 


Ohmgford, 

Essex, June 8th, 1903. 

My dear friend. 

Thank you very much for your letter, & also for Albert’s. Will 
you like me to send him some cigarettes, or has Charley sent them 
for you. If you wish me to do so will you please let me have the 
full address, and directions as to what to buy. I don’t believe I 

* Not the Miss L ” to whom Dougal wrote recommending the 

jolly English home ” The Miss L of this prison correspondence 

was a friend he had made m the Watlington days — Ed 


221 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

have ever bought any in my life. Not too high a figure, as I am 
not earning and paymg for my board I enjoy a walk in the Forest 
sometimes, or should enjoy the walk if you were not in such trouble 
I am surprised that Albert has not heard from Charley for so long 
I shall be pleased to write to him I have often wished to do so 
It is marvellous how he has come through the war We are all very 
ready to talk I hope if any charge is made against you, they will 
remember him and take it of your bill. But I am hoping for the 
best. It is such a lovely day. I wish you were here to enjoy it 
I shall not try to learn a bicycle unless you can teach me I have 
no confidence, and I am a good walker I remember the watch you 
think of sending to Dthala for Albert perfectly I have often admired 
it as bemg so strong and good looking. I remember your snake rings 
& the one with the William or diamond, also the one “ Asthore ’’ 
of Mrs Dougal’s Did you remember the spoons when you gave the 
list of your property. They are honestly mine I hope you did not 
forget to claim them I am glad to hear Olive is well & happy, 
& very glad I have seen her again. You made a mistake in not 
fighting for a living at Northend House I am sure you would have 
succeeded Albert was growmg such a smart lad and would have 
been a great help to you Excuse me speaking in such a motherly 
fashion. I am thankful to hear you are keeping up & you must still 
do so Certainly I will let you know my address. I hope your 
friends will come forward and assist you all they can. 

I have no stamps by me to-day, so you must forgive me for not 
sending any in this letter Please put my initials when you write. 
Hoping you are keeping well & with my best good wishes for you. 

Always your sincere friend, 

C L 

P S — If you wish to write at any time and have no stamps send 
the letter without. 


Springfield, 

Essex, 8th June, 1903 

My dear Olive, 

I was so pleased to receive your letter & to know you are happy & 
comfortable with kmd friends I hope you will pay great attention 
to your lessons, & try and learn them all you can I was glad to 
know Mam is gomg to be confirmed I hope you are well, & I want 
you to pay great respect to your kind lady friend who you are now 
staying with, also to the little girl Ethel. 

Give my love to your Mama & kind regards to all friends. I send 
you a kiss. 

Your affectionate Papa, 

S. P Dougal. 


Chelmsford Prison, 10th June, 1903. 

Dear Miss L , 

You are kind to think of sending Albert some cigarettes. Player’s 
Medium are very good, sold in boxes of 50 at Is,, or Will’s Gold 
222 



Appendix XII. 

Flake in round tins at Is l^d are also good, his address 2nd Batt. 
Eoyal Dublin Fusiliers, Aden He will be glad to receive a letter 
from you,* he does not get too many out there. I will have the 
watch sent to him the first opportunity; tell him so 
Don’t trouble about the spoons, they will be quite safe I have 
sworn an affidavit since I have been here saying they are yours, also 
as to all my property at the Moat House. Mr. Newton also has a 
description of the spoons and their marks It is as you say 
wonderful Albert should have got through without a scratch, con- 
sidering quite two-thirds of his regiment were killed; as a fact they 
suffered and fought over more engagements than any other I thought 
of having an inscription engraved inside the watch as a thank offering 
for his safe return I had a letter from Olive; she is well and 
happy m London. 

Don’t trouble about stamps ; I can obtain them alright here 
Did I tell you I was in the Infirmary here ; therefore don’t require 
to obtain my food from outside. Ample is supplied in that way 
Yes, I should much enjoy a ramble in the Forest just now, the 
country is looking at its best as you say I could teach you to ride 
a bicycle. I have found one can learn much better by themselves. 
Get a machine and go to a quiet road, and insist on riding, it is 
then done For my part I got on a new machine and rode straight 
--(hardly straight) away 30 miles 1st day. A lady is of course more 
timid than a man, and consequently takes longer to learn. 

I am keepmg well 
Kmdest regards. 

Yours faithfully, 

S Hebbbrt Dougal. 


Wilton Eoad, 

Higham Park, Chingford, 

T., , T. • Essex, June 11th, 1903 

My dear Friend, ' 

All being well I will send the cigarettes to Albert to-morrow ; a 
tm would be best to send I should think I will see if I can manage 
more than one tin. I suppose* there would not be time to have the 
engraving that you speak about put on the watch before you send it 
out to Albert. I will write to him when I have finished this and 
tell him about the watch, that you are sendmg it out to him I am 
glad to hear you are keeping well. No « you had not told me before 
you were in the infirmary I get plenty of occupation I assure you, 
so shall not trouble about learning to ride a bicycle this summer. 
I am pleased to hear that Olive is well and happy I did not know 
she was in London What do you think will be the probable cost 
of the inscription you are going to have put on the watch? Will a 
pound cover it? or will you rather wait till he comes home before 
you have it done. I have my bureau & a nice large easy chair & a 
table & my china here. Write when convenient to you. Now I know 
you are well & employed, I feel more satisfied. Believe me always 
your sincere friend. 


C. L, 
223 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

Chelmsford Prison, 12tli June, 1903. 

Dear , 

I received a letter this morning giving me certain information and 
which I have no doubt is correct; allow me to congratulate you. At 
the same time, I hope you are going on all right and are comfortable. 
I only wish I could be of some service to you; or bring you some 
little delicacy and even come and see you and have a chat would be 
better than what I am doing or rather not doing You will I know 
take the will for the deed in this case. It does seem hard to me not 
to be able to see you under the circumstances 
I hear from Mr. Newton he is retaining Mr George Elliot and a 
junior counsel on the Chelmsford circuit 

He has made another application for your watch and chain to be 
given up, but I have not heard the result , perhaps Harden will brmg 
it when he comes to see the girls 
I am writing this in a hurry, as I thought perhaps you would like 
a few hnes from me particularly at this time I hope they are all 
treating you kindly just now, let me know, and if not I will drop 
them a few lines and give them a bit of my mind on paper. 

It is most unfortunate that I should be unable to do anything for 
you, but let us hope and trust that this won’t last long, and then 
we shall be contented and happy again. 

I had a letter from Mrs D yesterday Simply Olive is well and 
happy and wants some new dresses. She speaks of a drab and a 
fawn coloured dress; were these not made by your sister and sent 
to the convent? I believe so, although my memory is so bad I can’t 
be positive When you write kindly let me know, as Mrs. D thinks 
they were bought for you , Olive has never had them I have often 
thought those nuns were charitable with other people’s things ’ and 
this may be an instance I now wonder whether they sent back with 
her all those nice clothes and under linen we bought her when she 
went to Belgium ’ I must write and ask Mrs. D , as if not, the Nuns 
must be referred to about it. I can’t remember we really got for 
her, so perhaps when you are able you will send me a list and I will 
forward to Mrs. D., will you kindly? 

Now then, old girl, you must keep yourself strong, take plenty of 
nourishmg food, don’t stint yourself and you will soon be well I 
am writing this in a hurry, so pray excuse. 

With kindest regards 

Very sincerely yours, 

S. Heebbrt Dougal. 


^ „ Chelmsford Prison, 12th June, 1903 

Dear Hermie, ^ 

I was glad to get your letter, but was nearly missing the P,S. the 
most pithy part. ' 

The two dresses slate and fawn color were I believe taken to her 
at the Convent, Bishops Stortford She surely must have seen them, 
they were very nice frocks and nicely made. Before she went to 
Belgium I bought her a complete rig out— sheets, pillow slips. 



Appendix XII. 


serviettes, all new underclothing, and a very nice green coat trimmed 
fur 5 did they return all these things? Well if she has not those 
coloured frocks it is evident they have not. I have often thought 
they gave away other people’s things, perhaps some other children 
have these frocks. She also had a new very fin© hair brush (6s ) 
everything of the very best. 

Give her my love You ought to write Sister Maria for all her 
things 

Yours, 


Hebbebt 


Chelmsford Prison, 15th June, 1903. 

Dear , 

Just a few lines to say my cold is a little better, and to ask how 
you are’ As this weather is not very grand for any one with a cold 
on their chest, I hope yours is better I suppose none of your family 
went to the Show at Bishops Stortford last week, as it was very wet 
Did I tell you the name of the Counsel; it is Mr Henry Elliot 
I have just had a visit from my solicitor, and all la now in order 
for next Monday when the trial will be commenced. 

Kmdest regards 

Yours very sincerely, 

S. Hebbebt Dotjgal. 

I hop© you are getting along nicely; let me have a line when able. 

S. H. D. 


Chelmsford Prison, 16th June, 1903 

Dear , 

To-day is much better; we have a little sun after some days of 
ram 

I see there were at the Show at Bishops Stortford two men, one 
playing a banjo and singing ballad on the Moat House, etc., and 
the other was dispensing of the copies of the song at Id each, and 
domg a good business. I saw one vers© of the song in a local paper, 
and no doubt you may see a copy of it in your neighbourhood If 
you do, see if there is the Printer’s Aame at the bottom of the page, 
and if so, make a not© of it for me, please. The junior Counsel th^at 
will assist Mr. Elliot on my trial is Mr. Basil Watson, and of course 
Mr. Newton and his representative will be there also. 

The body of that man that was found in Mr Laurie’s straw sack 
at Wicken Bonhunt is supposed to be an Army Pensioner who came 
from Royston on 6th April; he was a on© armed man. 

The farm where young Bowyer lives, The Bonhunt,” is offered 
for sale ; you know the house, where w© ran up the carriage drive in 
the locomobile and where I put a new gauge glass in when waiting 
there. Oh ’ for those times over again ; we had a nice little run 
that day if you remember? 

Q 


225 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

Well, my girl, bow are you getting along ’ I am anxiously awaiting 

a few lines from you to say how you are I wonder has not 

written to let me know. 

I daresay the girls have received their notices, etc , to attend next 
Monday at Chelmsford, have they not? There will be several from 
about there, and it would be a good idea to club together and hire 
a trap and drive all the way It is a delightful drive through 
undulating country, and at this time of year it would be a veritable 
treat for them all. So much better and more comfortable than the 
tram with its three changes, and, besides, they have the four miles 
to get to the station in the first place I was thinking of a child 
(Daughter) born on the 11th of this month might be named “ Draga ” 
after the poor Queen of Servia assassinated on that day, what a 
dreadful piece of business • When you feel like it, please drop me a 
few lines and let me know how you are 

Yesterday I had a visit from my solicitor’s representative, and he 
tells me everything is in order for the trial on Monday ; it is a very 
great suspense having it hangmg about so long, and I shall be glad 
when it is over and settled. I don’t think I have any more to write 
about this time. 

Kindest regards to you and yours. 

Very sincerely yours, 

S. Herbekt Dougal 

P.S — Kindly let me know when you receive this letter. 

S. H D 


Chelmsford Prison, 16th June, 1903. 

Dear Sir, 

I understand Mr Arthur Newton has retained Mr Henry Elliot 
to defend me at the trial next Monday, and from what I hear he is 
considered a good criminal lawyer and one who will do justice to 
the case. ^ 

I don’t know whether Mr Newton has given you any details of the 
case, as from the newspaper accounts it would appear that there was 
very little hope of a successful issue; therefore I authorised him to 
tell you exactly how the matter stood and from which you would see 
how free from guilt I am, and I understood that it was upon that 
understanding you made your very generous offer to Mr. Newton. 
Yesterday I had a visit from his representative, and every detail has 
now been arranged for my defence, and from what I see they have 
been most diligent in getting everything in order for the trial. 

I thought you would like to know this from me in case you wish 
to communicate with Mr Newton on the subject of my defence. 
Thanking you again for your kindness 

I remain. 

Yours faithfully, 


226 


S Herbert Dougal. 



Appendix XII. 

Chelmsford Prison, 18th June, 1903. 

Dear , 

I thought probably I should receive a letter from you this morning, 
but so far (8 30 am) have been disappointed. I go down to the 
Court to-day, what for I don’t know, unless it is to “ plead ” to the 
charge, and then most probably I shall know for certam when the 
case will be commenced. To-day is much finer and the sun is actually 
shining. I hope for better weather, as the late rains have affected 
my chest and made me very uncomfortable with tightness; you know 
what that is as regards my case, the slightest exertion putting me out 
of breath. 

I hope you are getting along nicely, and long to hear from you to 
say so. I see they have some very bad cases of floodmg at Spell- 
brook ; they had to live in their upstair rooms, and boats were 
requisitioned to go out to work or elsewhere. 

One man near Bishop’s Stortford had a very bad loss of nearly 120 
sheep In fact, nearly everywhere, at or near a river, people’s 
houses were flooded out I know a gentleman’s place near Marlow 
on the Thames where there will be, as soon as the waters go down, 
2 inches of mud all over his drawing-room carpet and furniture. I 
saw the same thing happen there some seven years ago after a similar 
flood I daresay there is plenty of water at Clavering Bridges just 
now Are Watson’s still there, or are they sold up’ 

I am anxiously waiting Monday 

Yours very truly, 

S. Heebbet Doxjgal. 


Chelmsford Prison, 19th June, 1903. 

Dear Miss L , 

I don’t think I have replied to your letter of the 11th instant. 1 
cannot say what will be done about Albert’s watch ; should of course 
like him to have it as soon as possible and to have the inscription put 
on it before he gets it. Oh, the cost would be trifling, very much 
less than you say, only a fev*> shiUmgs. 

My trial commences on Monday, and will most likely last two or 
three days. 

You are very kind to send Albert the cigarettes ; he will be pleased. 

Yes I made a mistake in putting Road ” instead of “ Park ” , 
you must excuse it. 

Olive I am glad to hear is happy and well in London. 

George is at Plymouth in the Submarine Mining Dept. Royal 
Engineers, and is now a Corporal. 

Charley'^is still at his desk in London 

I daresay you are kept busy in that household; you don’t say m 
what way, but I expect of a domestic nature, eh? 

Kind regards to all. 

Yours faithfully, 

S. Heebeet Dottgal 
227 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

Chingford, 20th June, 1903. 

My Dear Friend, 

Thank you for your letters I wrote to Albert and sent the 
cigarettes as I said I would. I am pleased to be able to do so. 

You must write to me again when you can, I shall be thinking of 
you on Monday and all through the trial, and hope very earnestly 
things are not so bad as they look 
With best and kindest wishes, believe me always your smcere 

C. L— . 

I am pleased to hear Olive is well and happy. 


Chelmsford, 23rd June, 1903. 

Dear , 

I was most pleased to receive your letter yesterday morning before 
going to Court and to find you are in good spirits, and if not entirely 
strong and well I do trust you will soon be up and about as usual 
Yes, I think that name a very nice one indeed, and the only one 
required as far as I see 

I was surprised to hear the Clavering witnesses have been here 
since last Wednesday night ; they have no doubt been having a good 
old time living at hotels and on the fat of the land ; some of them 
would like to be on a similar trial again, that is, if they are being 
treated well. The jury were taken out for a drive after tea. 

I saw Mrs. and m Court; they were sitting on the 

Bench, if you please, immediately behind the right hand of the judge; 
of course the other witnesses were out of Court, and I therefore did 

not see or , but doubtless will be called to-day, the 

forgery charge will be taken after (if this charge is not proven) so 
that only the witnesses to each charge are being examined at a time 

I was extremely sorry to hear the girls have been so unkind to 

you I am surprised at , but the time may come when will 

require similar attention, and then sl^e may know what it is to be 
slighted. 

Anything to sell newspapers last evening on the contents bill in of 
course large letters, Dougal and the servant, it was I suppose that 
girl’s evidence about trying to kiss her. One man that went into 
the box yesterday only spoke one word that was true; all the other 
part of his evidence was totally untrue and fabricated for the trial, 
but fortunately it was to my advantage, if any, what he did he 
about, and that was he said the original agreement to purchase the 
farm was signed by me, but that Miss H. called at hts office and 
signed another herself and destroyed the other after, whereas the 
original was in Court signed by her and witnessed by me. 

I do hope will tell the truth when m the box I fancy she 

will, as I find a number of witnesses have dropped statements which 
they were cross-examined upon at the Police Court; in fact, the 
superintendent himself had a differently worded statement and had 
dropped the words “ A friendly chat and wanted to invite his con- 
228 



Appendix XII. 

fidence/’ which Mr. Newton handled somewhat severely at the 
magisterial hearing, has been all dropped His evidence was some- 
thing like a schoolboy saying his lessons. The 3 ury are remarkable 
for their youthful appearance, and appear to be drawn from the 
artizan class or middle class shopkeeper 
Most likely my trial on this charge will be disposed of to-day; 
whichever way it goes no doubt I shall be given the opportunity of 
writing, so that keep a good heart I am endeavouring to do so, and 
as far as outward appearances go, it is so. 

I enclose Olive’s last letter to me, so that you will see she is 
comfortable and happy Are those pieces of stuff you speak of as 
being at the Moat House, those two pieces we bought together at 
Wallis, a fawn and a slate colored piece ; if so, I thought they had 
been made up and sent to Olive, and have so informed Mrs D. 
Kindly let me know and I will rectify the mistake if any Am glad 
Dr. Smith abstained from asking any impertinent questions ; he is very 
prone to do so at times, and may only be waiting until you are strong 
before doing so , if he does, just answer him short I am surprised 
at youi sister keeping back letters, that is a very serious offence, and 
tell her so , the P 0 authorities would prosecute her for it if known. 
I am now waiting to be driven down to Court With kindest regards. 
Thank Millie for me for her kindness 

Yours very Sincerely, 

S Herbert Dougal, 


229 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 


APPENDIX XIII. 


Petition by S. H. Dougal. 

To His Majesty^s Principal Secretary of State 
for the Home Department. 


Home Office, 

Whitehall, S.W 

The Huotle Petition of Samuel Herbert Dougal, now lying 
under sentence of death at His Majesty’s Prison, Chelms- 
ford, in the County of Essex, for the murder of Camille 
Cecile Holland. 

Sheweth as follows : — 

1. Your petitioner, the above-named Samuel Herbert 
Dougal, was on the 19th of March, 1903, arrested at the 
Bank of England upon a charge of forging a cheque pur- 
porting to have been drawn by the above-named Camille 
Cecile Holland. 

2. On the 20th of March, 1903, your petitionei was brought 
up at Saffron Walden Petty Sessions and remanded without 
evidence being taken until the 27th of March, and subse- 
quently brought up at the said Petty Sessions upon the said 
charge of forgery and subsequently upon a further charge 
of the alleged murder of the said Camille Cecile Holland 
on 2nd, 8th, 16th, and 23rd April, and on 1st, 6th, 13th, 
22nd, and 29th May ; your petitioner also attending the 
inquest upon the alleged body of the said Camille Cecile 
Holland before the coroner at Newport, in the said county 
of Essex, on 30th April and 7th and 16th May. 

3. On the said 15th of May, 1903, the coroner’s jury 
found a verdict of wilful murder against your petitioner, 
and he was committed by the coroner to take his trial at 
the then next ensuing Chelmsford Assizes, and your petitionei 
was subsequently on the said 29th day of May committed by 
the magistrates sitting at the Saffron Walden Petty Sessions 
aforesaid to take his trial at the said Assizes upon the said 
charges of forgery and wilful murder. 

4. Your petitioner was indicted upon both the said charges 
before the grand jury at the Chelmsford Assizes holden on 

230 






Appendix XIII. 

Thursday, the 18th day of June, 1903, and a true bill was 
found against him upon both such charges. 

5. Your petitioner was tried before the Honourable Sir 
Kobert Samuel Wright at such Assizes on the 22nd and 23rd 
of June, 1903, the prosecution being conducted at the instance 
of the Solicitor to the Treasury by Mr. Charles Frederick 
Gill, K.C., Mr. Walter John Grubbe, and Mr. Rollo Frederick 
Graham-Campbell, counsel for the Crown, and your petitioner 
was defended by Mr. George Elliott, Mr. Basil Bernard 
Watson, and Mr. John Paul Valetta, at the instance of his 
solicitor, Mr. Arthur Newton 

6 After a long deliberation by the jury your petitioner 
was found guilty upon the indictment of wilful murder of 
the said Camille Cecile Holland, and was sentenced to death. 

7 Inquiiies have been made, and it has been ascertained 
that on the 3rd of February, 1896, your petitioner was 
received into the London County Lunatic Asylum, Cane Hill, 
Purley, in the county of Surrey, as a criminal lunatic from 
His Majesty's Prison, Pentonville, where he was undergoing 
a sentence of twelve months’ imprisonment for alleged 
forgery, the report of the medical officer of the said prison 
with regard to your petitioner being as follows : — 

Since admission has been low spirited and depressed, 
and has been under special observation. He made a 
deliberate attempt to hang himself on the 27th January. 

On admission here he was depressed, &c., but was 
reported to be not dangerous, nor did he display any 
dangerous or homicidal tendencies whilst here. He 
steadily improved, and in the following June he is noted 
as working with the firemen, and was allowed a con- 
siderable amount of personal liberty. 

About August he ha?^ apparently quite recovered, and 
I made a report to the Home Secretary to this effect, 
but advised that he should not be sent back to prison 
on the grounds that such a course might cause a relapse 
His sentemi^^asTiot, however, remitted, and he remained 
an inii^^ of this asylum until the 8th December, 1896, 
when he was discharged on the expiration of his sentence 
of in^risonment, and was written ofi the books of the 
asylum as Recovered.” 

I would add that the only symptom which he displayed 
whilst here was depression, and this steadily decreased 
after admission. 

8. Your petitioner has always since his arrest most 
strenuously protested his entire innocence of wilfully causing 
the death of the said Camille Cecile Holland. 


231 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

9. Your petitioner's explanation of the manner in which 
the said Camille Cecile Holland met with her death is as 
follows ; — 

I, Samuel Herbert Dougal, hereby state that on the 
19th of May, 1899, Miss Holland and I arranged that 
after tea we should go for a drive. 

About six o'clock I put the horse in the trap and we 
drove to Stansted to do a little shopping, afterwards 
drove slowly home, stopping on the way at the Chequers 
public-house and had a glass of whisky each, arriving 
at the Moat House at about eight o’clock or a little 
after. While I was taking the horse out Miss Holland 
said she would not go indoors just yet, as it was so fine 
an evening, and would wait until I returned from taking 
the horse across the yard to the stable. 

I got a box that was in the coach-house on which sh» 
sat, near the doors, and which are facing the front of 
the Moat House. 

Lying on a shelf at the side of the house was a revolver 
and cartridges with which I had been shooting early 
in the afternoon. I took up the revolver, which was 
loaded, and commenced unloading by extracting the 
cartridges, and had lifted up the small clip of metal 
closing the end through which it was loaded, having 
the weapon in my left hand, when she said, Come and 
look at the beautiful silvery moon." I moved across 
towards where she sat, when the revolver accidentally 
exploded, and immediately I said, “ I hope you are 
not hurt, dear," and almost at that instant her head 
fell forward. I supported her and spoke a few endearing 
words. I said, Speak, Cecily, dear," and, thinking 
she had fainted, placed the cushions of the trap under 
her shoulders and head agawt the trap, and ran indoors 
for some brandy, and was immediately confronted by 
the servant (now Mrs. Blackwell), who asked, " Where 
IS the mistress^" I said, She has gone to London, 
but is returning again to-night. «iJ^he time I said 
this I thought she had only fainted, an&Would be able 
to come into the house later on 

I returned with the brandy ; she was still |n the same 
position. I attempted to give her some of it, I but found 
she could not take it. I felt her pulse, it was beating. 
I took off her hat and veil and could see no blood, and 
afterwards removed her cloak, and still saw no blood. 

At this time I became demented, not knowing what 
I did. I took her in my arms and carried her up into 
232 



Appendix XIII . 

the fields where there was a breeze, thinking it would 
revive her, and laid her on some hay close to the stacks. 
I knelt down beside her and again felt her pulse, which 
was getting feeble. I went back indoors, and shortly 
after returned to her and found her dead. I did not 
know what to do then. I carried her back towards the 
coach-house, and, seeing the open ditch, which I had 
previously given orders to have filled up as being un- 
sightly and to prevent the dirty water from flowing into 
the little moat, where some fish had recently been put. 
I laid her on some straw in the ditch, and returned to 
the house again 

I could not rest, so returned to where she was. I 
knelt down and kissed her, and placed a piece of lace 
over her face, and put some straw over her. I could 
not bury her. Afterwards I placed a branch of a thorn 
bush on the straw, so that the fowls could not scratch 
the straw ofl the body After that I walked about the 
yard backwards and forwards; then I went indoors, and 
told the servant I was going to the station, but in reality 
only walked about the farm until nearly twelve o^clock, 
returning to the house and saying to the servant, 

Misti ess has not returned. I told the girl to go to 
bed, and I retired also, but could not sleep, and arose 
early next morning and went out and saw the straw 
had not been moved. 

After breakfast, Alfred Shaw, who I had previously 
told to fill up the ditch, commenced doing so at the spot 
where the straw was under the trees, and the work was 
afterwards continued until the trench was level, taking 
about a fortnight. (Signed) S. Hekbbrt Douoal. 

10. Your petitioner had always intended upon his said 
trial to go into the witness-box and give evidence on oath 
himself, bearing out the above-mentioned explanation ; but 
on the 23rd second day of your petitioner’s trial, 

owing to th^^Long mental strain which he had undergone 
for a per^ of nearly three months, he felt himself quite 
unable to face the ordeal, and, inasmuch as the learned judge 
had decided that no detailed evidence with regard to the 
charges of forgery should be given upon, the charge of murder, 
your petitioner was confident that there thus being no 
evidence of any alleged motive he would be acquitted upon 
the said charge, and your petitioner’s counsel therefore urged 
upon the absence of any motive and the very unsatisfactory 
nature of the evidence adduced, and the entire absence of 

233 


B 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 

any direct evidence to connect your petitioner with, the 
alleged murder of the said Camille Cecile Holland. 

11. Your petitioner humbly submits for your earnest con- 
sideration the following points : — 

(a) The evidence given against him upon his said trial 

shows conclusively that he has always lived upon 
terms of the greatest aSection with the said 
Camille Cecile Holland. 

(b) That within a few months of meeting the said Camille 

Cecile Holland she had agreed to live with him 
as his wife, and had at his request purchased 
the Moat Farm, including stock, at a sum of 
£2000, and also was supplying him with all 
reasonable moneys that he might lequire. 

(c) That under these circumstances, there being no direct 

evidence of any kind that the said Camille Cecile 
Holland was wilfully murdered by him, the 
probabilities are strongly in his favour, as, inas- 
much as he was living on terms of ahection with 
the deceased, and able practically to be supplied 
with whatever moneys he required, it is in the 
highest degree improbable that he would wilfully 
have caused her death. 

(d) That under the above circumstances the explanation 

of your petitioner as to how the deceased met 
her death by such accident as aforesaid is the 
right and true one, and that the mere fact of his 
ultimately dealing with her property, which the 
deceased had always expressed her intention of 
bequeathing to him, should not be urged as an 
argument against him in the absence of direct 
evidence and in the ^absence of any motive to 
induce him to commit such crime. 

12. Tour petitioner also humbly submits that his explana- 
tion with regard to his feeling stunnei,ajitf^nzed after the 
accident and not giving an alarm or callingfSl^stance is an 
explanation which should be accepted when it Ik borne in 
mind that his mental condition only a comparatively short 
space of time before the occurrence had been suji that he 
had made a determined attempt upon his life, and had been 
confined in a criminal lunatic asylum for a period of nearly 
twelve months. 

13. Your petitioner therefore humbly submits that, bear- 
ing in mind the uncertainty existing with regard to the 
whole facts, his explanation with regard to the occurrence 

234 



Appendix XIII. 

‘being accidental should he accepted, and that you will be 
pleased to advise His Majesty to remit the said sentence of 
death under which your petitioner is now lying. 

And your Petitioner will ever pray, &c. 

This petition on behalf of the above- 

named S^j^EL Hebbekt Dougal by Messrs. 
Arthur Tfevfcon & Co.^«-- ?3 Great Marlborough 
Street, E|^nt Street, ^Si(^ndon, W 

dth July, 1903. 


235 



Samuel Herbert Dougal. 


APPENDIX XIV. 


Question in the House op Commons regarding the Chaplain 
AND A Confession by Dougal. 

In reply to Mr. H D. Greene, who asked the Home Secre- 
tary whether the rules under the statute directing execution 
to take place privately within prisons permit any official to 
interrogate prisoners under sentence of death with a view to 
extort admissions or confessions ; and, if so, whether he would 
consider the expediency of so altering the rules as to ensure 
that this proceeding will not be applied in such a manner 
as to cause unnecessary sneering to the condemned prisoner, 
Mr, Akers-Douglas said — The relations between the chaplain 
and the prisoners under his spiritual care are a matter not 
dealt with and hardly capable of being dealt with by statutory 
rules. In the case to which I take the honourable member 
to refer, I have called for a report from the chaplain, and 
he informs me that Dougal had promised to make a true 
confession on the eve of his execution, but failed to do so. 
As the last moment approached, the chaplain says, My 
spiritual anxiety became intense. I prayed earnestly with 
him during the last quarter of an hour, during which he 
sobbed, but he seemed unable to unbend and make a confes- 
sion. I knew not what to do more, so under strong impulse, 
and quite on the inspiration of th^ moment, I made the strong 
appeal at the scaffold.’^ While making every allowance for 
the chaplain’s difficult position, I think the incident is to be 
regretted, and I will endeavour to prevent a similar 
occurrence in the future. (I7th July, 


236 



Fiel<i whet»e exhibihoni of cycling ^ooK place . 


C3 a D a a 

Bee H I 


o„V-^Q 


- ioh6tre-i£^ 
t>ouaal. 
use jftb tT)eel' 
poshnan 


noAT 

l®‘“s4_ FARM 


A < 


f U)o«Ae<d., 

t Idani.^ 


* of lxri^“ ' ► ^ 

' £«Vtb€T^ ^1»S5 Hoiknd was • J 

r^s^ar Acred (accQ^iaVwr ^ 
Shea. U«reSOS'*' ^ h 


rvap UAS kep 


Kb'ere Hwi J 


Pa&hara 


rt. The mar Hoiise , . 

oueTri<^4.t; / 


i'.f'E.Sli'ftii whtTt IVAp 4Aas Kept . ' " 

BeAy «aas found. ^ traried 

flstnrM Jtirotre. ^ : *'":4 

**** jr^TT^jlTw 






