u 


(/ 


TRotable  English  Griate 


Hawley  Harvey  Crippen 


NOTABLE  TRIALS   SERIES. 


H.  H.  Crippen.     Edited  by  Filson  Young. 
Madeleine  Smith.    Edited  by  A.  Duncan  Smith 

Advocate. 
Dr.  Pritchard.     Edited  by  William  Roughead. 

The  Stauntons.  Edited  by  J.  B.  Allay,  Barrister- 
at-Law. 

Franz  Muller.    Edited  by  H.  B.  Irving. 
The  Annesley  Case      Edited  by  Andrew  Lang. 
Lord  Lovat.     Edited  by  David  N.  Mackay. 
Captain  Porteous.     Edited  by  William  Roughead. 
William  Palmer.     Edited  by   Geo.    H.   Knolt, 

Barrister-at-Law. 

Mrs.  Maybricfc.    Edited  by  H.  B.  Irving. 
Dr.  Lam  son.     Edited  by  H.  L.  Adam. 
Mary  Blandy.     Edited  by  William  Roughead. 

City  of  Glasgow  Bank  Directors.      Edited  by 

William  Wallace,  Advocate. 
Deacon  Brodie.     Edited  by  William  Roughead. 
James  Stewart.     Edited  by  David  N.  Mackay. 
A,  J.  Monson.     Edited  by  J.  W.  More,  Advocate. 
Oscar  Slater.     Edited  by  William  Roughead. 

Eugene  Marie  Chantrelle.    Edited  by  A.  Duncan 

Smith,  Advocate. 
The  Douglas  Cause.       Edited    by   A.   Francis 

Steuart,  Advocate. 
Mrs.  M'Lachlan       Edited  by  William  Roughead. 

Eugene  Aram.  Edited  by  Eric  Watson, 
Barrister-at-Law. 

J.  A.  Dickman.  Edited  by  S.  O.  Rowan- 
Hamilton,  Barrister-at-Law. 

The  Seddons.     Edited  by  Filson  Young. 

Sir  Roger  Casement.  Edited  by  Geo.  H.  Knott, 
Barrister-at-Law. 


2N  PREPARATION. 
The  Wainwrights.     Edited  by  H.  B.  Irving. 
Thurtell  and  Hunt     Edited  by  Eric  Watson. 
Burke  and  Hare.     Edited  by  William  Roughead. 

Particulars  may  be  had  from  the  Publishers. 


[Photo,  by  Ruasrll. 

The  Right  Hon.  Lord  Alverstone,  Lord  Chief  Justice  of  England. 


3? 

The  Trial  of 


Hawley  Harvey  Crippen 

'I/O 

EDITED 

WITH    NOTES    AND    AN    INTRODUCTION 

BY 

FILSON  YOUNG 

Editor  of  "  The  Trial  of  the  Seddons"  S-v.,  &c. 


EDINBURGH  AND  LONDON 

WILLIAM    HODGE    &    COMPANY,    LTD. 


PRINTED  BY 

WILLIAM   HODGE  AND  COMPANY,  LTD. 

GLASGOW  AND  EDINBURGH 

1920 


KV 

W? 

C7S  T7 


TO 

SIR    BASIL    HOME    THOMSON,    C.B. 

IN   KESPECT  FOR  HIS   WORK 

AND   IN 
FRIENDSHIP  FOR  HIMSELF 


PREFATORY    NOTE. 

THE  "Notable  Trials  Series"  is  now  well  enough  established,  and  has  been 
sufficiently  welcomed  by  the  legal  as  well  as  the  general  reader,  to  make 
unnecessary  any  explanation  of  the  appearance  in  it  of  the  trial  of  Dr. 
Crippen.  In  a  case  of  such  world-wide  notoriety,  the  theme  inevitably  of 
much  speculative  and  imperfectly  informed  discussion,  it  is  more  than 
ever  useful  to  have  the  facts,  in  so  far  as  the  trial  revealed  them,  set  forth 
exactly  as  they  were  unfolded  to  the  judge  and  jury;  and  it  has  been 
possible  in  the  Introduction  to  enlarge  upon  some  other  aspects  of  the  case 
which  were  not,  and  could  not,  be  discussed  at  the  Old  Bailey.  If  the 
trial  is  less  interesting  from  a  legal  point  of  view  than  some  others,  this 
defect  is  atoned  for  by  the  extraordinary  human  and  dramatic  interest  with 
which  the  story  is  packed,  and  which  has  placed  Dr.  Crippen  in  the  front 
rank,  so  to  speak,  of  convicted  murderers. 

I  have  to  thank  Sir  Edward  Marshall  Hall,  K.C.,  Sir  Richard  Muir, 
Mr.  Herbert  Austin,  Clerk  of  the  Central  Criminal  Court,  the  Home  Office 
authorities,  the  Governor  of  Pentonville  Prison,  Dr.  Rylance,  Crippen's 
former  business  partner,  Inspector  Mitchell,  Mr.  (late  Inspector)  Dew, 
and  Mrs.  Harrison  for  information,  material,  and  assistance  in  arriving 
at  the  conclusions  on  which  the  narrative  part  of  the  Introduction  is  based. 

A.  B.  P.  Y. 

LONDON,  November,  1919. 


CONTENTS. 


PAGE 

Leading  Dates  in  the  Crippen  Case, 
The  Trial— 

XXXV 

FIRST  DAY—  TUESDAY, 
Mr.  Muir's  Opening  Speech  for  the  Crown, 

Evidence  for  th 

18TH  OCTOBER,  1910. 

3 

e  Prosecution. 

Frederick  Lown,     ...         -        9 
Dr.  John  H.  Burroughs,          -         -       10 
Mrs.  C.  Martinetti,         -                 -       12 
Mrs.  L.  Smythson,                                   17 
Mrs.  T.  Hunn,        -        -        -        -       18 
Bruce  Miller,  -                                          19 
Miss  Melinda  May,         •        •               23 
Mrs.  E.  Jackson,    -        -        -               24 

F.  Pedgrift,     - 
E.  W.  Stuart, 
C.  J.  Williams, 
F.  Hayles, 
Miss  M.  L.  Curnow, 
G.  M.  Rylance, 
W.  Long, 
E.  Brett,         - 

-      26 
-      26 
-      26 
27 
-      27 
-      29 
-      30 
-      32 

SECOND  DAY  —  WEDNESDAY,  19iH  OCTOBER,  1910. 

Evidence  for  the  Prosecution  (continued). 

W.  Dew,         33 
Statement,  by  Accused,                            34 
W.  Dew  (continued),                               39 

A.  F.  Leverton, 
D.  Gooch, 
Dr.  A.  J.  Pepper,   - 

-      47 

47 
47 

THIRD  DAY—  THURSDAY,  20rn  OCTOBER,  1910. 

Evidence  for  the  Prosecution  (concluded). 

Dr.  B.  H.  Spilsbury,                         -      62 
Dr.  T.  Marshall,     ....      64 
A.  Robinson,  67 
R.  Thompson,                                           67 
C.  Pitt,  67 
Dr.  W.  H.  Willcox,        ...      67 

Dr.  A.  P.  Luff, 
C.  Hetherington,     • 
H.  Kirby, 

-      74 
-      75 
-      76 

77 

Mrs.  A.  Harrison,  - 

-      77 

Mr.  Tobin's  Opening  Speech  for  the  Defence,  - 

-      78 

Evidence  for  the  Defence. 

87 

CONTENTS. 

FOURTH  DAY — FRIDAY,  21si  OCTOBER,  1910. 

Evidence  for  the  Defence  (concluded). 


H.  H.  Crippen  (recalled),        -        -      94 
Dr.  G.  M.  Turnbull,       -        -        -     130 


Dr.  R.  C.  Wall,       ....     138 
Dr.  A.  W.  Blyth,   -        -        -        -    141 


Further  Evidence  for  the  Prosecution. 

W.  J.  Chilvers,                                                                                                               -  144 

Mr.  Tobin's  Closing  Speech  for  the  Defence, 145 

FIFTH  DAY,  SATURDAY,  22ND  OCTOBER,  1910. 

Further  Evidence  for  the  Defence. 

PAGE 

H.  H.  Crippen  (recalled),                                                                                           •        -  151 

Mr.  Muir's  Closing  Speech  for  the  Crown,         -                          153 

The  Lord  Chief  Justice's  Charge  to  the  Jury, 161 

The  Verdict, -  183 

The  Sentence, 183 


APPENDICES. 

Appendix  A — Captain  Kendall's  Message, 187 

Appendix  B — Published  Statement  of  Dr.  Crippen, 188 

Appendix  C — Letter  from  Dr.  Crippen  to  Ethel  le  Neve, 190 

Appendix  D— The  Trial  of  Ethel  le  Neve  at  the  Old  Bailey,    -         -        -        -        -  192 

Appendix  E — Court  of  Criminal  Appeal — Rex  v.  Hawley  Harvey  Crippen,     -        -  209 


LIST   OF  ILLUSTRATIONS. 

The  Right  Hon.  Lord  Alverstone,  Lord  Chief  Justice  of  England,      -  Frontispiece 

I  fl     30  Hilldrop  Crescent,   ------                          -           facing  page  xvii 

Mrs.  H.  H.  Crippen, „  22 

Reproduction  of  Police  Bill, , ,  40 

H.  H.  Crippen  and  Miss  le  Neve  in  the  Dock  at  Bow  Street,  ,,  94 

A.  A.  Tobin,  K.C.,                „  146 

R.  D.  Muir, 154 


THE    TRIAL   OF    H.    H.    CRIPPEN. 

INTRODUCTION. 
I. 

MOST  of  the  interest  and  part  of  the  terror  of  great  crime  are  due  not  to 
#hat  is  abnormal,  but  to  what  is  normal  in  it ;  what  we  have  in  common  with 
the  criminal,  rather  than  that  subtle  insanity  which  differentiates  him  from 
us,  is  what  makes  us  view  with  so  lively  an  interest  a  fellow-being  who  has 
wandered  into  these  tragic  and  fatal  fields.  A  mean  crime,  like  that  of  the 
brute  who  knocks  an  old  woman  on  the  head  for  the  sake  of  the  few  shillings 
in  her  store,  has  a  mean  motive;  a  great  crime,  like  that  of  the  man  who 
murders  his  wife  and  little  children  and  commits  suicide  because  he  can 
see  only  starvation  and  misery  before  them,  gathers  desperately  into  itself 
in  one  wild  protest  against  destiny  what  is  left  of  nobility  and  greatness 
in  the  man's  nature.  It  is  not  that  his  crime  has  any  more  legal  justification 
than  that  of  the  murdering  robber;  it  has  not.  On  the  contrary,  it  is 
more  of  an  outrage  upon  life,  and  far  more  damaging  in  itsi  results  upon 
the  community.  Yet  we  do  not  hate  or  execrate  the  author;  we  profoundly 
pity  him ;  it  is  even  possible  sometimes  to  recognise  a  certain  terrible  beauty 
in  the  motive  that  made  him  thus  make  a  complete  sweep  of  his  little 
world  when  it  could  no  longer  cope  with  the  great  world.  There  are,  at 
the  least,  reasons  for  a  great  crime;  for  a  mean  one  there  are,  at  the  most, 
excuses.  The  region  of  human  morality  is  not  a  flat  plain;  there  are  hills 
and  valleys  in  it,  deep  levels  and  high  levels;  there  are  also  certain  wild, 
isolated  crags,  terrible  in  their  desolation,  wrapped  in  storms  and  glooms, 
upon  which,  nevertheless,  a  slant  of  sunshine  will  sometimes  fall,  and  reveal 
the  wild  flowers  and  jewelled  mosses  that  hide  in  their  awful  clefts. 

Somewhere  between  these  extremes,  far  below  the  highest,  but  far  above 
the  lowest,  lies  the  case  of  Dr.  Crippen,  who  killed  his  wife  in  order  to 
give  his  life  to  the  woman  he  loved.  His  was  that  rare  thing  in  English 
annals,  a  crime  passionel.  True,  the  author  of  it  was  an  American,  and 
the  victim  a  German-Russian-Polish-American,  but  the  theatre  and  setting 
were  those  of  the  most  commonplace  and  humdrum  region  of  London  life, 
and  all  the  circumstances  that  contributed  to  its  interest  were  such  as  are 
witnessed  by  thousands  of  people  every  day.  The  trial  that  followed  it  is  in 
no  sense  remarkable  from  a  legal  point  of  view,  except  possibly  with  regard 
to  the  medical  evidence;  its  chief  interest  lies  in  the  story  itself,  in  the 
characters  of  the  people  concerned,  and  in  the  dramatic  flight  and  arrest  at 
sea  of  Crippen  and  his  mistress. 

xiii 


Hawley   Harvey  Crippen. 


11. 

In  the  year  1900  there  came  to  London  an  entirely  unremarkable  little 
man,  describing  himself  as  an  American  doctor,  to  find  some  place  in  that 
large  industry  that  lies  on  the  borderland  between  genuine  healing  and  the 
commercial  exploitation  of  the  modern  human  passion  for  swallowing 
medicine.  This  was  Dr.  Hawley  Harvey  Crippen,  a  native  of  Coldwater, 
Michigan,  where  he  had  been  born  in  the  year  1862,  his  father  being  a  dry 
goods  merchant  of  that  place.  It  was  not  his  first  visit  to  England;  he 
had  previously  been  here  in  the  year  1883,  when  at  the  age  of  twenty-one 
he  had  come  to  pick  up  some  medical  training.  His  education  had  followed 
the  ordinary  course  of  studies  for  the  medical  profession  in  America.  After 
receiving  a  general  education  at  the  California  University,  Michigan,  he 
proceeded  to  the  Hospital  College  of  Cleveland,  Ohio.  After  a  little  desul- 
tory attendance  at  various  London  hospitals  in  1883,  Dr.  Crippen  had 
returned  to  New  York,  where  in  1885  he  took  a  diploma  as  an  ear  and  eye 
specialist  at  the  Ophthalmic  Hospital  there.  He  afterwards  practised  at 
Detroit  for  two  years,  at  Santiago  for  two  years,  at  Salt  Lake  City,  at 
New  York,  St.  Louis,  Philadelphia,  and  Toronto.  These  movements  covered 
twelve  years,  from  1885  to  1896. 

In  1887  he  had  married  at  Santiago  his  first  wife,  Charlotte  Bell;  the 
following  year  was  born  a  eon,  Otto  Hawley  Crippen,  who  at  the  time  of  the 
trial  was  living  at  Los  Angeles.  In  the  year  1890  or  1891  his  wife  died  at 
Salt  Lake  City;  and  from  there  he  returned  to  New  York,  where  two  years 
later  he  made  the  acquaintance  of  a  girl  of  seventeen,  whom  he  knew  as  Cora 
Turner.  He  fell  in  love  with  her,  and  although  at  the  time  he  met  her  she 
was  living  as  the  mistress  of  another  man,  he  married  her  and  took  her 
with  him  to  St.  Louis,  where  he  had  an  appointment  as  consulting  physician 
to  an  optician.  He  had  found  out  that  his  wife's  real  name  had  not  been 
Cora  Turner  at  all,  but  Kunigunde  Mackamotzki,  and  that  her  father  was 
a  Russian  Pole  and  her  mother  a  German. 

Mrs.  Crippen  was  the  possessor  of  a  singing  voice,  small  but  of  a 
clear  quality,  her  friends'  appreciation  of  which  led  her  to  entertain 
ambitions  with  regard  to  it  which  afterwards  did  not  turn  out  to  have 
been  justified.  Crippen,  however,  who  was  nothing  if  not  an  indulgent 
husband,  allowed  her  to  have  it  trained.  This  was  in  the  year  1899,  when 
they  were  living  in  Philadelphia;  but  Crippen  allowed  his  wife  to  stay  in 
New  York  for  the  purpose  of  having  lessons,  for  which,  of  course,  he  paid, 
her  ambition  being  that  she  should  be  trained  for  grand  opera.  She  was 
still  there  when  in  1900  Dr.  Crippen  came  to  London  as  manager  for 
Munyon's  advertising  business  in  patent  medicines,  the  offices  of  which 
were  at  that  time  in  Shaftesbury  Avenue.  About  four  months  later  he  was 


Introduction. 

joined  by  his  wife,  who  had  given  up  her  lessons  in  New  York  and  abandoned 
the  idea  of  going  into  grand  opera.  Her  ambitions  now  lay  in  the  direction 
of  the  music  hall  stage,  and  she  probably  regarded  England  as  a  promising 
field  for  the  development  of  her  talents  in  that  direction. 

This  part  of  the  story  may  be  very  briefly  dismissed.  Although  she 
came  over  with  a  sketch  of  her  own  design,  and  many  obliging  music  hall 
agents  undertook  to  float  her  in  this  country,  nothing  ever  came  of  it  save 
profit  to  the  agents.  Her  musical  sketch  turned  out  to  be  a  thing  of  which 
the  music  and  the  words  both  remained  yet  to  be  written,  and  competent 
artists  were  hired  by  the  obliging  agents  to  fill  these  omissions.  Mrs. 
Crippen,  who  was  assiduous  in  fulfilling  all  the  external  conditions  of  her 
proposed  career,  took  a  stage  name  of  "  Belle  Elmore,"  and  provided  herself 
with  a  quantity  of  dazzling  dresses — all,  of  course,  at  her  good-natured 
husband's  expense.  But  in  fact  the  only  attributes  of  the  music  hall  artiste 
to  which  she  ever  attained  were  the  stage  name  and  the  dresses.  From 
star  appearances  in  a  first-rate  London  musio  hall  her  ambitions  dwindled 
down  to  appearances  of  any  kind  at  any  musio  hall ;  and  even  these,  when 
it  came  to  the  point,  proved  beyond  the  powers  of  the  agents  to  secure. 
One  or  two  feeble  appearances  were  made  at  very  minor  music  halls;  but 
Mrs.  Crippen's  talents  were  so  inadequate,  and  the  failure  was  so  obvious, 
that  even  these  attempts  (for  which,  of  course,  Dr.  Crippen  had  to  pay) 
were  abandoned.  The  truth  was  that  Mrs.  Crippen  never  had  any  talent 
whatever  for  the  stage — not  even  the  very  moderate  kind  that  will  suffice 
to  make  the  performance  of  an  attractive  young  woman  with  a  voice,  wearing 
pretty  clothes,  and  with  some  financial  backing,  acceptable  to  a  music  hall 
audience.  Poor  Mrs.  Crippen  had  to  content  herself  with  frequenting  music 
hall  circles,  reading  the  Era,  retaining  her  "  stage  "  name  of  Belle  Elmore, 
and  adding  to  her  already  large  stock  of  theatrical  garments.  Here  was, 
indeed,  a  small  tragedy.  If  the  poor  woman  had  had  any  kind  of  talent, 
and  had  really  been  the  music  hall  favourite  that  she  loved  to  imagine 
herself,  both  she  and  her  husband  would  probably  be  living  now,  each 
happy  in  a  different  sphere;  but  apparently  she  had  nothing  but  vanity, 
no  scrap  of  the  ability  or  industry  necessary  even  for  her  small  purposes. 
The  humblest  English  music  hall  has  its  standards;  and  "  Belle  Elmore," 
in  spite  of  her  personal  attractions  and  her  pretty  clothes,  could  not  attain 
to  them. 

III. 

People  who  met  the  Crippens  at  this  time  describe  them  as  cultivating 
acquaintances  among  the  Bohemian  world  of  music  hall  performers  who  meet 
in  small  restaurants  and  are  always  ready  to  welcome  to  their  social  circle 
those  who  are  lively  company  and  have  money  to  spend.  Her  friends 


Hawley   Harvey   Crippen. 


\ 


describe  Belle  Elmore  at  this  period  as  being  of  an  exceptional  liveliness. 
A  loud,  clear  voice  with  a  strong  New  York  twang  would  have  called 
attention  to  her  presence  wherever  she  was;  but  her  whole  appearance 
corresponded  with  the  vivacity  of  -,her  character.  She  is  described  as  good- 
looking,  with  large  dark  eyes,  raven  black  hair,  always  elaborately  dressed  and 
in  the  brightest  colours.  Her  appearance  was  likened  by  one  enthusiaat 
to  that  of  a  "  bird  of  paradise."  Strange  paradise,  indeed,  from  which 
this  poor  painted  bird  had  flown,  or  whither  she  was  flying ! 

Crippen  was  then  the  insignificant-looking  little  man  he  always  re- 
mained, small  and  short  and  slight  in  stature,  with  a  sandy  moustache, 
prominent  eyes  that  looked  at  you  through  gold-rimmed  spectacles,  and  a 
large  domed  forehead.  His  role  in  the  social  life  was  that  of  a  spectator. 
He  was  the  silent  member  of  the  gay  little  companies  that  were  entertained 
by  him  and  the  bird  of  paradise.  He  was  always  courteous,  always  hospit- 
able; apparently  contented  to  look  on  at  and  enjoy  his  wife's  little  social 
triumphs  among  her  friends.  Her  clothes  and  her  jewels  were  the  recipients 
of  a  great  deal  of  admiration,  and  Crippen,  who  paid  for  everything,  was 
content  to  find  his  share  of  the  enjoyment  in  the  attention  and  applause 
which  they  excited.  He  often  would  give  her  money  or  a  piece  of  jewellery 
in  the  presence  of  her  friends;  and  was  regarded,  not  surely  without  justifica- 
tion, as  an  ideal  husband  worthy  of  the  good  fortune  that  had  befallen 
him  in  becoming  the  proprietor  and  companion  of  the  bird  of  paradise. 

He  was  undoubtedly  at  this  time  still  very  fond  of  his  wife,  very 
kind  to  her,  very  patient  with  her  extravagancies  and  the  interminable 
calls  which  she  made  upon  his  time  and  his  means.  I  do  not  mean  that 
such  things  are  sacrifices  when  they  are  given  as  Crippen  gave  them.  His 
attitude  to  women  was  peculiar.  He  was  not  the  type  of  man  that  likes 
to  dominate  women;  he  wasi  of  the  type  that  loves  to  be  dominated  by 
them ;  and  in  his  love  for  showering  presents  upon  his  wife  in  public,  and 
in  spending  a  quite  ridiculous  proportion  of  his  income  in  the  adorning 
of  her  plump  little  person,  he  exhibited  the  symptoms  of  the  psycopathic 
type  to  which  undoubtedly  he  belonged. 


IV. 

It  is  not  my  intention  to  trace  in  detail  the  lives  of  these  people 
further  than  is  necessary  to  discover  their  characters.  The  relations  which 
existed  between  them  at  the  time  of  which  I  have  been  writing  did  not 
continue.  The  inordinate  vanity  of  the  wife  demanded  more  than  a 
husband's  admiration,  and  Crippen's  affection  for  her,  which  had  never 
been  of  a  very  spiritual  type,  died  the  natural  death  of  all  such  passions. 
It  is  distasteful  to  speak  of  Mrs.  Crippen's  relations  with  other  men,  but 


Introduction. 

it  is  obvious  that  the  avenue  to  her  affections  was  not  very  narrow  or 
difficult  of  access.  This  also  had  its  effect  on  the  relations  of  husband 
and  wife.  After  two  years  in  England  Crippen  had  to  pay  a  short  visit 
'  to  America,  and  when  he  came  home  he  found  that  she  had  contracted  a 
friendship  with  a  Mr.  Bruce  Miller,  whose  evidence  will  be  found  in  the 
course  of  the  trial.  Crippen ',s  own  written  statement  is  that  "  she  told 
me  that  this  man  visited  her,  had  taken  her  about,  and  was  very  fond 
of  her,  also  she  was  very  fond  of  him.  .  .  .  It  is  quite  four  years 
since  she  ever  went  out  to  sing,  and  although  we  apparently  lived  happily 
together,  as  a  matter  of  fact  there  were  frequent  occasions  when  she  got 
into  most  violent  tempers,  and  even  threatened  she  would  leave  me,  saying 
she  had  a  man  she  could  go  to,  and  she  would  end  it  all."  Is  that  a  true 
or  an  untrue  statement?  As  we  cannot  tell,  we  have  to  ask  ourselves  is 
it  likely  or  unlikely?  Even  a  very  moderate  experience  of  the  world 
would,  I  imagine,  be  enough  to  convince  a  student  of  this  case  that  it  is 
probably  a  very  accurate  description  of  the  state  to  which  affairs  had 
drifted  after  several  years  of  the  life  which  I  have  been  trying  to  indicate. 

V. 

In  the  year  1905  the  Crippens  left  the  rooms  in  Store  Street,  Blooms- 
bury,  where  they  had  been  living,  and  established  themselves  in 
39  Hilldrop  Crescent — a  small  semi-detached  house  in  a  quiet,  leafy 
crescent  off  the  Camden  Road.  There  had  been  recently  a  rather  un- 
pleasant trial  in  connection  with  the  Drouet  Institute,  and  Crippen  had 
severed  his  connection  with  it,  and  returned  to  the  management  of 
Munyon's,  where  Ethel  Le  Neve  was  now  engaged  as  book-keeper  and 
secretary. 

The  life  at  Hilldrop  Crescent,  externally  commonplace,  reveals  on  a 
closer  examination  some  peculiar  characteristica.  From  a  friend  of  the 
Crippens  who  lived  near  them,  knew  them  well,  and  saw  them  con- 
stantly, we  are  able  to  get  some  interesting  sidelights  on  the  life  of  the 
household.  Mrs.  Crippen'si  florid  taste  was  reflected,  so  far  as  their 
means  permitted,  in  the  furniture  and  decorations.  Having  seen  a  green 
wallpaper  in  the  drawing-room  of  her  friend's  house,  Mrs.  Crippen  ex- 
pressed herself  shocked,  and  said,  "Gee!  you  have  got  a  hoo-doo  here. 
Green  paper!  You'll  have  bad  luck  as  sure  as  fate.  When  I  have  a 
house  I  won't  have  green  in  the  house.  It  shall  be  pink  right  away 
through  for  luck."  And  apparently  nearly  all  the  rooms  in  Hilldrop 
Crescent  were  decorated  in  this  propitious  colour. 

I  cannot  do  better  than  quote  some  notes  of  Mrs.  Harrison's  on  the 
life  at  Hilldrop  Crescent.  It  is  possible  that  some  of  her  views  are 
B  xvii 


Hawley  Harvey  Crippen. 

coloured  by  after  events,  but  they  are  so  interesting  that  they  should  be 
told  in  her  own  words. 

"  Mrs.  Crippen  was  strictly  economical  in  small  matters  in  con- 
nection with  their  private  home  living.  In  fact,  to  such  an  extent  did 
she  carry  it  that  it  suggested  parsimony.  She  would  search  out  the 
cheapest  shops  for  meat,  and  go  to  the  Caledonian  Market  and  buy  cheap 
fowls.  She  was  always  trying  to  save  the  pence,  but  scattering  the 
pounds.  It  was  a  peculiar  trait  in  her  character.  .,  .  .  It  was 
shortly  after  they  took  up  their  residence  at  Hilldrop  Crescent  (which  was 
in  the  September  of  1905)  that  the  doctor  was  converted  by  his  wife 
to  Roman  Catholicism.  She,  who  had  neglected  her  religion,  so  far 
as  going  to  early  Mass  was  concerned,  started  regularly  attending  the 
Roman  Catholic  church  in  Kentish  Town. 

"  One  Sunday  morning  they  both  called  early,  after  Mass,  to  invite 
us  to  a  little  supper  party  on  the  same  evening,  and  it  was  then  the 
doctor  informed  us  that  his1  wife  had  made  him  a  Catholic.  He  always 
appeared  subservient  to  her  wishes.  I  seemed  to  think  at  that  time 
that  she  appeared  more  contented  and  settled  down  now  she  had  a  home 
to  interest  her  and  look  after.  He  was  delighted  with  the  air  up  at 
Camden  Road,  and  he  chuckled  with  delight  when  he  told  us  his  clothes 
were  becoming  too  small  for  him,  and  that  he  was  getting  quite  fat. 
Within  a  few  months  he  put  on  flesh,  and  appeared  quite  jolly  and  lively. 
They  were  about  a  great  deal  together,  and  their  garden  and  the  em- 
bellishment of  their  house  seemed  a  source  of  great  interest.  He  was 
a  man  with  no  apparent  surface  vices,  or  even  the  usual  weaknesses  or 
foibles  of  the  ordinary  man.  Restraint  was  the  one  and  only  evidence 
of  firmness  in  his  character.  He  was  unable  to  smoke;  it  made  him  ill. 
He  refrained  from  the  consumption  of  alcoholic  liquor  in  the  form  of 
wines  and  spirits,  as  it  affected  his  heart  and  digestion.  He  drank 
light  ale  and  stout,  and  that  only  sparingly.  He  was  not  a  man's  man. 
No  man  had  ever  known  him  to  join  in  a  convivial  bout;  he  was  always 
back  to  time,  and  never  came  home  with  a  meaningless  grin  on  his  face 
at  two  o'clock  in  the  morning  attended  by  pals  from  a  neighbouring  club. 
He  never  paid  compliments  to  women,  or  flirted  even  in  a  jocular  spirit. 
His  eccentric  taste  in  the  matter  of  neckties  and  dress  generally  may  be 
attributed  to  the  fact  that  it  represented  feminine  taste.  His  wife  pur- 
chased his  ties,  and  decided  on  the  pattern  of  his  clothing.  She  would 
discuss  the  colour  of  his  trousers  with  the  tailor,  while  he  stood  aside 
looking  on,  without  venturing  to  give  an  opinion.  The  novelty  of  the 
new  house  employed  her  thoughts  for  a  time.  Her  next  little  harmless 
whim  took  the  form  of  desiring  to  receive  paying  guests  for  company. 
So  she  set  to  work  to  obtain  some,  and  advertised  in  the  Daily  Telegraph. 
Several  German  young  men,  attracted  by  the  newly  furnished  house  and 
fascinating  little  hostess,  engaged  rooms.  Four  young  men  took  up  their 
residence  with  them.  Still  objecting  to  domestic  servants,  Mrs.  Crippen 
undertook  the  domestic  work,  with  the  occasional  assistance  of  a  woman  to 
do  the  cleaning.  The  doctor  had  to  do  his  part.  He  had  to  rise 
at  six  o'clock  in  the  morning  to  clean  the  boarders'  boots,  shovel  up  the 
coal,  lay  the  breakfast,  and  help  generally.  He  was  always  at  his  office 
before  eight.  It  was  a  trying  time,  and  quite  unnecessary  exertion  for 


Introduction. 

both,  as  Crippen  was  earning  -well,  and  gave  his  wife  an  ample  supply  of 
money ;  in  fact,  she  had  the  strings  of  the  family  purse,  which  will  be 
revealed  as  this  strange  story  unfolds  itself.  She  annexed  the  extra 
money  from  the  boarders  for  personal  adornment,  and  he  continued  to  pay 
the  household  bills. 

"A  Mr.  Richards,  who  was  a  member  of  their  household  for  a  time, 
wrote  from  Paris  to  the  effect  that  during  his  sojourn  under  their  roof  he 
witnessed  several  domestic  eruptions  of  rather  a  one-sided  nature.  Mrs. 
Crippen,  excitable  and  irritable,  chiding  her  husband;  Crippen,  pale,  quiet, 
imperturbable. 

"  Ethel  Le  Neve,  the  quiet,  ladylike,  unassuming  typewriter,  always 
to  time,  neat  in  appearance,  methodical,  obedient,  was  interesting  the 
man  who  employed  her.  Quietly,  imperceptibly  she  was  creeping  into 
his  heart  and  dulling  the  affection  for  his  wife.  Crippen's  home  life, 
which  could  have  been  made  happy  with  the  means  at  their  command, 
was  not  restful.  Their  Sunday  was  a  strenuous  day  of  unrest  for  a  hard- 
working business  man.  Early  morning  Mass,  boarders'  breakfast  to  be 
prepared  on  their  return,  boots  to  clean,  beds  to  make,  crockery  to  wash, 
dinner  for  mid-day  to  be  cooked  and  served,  and  all  this  to  be  done 
without  domestic  assistance.  After  dinner  they  played  cards  with  their 
boarders,  gave  them  tea  at  five  o'clock  and  supper  at  nine.  The  novelty 
of  the  boarders'  society,  which  entailed  so  much  drudgery,  soon  wore  off. 
Dr.  Crippen  hinted  that  he  objected  to  it.  They  left  shortly  afterwards, 
and  the  Crippens  returned  to  their  strange  solitary  mode  of  living.  There 
was  no  system  in  the  household.  Mrs.  Crippen  disliked  fresh  air  and 
open  windows.  There  was  no  regular  house  cleaning.  It  was  done  in 
spasms.  The  windows  in  all  the  rooms,  including  the  basement,  were 
rarely  opened.  They  had  two  cats,  which  were  never  permitted  to  roam 
for  fear  they  should  fall  victims  to  the  shafts  of  illicit  love.  At  his  wife's 
desire  Crippen  built  a  cage  in  the  garden  for  them  to  take  the  air.  Only 
when  they  received,  were  lights  shown  in  the  hall  or  living  rooms.  They 
lived  practically  in  the  kitchen,  which  was  generally  in  a  state  of  dirt 
and  disorder.  The  basement,  owing  to  want  of  ventilation,  smelt  earthy 
and  unpleasant.  A  strange  '  creepy  '  feeling  always  came  over  me  when 
I  descended — it  was  so  dark  and  dreary,  although  it  was  on  a  level  with 
the  back  garden. 

"  I  followed  her  into  the  kitchen  one  morning  when  she  was  busy. 
It  was  a  warm,  humid  day,  and  the  grimy  windows  were  all  tightly 
closed.  On  the  dresser  was  a  heterogenous  mass,  consisting  of  dirty 
crockery,  edibles,  collars  of  the  doctor's,  false  curls  of  her  own,  hairpins, 
brushes,  letters,  a  gold  jewelled  purse,  and  other  articles.  It  reminded 
one  of  the  contents  of  Mrs.  Jellyby's  cupboard  in  Dickens'  '  Bleak  House,' 
when  the  cleaning  operations  were  started  for  her  daughter's  wedding. 
The  kitchener  and  gas  stove  were  brown  with  rust  and  cooking  stains.  The 
table  was  littered  with  packages,  saucepans,  dirty  knives,  plates,  flat- 
irons,  a  washing  basin,  and  a  coffee  pot.  Thrown  carelessly  across  a  chair 
was  a  lovely  white  chiffon  gown  embroidered  with  silk  flowers  and 
mounted  over  white  glace.  The  little  lady  cat,  who  was  a  prisoner,  was 
scratching  wildly  at  a  window  in  a  vain  attempt  to  attract  the  attention 
of  a  passing  Don  Juan.  .  .  ." 

xiz 


Hawley   Harvey   Crippen. 


VI. 

It  was  at  this  period  that  Mrs.  Crippen  made  the  acquaintance  of 
several  well-known  people  in  the  music  hall  world,  and  became  a  member 
of  the  Music  Hall  Ladies'  Guild — a  society  doing  quiet,  charitable  work 
among  the  more  unfortunate  members  of  the  profession.  Mrs.  Crippen'a 
enthusiasm  for  the  work  of  this  Guild  was  perhaps  the  best  thing  one  knows 
of  her.  It  had  the  double  attraction  of  appealing  to  the  impulsive  kind- 
ness of  heart  which  is  characteristic  of  people  of  her  type,  and  also  of 
bringing  her  into  a  more  interesting  kind  of  society  than  would  otherwise 
have  been  open  to  her.  Mrs.  Martinetti,  Mrs.  Ginnett,  Mrs.  Eugene 
Stratton,  Lil  Hawthorne,  and  Mrs.  Harrison  were  among  those  with  whom 
she  was  thus  brought  into  intimate  association.  And  in  this,  so  to  speak, 
posthumous  way  she  was  able  to  appear  herself  as  a  member  of  the  great 
profession,  call  herself  "  Belle  Elmore,"  and  appear  to  be  enjoying 
the  aftermath  of  those  brilliant  successes  which,  in  fact,  she  had  never 
enjoyed.  She  became  honorary  treasurer  of  the  Guild,  which  she  induced 
to  rent  one  of  the  rooms  of  Dr.  Crippen's  suite  in  Albion  House,  New 
Oxford  Street.  It  is  an  ill  wind  that  blows  nobody  any  good;  and  the 
music  hall  strike  gave  her  an  opportunity  during  the  famine  of  actually 
appearing  on  the  stage,  although  even  in  these  propitious  circumstances 
fate  was  against  her.  She  was  engaged  for  a  week  at  the  Bedford  and 
Euston  Palace,  but  on  her  appearance  at  the  Euston  (after  an  agitated 
week  turning  over  all  her  most  expensive  gowns)  the  audience  refused 
to  listen  to  her,  evidently  regarding  her  as  a  "  blackleg,"  and  she  was 
hiased  off  the  stage.  The  poor  creature  suffered  great  distress  from  this, 
and  was  only  consoled  by  Crippen's  sympathy  and  kindness.  On  this 
occasion  there  was  an  odd  and  sinister  coincidence.  An  actor,  named 
Weldon  Atherstone,  who  appeared  on  the  same  evening,  and  had  a  similar 
reception,  was  able  to  sympathise  with  the  weeping  "  Belle  Elmore." 
Three  years  later,  in  July,  1910,  in  the  same  week  in  which  London  was 
ringing  with  the  discovery  of  the  remains  at  Hilldrop  Crescent,  Atherstone 
was  found  shot  in  the  garden  of  his  flat  in  Battersea.  The  coincidence 
was  commented  upon  by  Dr.  Danford  Thomas,  the  coroner,  who  a  week 
later  was  himself  dead. 

In  all  this  time  the  Crippens  were  keeping  up  a  considerable  appear- 
ance, spending  money  on  entertaining  at  restaurants  and  little  parties, 
while  in  private  they  were  living  the  somewhat  squalid  existence  described 
by  Mrs.  Harrison.  Also  Crippen's  affection  for  Le  Neve  was  developing. 
For  this  quiet,  reserved,  attractive  girl  the  quiet  and  reserved  Crippen  was 
nourishing  a  genuine  passion.  From  the  strain  and  storm  of  existence  at 
home  he  was  finding  something  like  repose  and  true  companionship  in  his 


Introduction. 

association  with  Miss  Le  Neve.  His  resources  were  further  strained  by 
his  efforts  to  adorn  her  in  the  way  he  had  adorned  his  wife-nao  much  so 
that  the  doctor  connected  with  Munyon's  establishment  objected  to  her  too 
smart  appearance,  and  requested  her  to  return  to  a  more  sober  habit  of 
dress. 

In  short,  the  causes  were  now  all  assembled  which  were  to  produce 
such  tragic  results,  and  only  some  powerful  agent  was  required  to  pre- 
cipitate the  tragedy  from  these  ingredients).  There  was  the  life  at  home, 
sordid  and  quarrelsome.  There  was  the  outward  appearance  of  affluence 
and  display,  coupled  with  the  laboriously  kept-up  appearance  of  matrimonial 
felicity.  There  were  the  business  interests  and  anxieties,  and  there  was 
the  secret  growing  passion  for  Miss  Le  Neve. 


VII. 

Here,  then,  was  Crippen  living,  although  not  on  affectionate,  at  any 
rate  on  endurable  terms  with  his  wife.  That  the  relationship  would,  and 
indeed  must  somehow  at  some  time  come  to  an  end,  was  probably  in  both 
their  minds.  They  had  no  children  to  complicate  the  relationship,  and 
Mrs.  Crippen's  former  manner  of  life  and  her  popularity  with  a  certain  class 
of  man  must  have  familiarised  her  with  ways  in  which  she  could  be  easily 
independent  of  her  husband.  But  that  the  situation  in  January  had  become 
so  intolerable  that  either  thought  of  murdering  the  other  I  do  not  believe. 
Murder  is,  to  say  the  least  of  it,  an  extreme  step  to  take,  even  in  marital 
disagreements ;  it  is  an  extreme  stage  to  which  to  carry  them  •  it  is  an  extreme 
method  of  solving  them.  There  are  thousands  of  men  and  women  who 
daily  carry  the  burden  that  Crippen  was  carrying,  who  wake  up  every  morn- 
ing to  another  day  of  a  relationship  of  which  bickering  and  distaste  are 
the  elements ;  who  see  stretching  hopelessly  before  them  a  long  and  dreary 
vista  of  such  days.  But  they  do  not  resort  to  murder  as  an  escape.  Except 
to  a  maniac,  or  to  a  person  beside  himself  with  rage,  jealousy,  hatred,  fear, 
or  despair,  the  deliberate  killing  of  a  human  companion  is  a  difficult, 
disagreeable,  and  indeed  abhorrent  business.  It  is  also  highly  dangerous, 
and  (thanks  to  the  law  and  to  the  machinery  of  justice)  is  almost  certain 
to  bring  the  offender  into  a  situation  in  comparison  with  which  the  un- 
happiest  married  life  would  seem  as  charming  as  the  memory  of  Eden  must 
have  been  to  our  fallen  parents.  In  such  circumstances,  tolerated  for 
so  long,  and  therefore  tolerable  for  a  little  longer,  something  very  acute, 
sudden,  or  final,  must  occur  to  precipitate  such  an  action.  And  something 
of  the  same  character  must  have  occurred  in  the  Crippen  household  to  make 
the  doctor  decide  that  he  must  not  only  escape  from  his  wife  but  murder 
her.  What  was  it? 

xxi 


Hawley  Harvey  Crippen. 

There  are  four  theories,  and  only  four,  which  can  serve  even  approxi- 
mately as  a  solution  of  the  problem.    Let  us  examine  them. 


VIII. 

The  first  theory,  which  may  be  called  the  official  theory  of  the  prosecu- 
tion, is  that  Crippen  murdered  his  wife  simply  that  he  might  indulge 
his  guilty  passion  for  Ethel  Le  Neve.  This  is  the  kind  of 
motive  which  is  always  good  enough  for  a  jury,  especially  when 
the  facts  of  the  murder  are  proved;  but  it  will  not  stand 
intelligent  examination.  It  is  not  reasonably  in  accordance  either 
with  the  facts  or  with  the  characters  of  the  people  concerned.  As 
for  the  guilty  passion,  Crippen  had  not  only  enjoyed  it  for  a  considerable 
time,  but  he  obviously  did  not  feel  particularly  guilty  about  it;  it  is  even  ob- 
vious that  he  took  no  more  trouble  to  hide  it  than  the  dictates  of  elementary 
discretion  and  common  sense  demanded.  It  is  pretty  certain  that  all  his 
friends  and  the  people  connected  with  him  in  business  knew  all  about  it, 
and  had  become  so  accustomed  to  it  as  to  take  it  for  granted.  Ethel  Le 
Neve  was  the  companion  of  his  business  life  and  of  his  days ;  his  wife  was 
not  even  the  companion  of  his  nights;  and  much  as  he  no  doubt  wished 
that  he  was  married  to  Ethel  Le  Neve  and  not  to  Cora  Crippen,  that  in  itself 
could  not  have  been  a  sufficient  motive  for  him  to  commit  murder.  It  was 
always  possible  for  him  simply  to  leave  or  desert  his  wife,  and  live  openly 
with  Le  Neve.  But  if  he  had  been  going  to  do  that,  he  would  have  done 
it  before.  When  a  man  is  in  love  with  a  woman  who  is  not  his  wife,  the 
time  at  which  he  is  most  likely  to  desert  the  wife  for  the  mistress  is  at  the 
beginning  of  the  new  relationship ;  not  when  it  has  been  going  on  for  years 
and  become,  as  it  were,  regularised.  And  if  that  is  true  of  mere  desertion, 
how  much  more  true  is  it  of  murder,  which  requires  so  much  stronger  a 
motive,  so  much  more  impulsive  a  passion.  If  this  theory  as  to  motive 
were  sound,  Crippen  would  surely  have  committed  the  crime  several  years 
earlier,  and  not  after  he  had  settled  down  into  a  routine  of  existence  which 
was,  as  I  have  suggested,  if  not  happy,  at  any  rate  full  of  varied  interests 
and  had  its  private  alleviations. 

IX. 

Another  and  most  ingenious  attempt  to  account  for  the  sudden  abolition 
of  Mrs.  Crippen  is,  I  think,  the  invention  of  Sir  Edward  Marshall  Hall, 
who  developed  it  at  some  length  in  a  discussion  before  a  private  society  in 
London.  This  was  the  theory  upon  which,  if  he  had  defended  Crippen,  his 
defence  would  have  been  founded ;  and  it  was  because  another  line  of  defence 


Introduction. 

had  been  opened  at  the  Police  Court  before  the  brief  was  offered  to  him  that 
he  ultimately  declined  it. 

The  theory  is  that,  far  from  Crippen  having  ceased  to  cohabit  with  his 
wife,  he  was  in  fact  something  of  a  victim  to  her  exigencies  in  that  respect ; 
that  Mrs.  Crippen  had  an  abnormal  amative  appetite — abnormal,  that  is  to 
say,  not  in  the  nature  but  in  the  extent  of  the  appetite ;  that  her  husband, 
devoted  as  he  was  to  his  mistress,  found  himself  the  victim  of  a  double 
demand  to  which  the  poor  little  man's  frail  physique  and  advancing  years 
rendered  him  unequal;  and  that  he  sought  in  the  pharmacopoeia  a  remedy 
for  this  distressing  state  of  affairs.  That  having  known,  from  his  former 
experience  in  lunatic  asylums,  that  hyoscin  is  sometimes  used  as  a  sexual 
depressant  in  cases  of  acute  nymph omania,  he  conceived  the  idea  of  adminis- 
tering a  few  doses  of  this  drug  in  order  to  keep  his  wife  quiet.  That 
although  he  knew  the  drug  was  used  he  did  not  know  what  the  dose  was, 
and  innocently  went  out  and  bought  5  grains,  the  whole  of  which  he 
administered  to  his  wife  in  a  cup  of  coffee.  And  that  when,  instead  of 
falling  quietly  asleep,  Mrs.  Crippen,  to  the  horror  and  surprise  of  her  hus- 
band, incontinently  died,  he  was  so  frightened  at  what  he  had  done  and 
foresaw  such  difficulty  in  explaining  it  that  he  cut  up,  burned,  and  otherwise 
disposed  of  the  remains,  and  gave  his  friends  the  explanation  of  Mrs. 
Crippen's  disappearance  which  in  fact  he  did  give.  That,  in  short,  if  when 
she  died  he  had  run  out  and  told  a  policeman  of  his  dreadful  mistake,  he 
would  have  been  an  object  of  sympathy  rather  than  of  legal  vengeance. 

The  ingenuity  of  this  theory  cannot  be  denied;  and  there  is  a  touch 
of  true  comedy  in  it,  in  spite  of  the  grim  facts,  which  makes  one  regret 
that  it  had  not  the  chance  of  being  fully  developed  in  a  criminal  Court. 
Sir  Edward  Marshall  Hall  is  not  only  convinced  that  he  could  have  satisfied 
the  jury  and  got  the  charge  reduced  to  one  of  manslaughter,  but  (a  much  more 
extreme  belief)  he  even  thinks  this  to  be  the  true  explanation  of  the  facts. 
But  I  am  afraid  that  it  will  not  do  either.  There  is  the  fact  that,  having 
occupied  a  common  room  and  bed  in  their  former  homes,  the  Crippens  had 
separate  rooms  at  Hilldrop  Crescent.  It  is  all  very  well  to  represent  Crippen 
as  the  victim  of  the  inordinate  concupiscence  of  his  wife  as  well  as  of  his  own 
passion  for  his  mistress;  but  these  are  two  fires  between  which  a  man 
In  his  situation  cannot  really  be  forced  to  remain.  Although  Courts  of 
law  continue  to  make  orders  for  the  restitution  of  conjugal  rights,  no  method 
of  enforcing  them  has  so  far  been  discovered ;  and  relief  from  such  a  situation 
as  this  theory  of  the  case  presumes  could  be  found  in  a  purely  negative  line 
of  conduct.  Moreover  (and  here  is  the  greatest  weakness  of  this  theory)  it 
is  almost  unthinkable  that  a  medical  man  who  knew  the  properties  of  hydro- 
bromide  of  hyoscin  could  be  totally  ignorant  of  the  amount  of  the  dose. 
It  is  quite  possible  that  he  would  not  know  the  minute  variations  of  the 


Hawley  Harvey  Crippen. 

dose  for  different  cases;  but  that  he  should  make  such  a  wild  mistake  as 
lies  in  the  difference  between  half  a  grain  and  5  grains  is  unthinkable. 
That  Crippen  administered  5  grains  is  to  be  inferred  not  only  from  the 
amount  discovered  in  the  remains,  but  also  from  the  fact  that  no  residue 
of  the  drug  was  discovered  in  his  possession;  and  it  would  have  been  of 
vital  importance  to  Jiim  to  produce  such  residue,  in  view  of  his  own  explana- 
tion as  to  his  reason  for  purchasing  hyoscin.  So  that  this  theory,  ingenious 
as  it  is  and  profoundly  interesting  as  its  development  would  have  been  as  a 
legal  defence,  must  in  my  view  be  dismissed,  not  so  much  because  it  is 
unreasonable  as  because  it  is  discordant  with  the  revealed  facts  of  the  case. 


X. 

There  is  a  third  theory  to  which,  after  full  consideration  of  all  the 
mysterious  elements  in  the  problem,  I  am  driven  as  the  most  reasonable 
explanation  of  this  extreme  and  violent  act  on  the  part  of  a  man  whose 
characteristics,  as  revealed  to  his  associates  through  a  number  of  years, 
were  patience,  kindness,  and  amiability.  It  is  that  the  more  or  less  sudden 
act  which  precipitated  the  tragedy  came  from  Mrs.  Crippen  herself,  in  the 
form  of  a  definite  decision  to  leave  her  husband  and  take  with  her  the  whole 
available  capital  of  the  family,  including  the  money  in  the  bank  and  the 
jewellery. 

In  regard  to  this  there  is  a  very  important  fact  which  did  not  and 
could  not  come  out  at  the  trial,  but  goes  far  to  explain  what  is  otherwise 
almost  inexplicable.  It  is  known  that  Mrs.  Crippen  had  more  than 
once  in  the  month  of  January  told  one  of  her  friends  that  if  Crippen  did  not 
give  up  his  association  with  Miss  Le  Neve  she  intended  to  leave  him,  and 
to  take  her  money  with  her.  It  will  be  observed  that  she  spoke  of  it  as 
"her"  money,  and  it  is  clear  that  she  so  regarded  it.  What  view 
Crippen  himself  took  of  this  scheme  I  do  not  know,  but  it  is  at  least 
strange  that  the  bulk  of  their  money  was  held  in  a  joint  account.  It  is 
not  in  accordance  with  the  orderly  and  business-like  character  of  Crippen 
that  he  should  have  placed  all  his  own  resources1,  on  which  he  depended 
not  only  for  his  household  expenses,  but  also  for  the  conduct  of  the  various 
little  businesses  in  which  he  from  time  to  time  engaged,  at  the  mercy  of  a 
woman  like  hie  wife.  He  knew  her  character  perfectly  well — no  one 
better;  he  must  have  known  that,  whatever  qualities  she  possessed,  she 
was  not  the  sort  of  woman  in  whose  hands  it  would  be  desirable  to  place  the 
control  of  one's  finances1.  In  regard  to  the  £600  on  deposit  in  the 
Charing  Cross  Bank,  some  of  this  had  been  deposited  in  the  joint  names 
of  husband  and  wife,  and  some  in  the  name  of  Belle  Elmore.  Now,  Mrs. 
Crippen  had  no  means  of  getting  money  unless  it  was  given  to  her  by  her 
xxiv 


Introduction. 

husband  or  some  one  else.  She  never  earned  any  money  during  the 
five  years  which  are  the  crucial  period  in  this  case.  Crippen  was,  even 
on  the  admission  of  her  own  friends,  liberal  to  her  when  he  had  money, 
and  gave  her  whatever  she  required  in  accordance  with  his  means.  But 
the  kind  of  salaries  that  Crippen  earned  did  not  entirely  account  for  the 
sums  of  money  that  were  from  time  to  time  in  the  possession  of  these  two 
people,  jointly  or  severally.  It  is  true  that  in  some  of  his  businesses, 
although  on  a  small  salary  (£3  or  £4  a  week),  he  was  entitled  to  com- 
mission; but  latterly,  at  any  rate,  that  commission  could  not  have 
amounted  to  anything  considerable.  In  1905,  when  he  was  manager  of 
the  Sovereign  Remedy  Company,  it  failed.  From  there  he  went  as 
physician  to  the  Drouet  Company,  and  it  failed ;  next  he  went  to  the 
Aural  Clinio  Company,  and  in  six  months:  it  also  failed.  Then  he  re- 
turned to  Munyon'e  as  manager,  and  after  some  two  years  took  it  over 
as  an  agency — which  seems  to  mean  that  the  proprietors  did  not  consider 
the  branch  sufficiently  profitable  to  justify  his  salary,  and  allowed  him 
to  run  it  on  an  agent's  commission.  In  November,  1909,  he  had  ceased 
to  be  manager  of  the  agency,  and  was  simply  remaining  on  commission; 
and  even  this  arrangement  was  to  terminate  on  the  31st  of  January,  1910. 
Undoubtedly  he  had  various  eide  lines  of  activity  in  the  patent  medicine 
business,  but  they  were  only  side  lines ;  and  probably  at  the  time  of  the 
murder  his  chief  source  of  income  was  the  partnership  in  a  dental  business 
which  he  had  with  Dr.  Rylance  at  Albion  House,  New  Oxford  Street.  But 
in  all  these  affairs,  having  regard  to  the  fact  that  he  had  a  house  to  keep 
up  and  a  wife  to  support  who,  for  her  station  in  life,  was  notoriously 
extravagant,  there  does  not  seem  much  room  for  the  laying  by  of  money  and 
the  purchase  of  expensive  jewellery.  Where,  then,  did  the  money  come 
from?  And  how  far  was  Mrs.  Crippen  justified  in  her  claim  to  it  as  her 
own  property? 

We  must  remember  what  she  had  been  and  what  she  was.  Un- 
doubtedly she  occasionally  received  "presents"  from  various  men;  and 
whether  these  took  the  form  of  money  or  jewellery,  or  both,  one  can  under- 
stand that  she  would  regard  them  as  entirely  her  own  property  and  at  her 
own  disposal.  What  Crippen  knew  of  their  origin  I  cannot  tell.  The 
veil  of  mystery  which  surrounds  so  much  of  the  character  of  this  quiet 
and  reserved  man  is  not  lifted  to  show  any  light  on  this  aspect  of  the  case. 
He  was  indifferent  to  his  wife,  who,  by  her  vanity,  her  extravagance,  her 
shrewishness,  had  long  worn  out  the  affection  in  which  he  had  formerly 
held  her  and  his  pride  in  the  kind  of  attention  that  she  attracted.  Crippen 
was  not  a  robust  man  physically ;  his  vitality  was  of  a  nervous  sort.  She, 
on  the  other  hand,  was  robust  and  animal.  Her  vitality  was  of  that 
loud,  aggressive,  and  physical  kind  that  seems  to  exhaust  the  atmosphere 


Hawley  Harvey  Crippen. 

round  it,  and  is  undoubtedly  exhausting  to  live  with.  In  all  probability, 
therefore,  he  did  not  ultimately  care  what  she  did,  where  she  went,  or 
whom  she  saw,  as  long  as  his  life  was  allowed  to  go  on  without  interruption. 
Of  course,  there  were  quarrels;  "  Belle  Elmore,"  who  could  be  so  pleasant 
and  attractive  to  her  music  hall  friends,  was  not  the  sort  of  woman  to 
withhold  her  words  on  provocation,  or  to  take  a  philosophic  view  of  her 
husband's  liaison.  It  is  true  that  she  had  ceased  to  care  for  him,  and 
spared  him  neither  in  public  nor  in  private  before  her  friends;  but  in  the 
mean  of  soul,  vanity  takes  the  place  of  nobler  passions,  and  though  she 
did  not  want  Crippen  for  herself,  it  was  not  in  accordance  with  her 
vanity  that  he  should  enjoy  the  love  of  any  other  woman.  She  was 
probably  getting  bored  with  the  Hilldrop  Crescent  existence;  unless  there 
was  plenty  of  money  to  gild  it,  that  was  too  dingy  a  life  for  the  kind  of 
woman  she  conceived  herself  to  be.  Also  she  had  reached  that  age — 
thirty-five  years1 — when  a  woman  of  her  race  begins  to  realise  that  her 
youth  is  over,  and  that  the  time  in  which  her  attractions  can  still  pass 
current  in  the  world  of  men  is  growing  short.  She  had  any  amount  of 
clothes,  plenty  of  jewellery,  some  money.  Why  not  pick  a  quarrel  with 
Crippen,  and  in  the  disguise  of  a  virtuous  and  ill-used  wife  fly  to  the 
protection  of  some  man  who  was1,  or  whom  she  believed  to  be,  ready  to 
receive  her? 

I  believe  that  somewhere  about  the  middle  of  January,  1910,  she 
made  this  threat  to  Crippen,  and  perhaps  began  to  look  about  her  for  the 
means  to  carry  it  out.  I  believe  that  he  was  worried,  both  on  account 
of  money  and  his  business  affairs,  and  possibly  also  through  his  love  for 
Ethel  Le  Neve.  It  is  possible  that  she,  as  well  as  Mrs.  Crippen,  was  discon- 
tented with  the  existing  situation ;  it  would  be  remarkable  if  she  were  not. 
Although  she  had  given  herself  entirely  to  Crippen,  and  knew  herself  to 
be  the  object  of  his  very  real  devotion,  she  was  still  working  as  an  ordinary 
typist  at  Munyon's;  and  the  contrast  between  her  situation  and  that  of 
the  woman  who  had  the  official  position  of  Crippen's  wife  and  the  spending 
of  the  money,  the  wearing  of  the  clothes  and  jewellery,  and  the  treasurer- 
ship  of  the  Music  Hall  Ladies'  Guild,  and  all  the  rest  of  it,  must  have 
been  increasingly  disagreeable.  There  is  no  evidence  that  she  put  any 
pressure  of  this  nature  on  Crippen;  it  would  not  be  fair  to  suggest  that 
she  did.  But  perhaps  all  the  more  for  that  reason  would  Crippen  desire 
to  give  to  the  woman  he  loved  what  was  at  present  being  wasted  on  the 
woman  he  did  not  love.  If  his  wife  were  to  go  away  as  she  threatened, 
and  take  all  her  possessions  with  her,  the  situation  would  be  worse  instead 
of  better.  There  would  be  a  scandal  in  their  little  world ;  there  would  be 
no  money  just  at  the  time  when  it  was  most  needed;  there  would  be  none 
of  the  jewellery  which  Crippen  longed  to  see  adorning  the  person  of  his 


Introduction. 

mistress.  Remember  Crippen's  attitude  to  jewellery.  Undoubtedly 
he  had  bought,  and  his  wife  possessed,  jewellery  of  a  value  quite  unusual 
for  people  in  their  circumstances;  and  there  is  no  doubt  that  at  the  time 
when  he  was  in  love  with  his  wife  he  found,  as  other  men  have  found, 
an  actual  stimulus  to  his  passion  in  seeing  her  hung  about  with  precious 
and  dazzling  things.  He  greatly  desired,  now  that  his  passion  was 
centred  on  Ethel  Le  Neve,  to  give  it  some  indulgence  in  the  same  way. 
If  Mrs.  Crippen  went  away  and  took  everything  with  her  there  was  an 
end  to  these  hopes.  But  what  if  she  were  to  die? 


XL 

Here  came  the  turning  point  in  Crippen's  life,  when,  from  being  a 
much-tried  and  much-enduring  man,  encoiled  by  circumstances  and  the 
consequences  of  his  own  actions,  he  became  a  criminal.  It  is  a  deep  and 
unfathomable  chasm  that  divides  the  two  conditions,  but  it  may  be  a 
very  narrow  one.  Upon  what  plank  he  crossed  or  what  exasperating  word 
or  deed  goaded  him  to  make  the  leap,  I  do  not  know  or  expect  ever  to 
learn.  But  from  that  moment  he  never  wavered.  He  went  and  bought 
the  hyoscin — always  considerate,  you  see,  even  in  the  weapon  he  used  to 
kill  his  wife.  He  had  decided  that  it  would  be  better  that  she  should 
cease  to  exist;  and  his  ingenuity  and  consideration  combined  hit  upon 
what  was  at  once  the  most  merciful  and  the  safest  poison  he  could  have 
used. 

From  the  19th  of  January,  when  the  hyoscin  came  into  his  possession, 
he  was  probably  considering  the  means  and  opportunity  of  using  it.  It 
is  impossible  to  say  whether  its  employment  on  the  night  of  the  31st  of 
January,  when  the  Martinettis  dined  with  them,  was  accidental  or  pre- 
meditated. It  may  have  been  in  his  mind  to  do  it  after  an  apparently 
amicable  evening  in  the  presence  of  friends,  when  he  and  his  wife  could 
be  seen  in  an  atmosphere  of  matrimonial  amity.  If  so,  that  scheme  was 
rather  frustrated  by  the  fact  that  Mrs.  Crippen  rated  him  soundly  in  the 
presence  of  the  Martinettis  for  allowing  Mr.  Martinetti  to  go  upstairs  to 
the  lavatory  by  himself,  instead  of  escorted  by  his  host.  The  matters 
into  which  one  descends  here  are  minute  indeed,  but  who  can  say  what 
bearing  they  may  not  have  had  on  the  destinies  of  those  present?  Mrs. 
Crippen  may  have  been  anxious  to  have  a  word  alone  with  Mrs.  Martinetti, 
and  have  been  enraged  with  Crippen  for  not  giving  her  the  opportunity. 
Otherwise,  seeing  that  Mr.  Martinetti  knew  the  house  well,  and  that  they 
were  in  the  habit  of  dining  there  at  least  once  a  week,  Mrs.  Crippen's 
annoyance  with  her  husband  seems  to  have  been  excessive.  However,  it 
may  have  been  enough ;  it  may  have  been  the  spark  that  fired  the  train, 


Hawley  Harvey  Crippen. 

and  what  is  certain  is  that  Mrs.  Crippen  was  never  seen  alive  after 
that  evening,  and  that  her  remains,  containing  trace®  of  what  had  been  a 
large  dose  of  hydrobromide  of  hyoscin,  were  subsequently  discovered 
beneath  the  floor  of  the  coal  cellar  below  the  steps. 

The  only  other  theory  with  which  the  facts  may  be  brought  into 
accordance  is  one  which  would  involve  the  collusion  of  an  accomplice,  and 
for  obvious  reasons  cannot  be  discussed. 


XII. 

But  taking  the  third  theory  as  the  one  which  is  the  most  reasonable  of 
those  that  are  open  to  us1,  Crippen's  subsequent  conduct  is  all  of  a  piece, 
and  throws  a  profoundly  interesting  light  on  his  character.  Across  the 
chasm  which  separates  the  ordinary  citizen  from  the  criminal,  he  had 
taken  the  fatal  and  decisive  step;  but  having  done  so,  instead  of  going 
off,  like  so  many  murderers,  to  wander  in  the  wilderness  as  an  outlaw,  he 
resumed  his  ordinary  course  of  life;  he  kept  straight  on;  only  now  he 
walked  on  the  far  side  of  the  narrow  abyss.  If  the  course  of  his  life  were 
to  be  marked  on  a  chart  one  would  not  see  it,  as  is  usual  in  the  case  of 
criminals,  turning  suddenly  at  a  right  angle  and  continuing  in  that 
direction;  it  would  appear  as  a  straight  course  with  one  little  step  aside 
in  the  middle  of  it,  and  then  continuing  as  before.  It  is  certain  that 
he  showed  no  disturbance,  remorse  or  fright  for  the  horrid  deed  that  he 
had  committed ;  and  I  believe  that  he  did  not  feel  any.  In  some  obscure 
way  he  justified  to  himself  what  he  had  done  without  violating  his 
conscience,  because,  as  far  as  one  can  judge,  his  life  was.  now  happier  than 
it  had  been  before.  But  on  the  assumption  that  he  committed  this  crime 
out  of  love  for  his  mistress,  hisi  subsequent  conduct  was  perfectly  con- 
sistent. He  took  all  the  necessary  steps,  and  took  them  with  great  skill 
and  coolness,  to  conceal  all  traces  of  the  crime.  The  bones,  limbs,  and 
head,  as  well  as  certain  characteristic  organs,  had  all  been  removed  from 
the  discovered  remains,  and  the  evidence  was  that  they  had  been  removed 
by  a  hand  skilled  in  dissection.  No  one  knows  how  they  were  disposed  of; 
but  it  must  have  been  a  work  of  days.  One  theory  is  that  it  was  done  in 
the  bath,  and  the  bones  and  limbs  burned  in  the  kitchen  grate,  while 
the  head  was  got  rid  of  during  Crippen's  subsequent  trip  to  Dieppe — 
dropped  overboard  in  a  handbag.  But  whatever  the  method,  it  must  have 
involved  labours  physically  exhausting,  and  of  a  nature  horrible  to 
contemplate. 

He  invented  a  story  to  account  for  his  wife's  disappearance. 
With  a  certain  completeness  of  artistic  circumstances  he  developed 
her  disappearance  into  her  death  in  far-away  California;  and 


Introduction. 

he  devoted  himself  to  the  girl  for  whose  affections  he  was 
to  pay  such  a  price.  It  is  characteristic  of  the  inconsistency  of 
human  prejudice  that  half  the  indignation  and  horror  aroused  against  him 
was  because  of  the  fact  that  he  cut  up-  his  wife's  remains,  and  that  he 
wrote  hypocritical  letters  to  the  music  hall  ladies  about  her  death  in 
California.  How  absurd  is  such  an  attitude.  The  crime  was  in  murdering 
his  wife ;  it  was  a  crime  of  such  magnitude  that  nothing  he  could  do  after- 
wards could  possibly  aggravate  it,  unless  it  had  involved  cruelty  or 
betrayal  of  some  one  who  was  alive.  On  the  contrary,  granting  the  crime 
and  granting  its  enormity,  what  he  did  afterwards  was  technically  admir- 
able. It  was  his  business  to  abolish  all  trace  of  it,  and  that  he  very  nearly 
succeeded  in  doing.  If  he  were  going  to  tell  a  lie  about  his  wife's  death 
in  California,  he  had  better  do  it  well  than  badly;  and,  in  fact,  he  did 
it  extremely  well.  If  he  had  murdered  his  wife  in  order  to  be  happy  with 
Le  Neve,  the  least  he  could  do  was  to  devote  himself  to  her;  and  from 
that  moment  until  the  morning  he  was  hanged  in  Pentonville  Prison  he 
had  no  other  thought  but  of  her  welfare,  no  other  object  but  to  secure 
her  safety  and  happiness,  no  other  fear  but  that  any  consequence  of  his 
action  should  recoil  upon  her. 


xm. 

But  human  vanity,  which  is  woven  like  a  gaudy  thread  through  the  dark 
fabric  of  this  story,  was  to  prove  his  undoing.  His  wife  gone,  her  disappear- 
ance explained  and  her  death  announced,  with  circumstantial  details,  in- 
cluding memorial  cards  and  announcements  in  the  Era — matters  which 
occupied  a  couple  of  months — Crippen  took  Miss  Le  Neve  more  or  less  openly 
to  live  with  him  in  Hilldrop  Crescent  (12th  March).  My  theory  as  to  the 
crime  is  supported  by  the  fact  that  on  2nd  and  9th  February  Crippen  pawned 
jewellery  to  the  value  of  £195.  He  had  now  command  of  money;  Miss  Le 
Neve  was  living  with  him,  and  he  could  begin  to  enjoy  the  fruits  of  his 
dreadful  action.  They  became  bolder  and  more  open  in  the  enjoyment  of 
the  situation.  She  was  seen  at  a  charity  dinner  and  dance  on  20th 
February,  wearing  some  of  the  jewellery  which  had  been  Mrs.  Crippen'e. 
This  seems  to  have  been  too  much  for  some  of  the  lady  friends  of  Mrs. 
Crippen.  Perhaps  some  of  them  felt  that  had  she  made  a  will  she  would 
have  divided  her  treasured  possessions  among  them.  They  knew  that  the 
last  person  whom  she  would  have  wished  to  enjoy  them  was  Miss  Le  Neve. 
They  talked,  they  wondered,  they  became  suspicious;  and  on  30th  June 
Mr.  Nash  went  to  Scotland  Yard  and  raised  the  whole  question  of  Mrs. 
Crippen's  disappearance. 

A  week  later  Inspector  Dew  and  Sergeant  Mitchell  began  their  inquiries, 


Hawley  Harvey  Crippen. 


visiting  Crippen  at  his  office.     He  then  told  them  that  the  whole  story  of 

(Mrs.  Crippen's  death  was  untrue,  that  she  had  left  him,  he  knew  not  with 
whom,  and  that  to  avoid  scandal  he  had  invented  the  story  of  her  journey 
to  California,  her  illness,  and  death.  He  gave  a  signed  statement  which 
will  be  found  in  its  place  in  the  evidence,1  and  showed  every  desire  to  give 
them  what  assistance  he  could  in  discovering  the  whereabouts  of  his  wife. 
This  statement  was  given  to  Inspector  Dew  in  Crippen's  office,  in  the 
intervals  between  medical  consultations  and  tooth-pulling ;  he  would  dictate 
a  little  of  it,  go  out  and  extract  a  tooth,  and  return  and  dictate  some 
more.  It  occupied  the  greater  part  of  the  day,  and  Crippen  and  Inspector 
Dew  went  out  and  had  lunch  together  at  the  Holborn  Restaurant  in  the 
middle  of  it.  Crippen  took  the  officers  to  Hilldrop  Crescent,  assisting  them 
to  examine  everything.  They  went  all  over  the  house  from  attic  to  cellar, 
and  found  nothing  whatever  inconsistent  with  his  story.  Inspector  Dew 
has  told  me  that  on  this  day,  8th  July,  having  been  almost  continually 
with  Crippen  and  having  gone  over  the  whole  house,  he  had  found  nothing 
whatever  to  lead  him  to  suppose  that  there  was  anything  in  the  case  other 
than  what  Crippen  had  told  him.  The  investigation  was  to  all  intents  and 
purposes  finished. 
I 

XIV. 

And  then  something  broke  down.  It  was  not  the  nerve  of  Crippen ;  but 
it  was  not  improbably  the  nerve  of  Miss  Le  Neve.  It  is  impossible  to  be 
sure  whether  or  not  she  knew  the  truth ;  it  is  quite  possible,  as  both  she  and 
Crippen  swore,  that  she  did  not.  If  she  did,  there  would  be  little  wonder 
that  the  situation  had  become  too  much  for  her.  But  even  if  she  did  not, 
she  may  have  become  uneasy  and  suspicious,  and  Crippen  may  have  felt, 
now  that  there  was  an  investigation  afoot,  that  in  some  way  her  nerve 
would  give  way  and  her  manner  awake  suspicion,  and  that  the  strain  of 
further  examination  would  prove  altogether  too  much  for  her.  He  resolved 
on  instant  flight.  Some  very  powerful  influence  must  have  been  at  work 
to  induce  Miss  Le  Neve  to  submit  to  the  daring  scheme  of  sudden  flight 
disguised  as  a  boy.  If  they  had  only  known  it,  the  worst  was  over;  the 
probability  is  that  if  they  had  not  gone  away  the  matter  would  have  been 
dropped,  and  Mrs.  Crippen's  disappearance  ranked  among  the  many 
unsolved  mysteries  of  London  life.  But  they  did  not  know  it ;  and  Crippen 
with  masterly  coolness  arranged  the  details  of  the  flight.  He  left  his 
affairs  in  order;  found  time,  even  in  this  hurried  hour  of  preparation,  to 
write  letters  characterised  by  his  usual  courtesy  which  would  enable  his 
business  associates  to  suffer  the  least  possible  embarrassment  through  his 

1  See  p.  34. 


Introduction. 

departure.  Unsuspected  and  uninterrupted,  they  got  away  to  Rotterdam 
and  to  Antwerp,  where  in  the  names  of  Mr.  and  Master  Robinson  they 
took  passage  for  Quebec  on  the  s.s.  "  Montrose,"  sailing  on  20th  July. 


XV. 

But  in  the  meantime  something  had  happened  in  London  which 
renewed  in  a  powerful  and  fatal  form  the  almost  extinct  current  of  official 
suspicion.  Inspector  Dew,  for  no  particular  reason,  decided  to  return  on 
Monday,  llth  July,  to  Albion  House,  Crippen' s  office,  to  ask  some  supple- 
mentary questions.  There  he  heard  that  Crippen  had  gone  away.  His 
suspicions  now  thoroughly  awakened,  he  returned  to  Hilldrop  Crescent, 
and  made  a  further  search  of  the  house,  taking  up  portions  of  the  garden, 
examining  the  coal  cellar,  testing  the  bricks  with  his  foot;  but  found 
nothing.  With  a  fortunate  pertinacity  which  won  him  his  distinction  in 
this  case,  he  returned  to  the  search  on  the  next  day,  and  again  on  the 
following  day,  the  13th,  when,  probing  the  bricks  of  the  cellar  floor  with 
a  poker,  he  discovered  that  one  of  them  could  be  raised.  Having  got  a 
few  more  out  by  the  same  process,  he  got  a  spade  and  began  to  dig,  and 
a  few  inches  down  came  upon  a  compact  mass  of  animal  remains  which, 
on  expert  investigation,  proved  to  be  the  greater  part  of  the  contents  of 
a  human  body  from  which  the  head,  limbs,  and  bones  were  missing,  as 
were  also  those  particular  organs  which  would  have  determined  the  sex  of 
the  body.  On  the  16th  July  a  warrant  was  issued  for  the  arrest  of  Crippen 
and  Miss  Le  Neve,  but,  as  has  been  seen,  they  had  successfully  escaped, 
and  were  then,  and  during  the  four  following  days,  waiting  for  the  "  Mon- 
trose "  to  sail  from  Antwerp. 

The  tragic  chapters  of  the  story  succeeded  one  another  with  dramatic 
rapidity.  There  had  been  time  for  the  sensational  discovery  at  Hilldrop 
Crescent  to  be  circularised,  and  the  description  of  the  two  fugitives 
reached  Antwerp  before  the  ship  sailed.  The  captain  had  read  them, 
and  he  had  not  been  at  sea  two  days  before  he  thought  he  had  identified 
in  Mr.  and  Master  Robinson  the  two  people  who  were  wanted  by  the  police, 
and  for  information  as  to  whom  the  Daily  Mail  had  offered  a  reward  of 
£100.  Wireless  telegraphy,  then  in  its  early  commercial  stages,  was  used 
for  the  first  time  in  the  science  of  criminal  detection.  Captain  Kendall 
sent  on  the  22nd  a  long  wireless  message  (which  will  be  found  as  an 
appendix)  relating  his  discovery,  and  for  nine  days  he  kept  his  victims 
all  unsuspicious  of  the  dreadful  part  in  their  lives  which  the  crackling 
discharge  of  the  wireless  played,  coaxing  them  to  talk  and  laugh,  and  luring 
them  on  to  the  exposure  of  their  not  very  successful  disguise.  On  the  23rd 
July  Dew  and  Mitchell  sailed  from  Liverpool,  and  on  the  31st  Crippen 


Hawley  Harvey  Crippen. 

and  Miss  Le  Neve  were  arrested  when  the  ship  was  off  Father  Point,  Dew 
coming  on  board  disguised  as  a  pilot;  and,  after  extradition  proceeding 
at  Quebec,  were  brought  back  to  London  for  trial. 


XVI. 

The  way  in  which,  by  the  accidental  inclusion  of  part  of  a  pyjama 
jacket  among  the  remains,  the  date  at  which  they  were  buried — otherwise 
unascertainable — was  absolutely  fixed  within  certain  limits;  the  brilliant 
and  laborious  analysis  which  proved  that  these  few  pieces  of  flesh 
and  skin  had  been  part  of  a  body  which  had  contained  a  fatal  dose  of 
hyoscin;  the  extraordinary  contradiction  and  breakdown  of  the  experts 
engaged  for  the  defence — these  may  all  be  discovered  in  the  report  of  the 
trial.  Mr.  Muir  (now  Sir  Richard)  was  never  in  all  his  long  career  as  a 
criminal  prosecutor  more  formidable  and  unflinching  than  in  his  masterly 
weaving  together  of  the  web  which  bound  Crippen  to  his  ultimate  fate. 
But  the  most  amazing  feature  of  the  trial  was  the  absolute  coolness  and 
imperturbability  of  Crippen  in  the  long  and  terrible  cross-examination 
which  will  be  read  in  its  place.  The  hideous  moment  in  which  the  pieces  of 
his  dead  wife's  skin  were  handed  round  in  a  soup  plate  for  inspection  left 
him,  alone  of  all  the  people  in  that  crowded  Court,  quite  unmoved.  He 
peered  at  them  with  an  intelligent  curiosity  as  though  they  had  been  mere 
museum  specimens.  Not  by  one  word  or  tremor  did  this  frail  little  man 
betray  any  sign  of  his  terrible  position,  to  which,  nevertheless,  as  we  know 
from  other  evidence,  he  was  acutely  and  tragically  sensitive.  This  be- 
haviour characterised  him  up  to  his  very  last  moments  of  life.  And  just 
as  the  Crown,  with  all  its  resources,  had  not  been  able  to  produce  a  single 
person  who  could  say  otherwise  than  that  in  every  relationship  of  life 
Crippen  had  always  behaved  with  kindness,  consideration,  and  unselfish- 
ness, so  every  one  who  came  in  contact  with  him  from  his  trial  to  his 
death — and  some  of  them  were  fairly  hardened  prison  officials! — looked  upon 
him  not  only  with  respect,  but  with  something  like  affection. 

He  never  gave  any  trouble,  showed  any  concern  or  asked  for  any  benefit 
for  himself;  all  his  concern  and  all  his  requests  were  for  the  woman  he 
loved.  I  have  seen  the  tragic  little  book  in  which  it  was  the  duty  of  the 
warders  who  sat  and  watched  with  him  day  and  night  in  the  condemned 
cell  to  record  his  conduct  from  hour  to  hour,  and  although  I  do  not  feel 
myself  free  to  quote  from  it,  there  is  nothing  in  that  record  that  shows 
any  preoccupation  whatever  except  anxiety  on  behalf  of  another.  The 
only  time  he  broke  down  was  when,  late  on  the  night  before  his  execution, 
the  Governor  of  Pentonville  prison  brought  him  a  telegram  of  farewell 
from  Miss  Le  Neve,  and  his  one  request,  when  the  Governor  at  this  same 
xxxii 


Introduction. 

midnight  interview  asked  him  if  there  was  anything  lie  could  possibly  do 
for  him,  was  that  the  one  or  two  letters  that  he  had  received  from  her, 
and  her  photograph,  should  be  buried  in  the  prison  grave  with  him  on  the 
morrow.  This  promise  was  given  and  kept. 


XVII. 

No  one  will  pretend  to  read  in  these  pages  any  apology  or  justification 
for  a  proved  murder.  They  are  an  attempt  to  trace  the  threads  of  motive 
throughout  what  is  a  very  remarkable  instance  of  good  and  bad  influences 
acting  on  human  conduct.  Rightly  read  and  understood  this  is  an  admon- 
ishing, sobering  and  instructive  story.  We  may  consider  Crippen  a  hateful 
man ;  but  nobody  who  came  in  contact  with  him  was  able  to  say  so. 
From  those  who,  whether  in  business  relations  or  as  friends  of  his  wife, 
had  no  reason  to  like  or  praise  him,  to  the  officials  of  the  prison  in  which 
he  was  executed  as  a  condemned  murderer,  there  is  but  one  chorus  of 
testimony  to  his  character  as  tested  by  daily  intercourse  with  his  fellow- 
men;  even  in  regard  to  the  very  circumstances  surrounding  his  crime,  or 
at  any  rate  following  it,  there  is  the  same  extraordinary  feature ;  the  very 
crime  itself  brought  out  in  him  high  human  qualities. 

There  are  two  sides  to  the  story — the  physical,  which  is  sordid, 
dreadful,  and  revolting,  and  the  spiritual,  which  is  good  and  heroic;  to 
the  extent  that  most  honest  men,  finding  themselves  in  the  situation  in 
which  he  ultimately  found  himself,  for  whatever  reason,  and  tried  by  the 
tests  by  which  he  was  tried,  would  be  glad  to  come  out  of  them  half  so 
well.  Such  a  story  can  only  be  understood  by  the  aid  of  the  imagination ; 
and  it  should  remind  us,  in  the  judgments  that  we  pass  on  our  fellow-men, 
never  to  forget  the  dual  nature  of  human  character  and  the  mystery  in 
virtue  of  which  acts  of  great  moral  obliquity  may  march  with  conduct 
above  the  ordinary  standards — conduct  which,  if  we  wish  to  be  just,  as  we 
hope  for  justice  to  ourselves,  should  be  remembered  and  recorded  no  less 
than  the  crime. 


xxxin 


Leading  Dates  in  the  Crippen  Case. 


1910. 
January         1        Crippen  orders  5  grains  of  hyoscin  from  Messrs.  Lewis  &  Burrows. 

19  He  gets  the  hyoscin. 

31        Mr.   and   Mrs.   Martinetti  dine  with   the  Crippens  at  30  Hilldrop 

Crescent. 

February       1        Dr.  Crippen  calls  to  enquire  for  Mr.  Martinetti. 
2        Crippen  pawns  ring  and  earrings  for  £80. 
2        Letter  received  by  the  Music  Hall  Ladies'  Guild,  containing  Mrs. 

Crippen's  resignation. 
9        Crippen  pawns  brooch  and  rings  for  £115. 

20  Crippen  and  Le  Neve  attend  the  dinner  and  ball  of  the  Benevolent 

Fund. 
March  12        Miss  Le  Neve  gives  up  her  situation  and  goes  to  live  with  Crippen  at 

39  Hilldrop  Crescent. 

16        Crippen  gives  his  landlord  3  months'  notice  as  to  the  tenancy  of 
39  Hilldrop  Crescent. 

23  Crippen  and  Le  Neve  go  to  Dieppe  for  Easter. 

24  Telegram  to  Mrs.    Martinetti  from  Crippen  announcing  his  wife's 

death. 

26        Obituary  notice  of  Mrs.  Crippen  in  The  Era. 
June  18        Crippen  arranged  with  his  landlord  to  stay  on  at  Hilldrop  Crescent 

until  29th  of  September. 
28        Mr.  Nash  questions  Crippen  about  his  wife's  remains. 

30  Mr.  Nash  goes  to  Scotland  Yard. 

July  8        Inspector  Dew  and  Sergeant  Mitchell  visit  Crippen  at  Albion  House, 

and  accompany  him  to  Hilldrop  Crescent 

9        Crippen  and  Miss  Le  Neve  leave  London.     Dew  at  Hilldrop  Crescent. 
9        Description  of  Mrs.  Crippen  circulated. 

11  Description  of  Crippen  and  Miss  Le  Neve  circulated  by  Police. 

12  Search  at  Hilldrop  Crescent  continued. 

13  Human  remains  discovered  beneath  the  cellar  at  Hilldrop'Crescent. 
16        Warrant  issued  for  the  arrest  of  Crippen  and  Miss  Le  Neve. 

20        S.S.  "  Montrose  "  sails  from  Antwerp,  with  Crippen  and  Miss  Le  Neve 
travelling  disguised  as  father  and  son. 

22  Wireless  message  received  from  Captain  Kendall  of  the  "  Montrose." 

23  Inspector    Dew    and    Sergeant    Mitchell    sail    from    Liverpool    in 

S.S.  "Laurentic." 

31  Arrest  of  Crippen  and  Miss  Le  Neve  at  sea  off  Father  Point. 
August          8        Extradition  proceedings  at  Quebec. 

20        Crippen  and  Miss  Le  Neve  sail  for  England  in  custody. 

28  Arrival  at  Liverpool. 

29  Police  Court  proceedings  opened  at  Bow  Street. 
September     2        Crippen  and  Miss  Le  Neve  committed  for  trial. 

26        Coroner's  jury  returns  a  verdict  of  wilful  murder  against  Crippen. 
October        10        Cora  Crippen's  remains  buried  at  Finchley  Cemetery. 
18        Trial  of  Crippen  opened  at  Old  Bailey.    «.  ...    .  f 
W-       Crippen  found  guilty  and  sentenced  to  death. 

5        Crippen's  appeal  to  the  Court  of  Criminal  Appeal  heard  and  dismissed. 
23        Crippen  executed  at  Pentonville. 


Notemt>%r 


THE  TRIAL 

WITHIN    THE 

CENTRAL  CRIMINAL  COURT, 
OLD  BAILEY,  LONDON, 

TUESDAY,    18th    OCTOBER,    1910. 


Judge — 

THE   RIGHT   HON.  LORD  ALVERSTONE,   Lord   Chief  Justice  of 
England. 

Counsel  for  the  Grown — 

Mr.  R.  D.  Mum, 

Mr.  TRAVERS  HUMPHREYS,  and 

Mr.  INGLEBY  ODDIE. 

(Instructed  by  the  Director  of  Public  Prosecutions.) 

Counsel  for  the  Prisoner — 

Mr.  TOBIN,  K.C., 

Mr.  HUNTLY  JENKINS,  and 

Mr.  ROOME. 

(Instructed  by  Messrs.  Arthur  Newton  &  Co.) 


THE    TRIAL. 

First  Day— Tuesday,   18th  October,  1910. 

The  CLERK  OP  THE  COURT — Hawley  Harvey  Crippen,  you  are  indicted 
and  also  charged  on  the  coroner's  inquisition  with  the  wilful  murder  of 
Cora  Crippen  on  the  1st  February  last.  Are  you  guilty  or  not  guilty? 

The  PRISONER — Not  guilty,  my  lord. 

Opening  Statement  for  the  Crown. 

Mr.  MUIR,  in  opening  the  case  for  the  Crown,  began  by  tracing  the 
earlier  personal  history  of  the  prisoner  and  of  his  wife,  whom  he  married 
as  his  second  wife  in  1892  or  1893,  and  also  the  circumstances  of  their 
married  life  at  Hilldrop  Crescent,  down  to  the  end  of  last  year.  So  far 
as  their  friends  were  concerned,  the  relations  between  husband  and  wife 
seemed  to  be  of  the  best  possible  kind;  they  lived  together  apparently  on 
affectionate  terms.  The  prisoner  had  not  for  some  four  years,  however, 
according  to  his  own  statement,  cohabited  with  his  wife,  but  had  during 
three  years  of  that  period  been  carrying  on  an  intrigue  with  a  young 
woman,  Ethel  Le  Neve,  who  had  been  in  his  service  as  a  typist,  and  for 
three  years  he  had  been  having  immoral  relations  with  her  of  a  clandestine 
kind,  never  staying  away  from  home  at  night,  but  meeting  her  in  hotels 
in  the  daytime.  That  being  so,  the  position  was  a  strange  one.  The 
prisoner  said  he  provided  all  the  money  for  the  home  in  which  he  and  his 
wife  were  living.  If  that  was  so,  he  was  keeping  up  an  establishment  for 
a  woman  towards  whom,  according  to  himself,  he  had  no  affection  at  all. 
As  regards  pecuniary  circumstances,  the  prisoner  and  his  wife  during 
some  years  of  their  married  life  were  putting  by  money.  Between 
March,  1905,  and  March,  1909,  they  had  deposited  with  the  Charing 
Crossi  Bank  various  sums,  amounting  in  all  to  £600.  These  were  de- 
posited, some  in  the  joint  names  of  husband  and  wife,  and  some  in  the 
name  of  the  wife  alone  by  which  she  was  generally  known — Belle  Elmore. 
In  the  beginning  of  the  present  year  the  financial  position  was  not  so 
good.  Up  to  November  the  prisoner  had  been  in  receipt  of  a  weekly 
salary  of  £3  from  the  business  known  as  Munyon's  Remedies,  but  that 
salary  ceased,  and  he  became  their  agent  in  this  country  on  commission. 
On  31st  January  of  the  present  year  his  relations  with  Munyon's  Remedies 
ceased  altogether — a  remarkable  coincidence  of  date,  because  31st  January 
was  the  critical  date  in  this  case.  The  prisoner  had  some  other  businesses, 
but  it  was  doubtful  whether  any  of  them  was  a  source  of  revenue  to  him 
at  all.  It  was  quite  certain  that  at  the  date  referred  to  the  prisoner  was 
pressed  for  money.  The  position,  therefore,  was  this — his  affection 

3 


Hawley  Harvey  Crippen. 


Mr.  Mulr 


fixed  upon  Ethel  Le  Neve,  and  himself  desirous  of  establishing  closer 
relations  "with  that  young  woman;  the  physical  presence  of  his  "wife  an 
obstacle  to  those  relations;  the  fact  that  he  had  no  money  another 
obstacle.  If  Belle  Elmore  died  both  those  obstacles  would  be  removed, 
because  Belle  Elmore's  money,  and  property  which  could  be  converted  into 
money,  would  enable  him  to  keep  Ethel  Le  Neve,  which  at  that  time  he 
was  unable  to  do. 

That  was  the  state  of  things  on  31st  January.  On  that  day  the 
prisoner  desired  that  Mr.  Paul  Martinetti  and  his  wife  should  spend  the 
evening  with  him  and  his  wife.  He  pressed  the  invitation,  and  it  was 
accepted.  Mrs.  Crippen  was  in  the  best  of  health  and  spirits. 
So  there  were  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Martinetti  witnesses,  if  ever  they 
should  be  required,  to  the  fact  that  on  the  early  morning  of  1st  February 
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Crippen  were  on  their  usual  affectionate  terms,  and  if.  Mrs. 
Crippen  should  from  that  moment  disappear  from  the  sight  of  all  who 
knew  her,  who  would  suspect  the  kind,  attentive,  and  affectionate  husband 
as  being  the  cause?  Belle  Elmore  was  a  woman  who  attracted  friends — 
a  busy  woman,  enjoying  life  for  the  pleasure  it  gave  her  and  for  the  good 
she  could  do  to  others.  She  was  described  as  a  bright,  vivacious  woman, 
fond  of  life,  fond — perhaps  inordinately  fond — of  dress  and  jewellery. 
Her  friends  said  she  was  a  good  correspondent;  but  from  the  moment 
that  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Martinetti  left  the  house  in  the  early  morning  of  1st 
February  she  passed  out  of  the  world  which  knew  her  as  completely  as 
if  she  were  dead.  She  left  behind  her  everything  she  would  have  left  if 
she  had  then  died — money,  jewels,  furs,  clothes,  home,  and  husband.  The 
prisoner  made  up  his  mind  that  she  had  left  never  to  return.  He  at 
once  began  to  convert  her  property,  and  on  12th  March  Ethel  Le  Neve, 
who  had  been  seen  wearing  a  brooch  and  furs  belonging  to  Belle  Elmore, 
went  permanently  to  live  with  him  at  39  Hilldrop  Crescent.  Crippen  was 
therefore  quite  certain  that  his  wife  would  never  return,  but  he  did  not  tell 
her  friends  he  knew  she  would  never  return.  He  started  a  campaign  of  lies 
to  account  for  her  disappearance.  He  knew  that  if  his  wife  did  not  attend 
the  meeting  of  the  Music  Hall  Ladies'  Guild  on  2nd  February  inquiries 
would  be  made,  and  so  he  sent  by  the  hand  of  Le  Neve  two  letters  to  the 
Guild  and  to  Miss  May,  one  of  the  officials  of  the  Guild.  Then  came 
the  story  of  her  disappearance  to  America,  and  the  invention  of  further 
lies — because  a  visit  to  America  might  be  expected  to  terminate  at  some 
time  or  other — to  account  for  the  fact  that  she  was  never  to  return.  On 
23rd  March  he  told  Mrs.  Martinetti  that  he  had  very  bad  news,  and  was 
momentarily  expecting  worse.  He  said  that  if  anything  should  happen 
to  Belle  he  was  going  to  France  for  a  week.  Mrs.  Martinetti  said,  "  What- 
ever for?"  He  said,  "Oh,  I  shall  want  a  change,"  the  truth  being 
that  at  that  time  he  had  arranged  an  Easter  trip  to  Dieppe  with  Ethel 
Le  Neve.  The  slate  had  to  be  wiped  clean  of  Belle  Elmore  before  he 
started,  and  from  Victoria  on  the  early  morning  of  24th  March  he  sent 
the  telegram  to  Mrs.  Martinetti  stating  that  Belle  died  the  previous 
night  at  six  o'clock ;  and,  that  nothing  should  remain  to  interfere  with  the 
rest  he  was  seeking  in  France,  he  sent  the  advertisement  to  the  Era 
announcing  that  Belle  Elmore  had  died  in  California — no  nearer  than  that — 
on  23rd  March.  The  object  of  the  advertisement  was  to  stop  people  asking 
4 


Opening  Statement  for  the  Crown. 

Mr.  Muir 

a  lot  of  questions.  But  Belle  Elmore's  friends  were  not  prevented  from 
asking  a  lot  of  questions,  and  they  got  some  answers.  They  obtained, 
too,  the  address  of  Crippen's  son.  The  ladies  wished  to  send  a  wreath 
to  their  friend's  grave  in  California.  They  were  told  that  the  wreath 
was  no  use — she  had  been  cremated,  and  her  ashes  were  to  be  brought 
home;  they  could  have  their  little  ceremony  then.  And  on  18th  May 
he  solemnly  announced  that  he  had  the  ashes  at  home. 

Then  the  ladies  became  still  more  curious.  They  wanted  to  know 
the  name  under  which  Belle  Elmor©  sailed  for  America,  but  Crippen  was  not 
at  all  sure  about  it.  It  must  have  been  obvious  to  Crippen  then  that  his 
statements  with  regard  to  the  disappearance  of  Belle  Elmore  were  being 
doubted,  and  it  was  perfectly  plain  after  his  interview  with  Chief 
Inspector  Dew  that  it  was  useless  to  proceed  with  the  stories  he  had  told. 
He  said  to  the  inspector,  "It  is  untrue  what  I  have  told  them  about  her 
death.  So  far  as  I  know  she  is  alive."  Crippen  then  made  a  long 
statement  giving  quite  a  new  version  of  his  wife's  disappearance.  He 
said  that  in  1902  or  thereabouts  he  had  to  visit  America,  and  that  while 
he  was  away  his  wife  had  formed  the  acquaintance  of  a  man  named  Bruce 
Miller,  becoming  attached  to  him;  that  upon  his  return  her  manner 
changed,  and  that  she  threatened  in  outbursts  of  temper  to  leave  him  and 
go  to  Bruce  Miller;  and  that  she  had  said  that  when  she  left  him  she 
would  pass  altogether  out  of  his  life,  and  that  he  would  never  hear  from 
her  again.  He  went  on  to  say  that  because  of  a  lack  of  courtesy  to  Mr. 
Martinetti  at  the  dinner  party  on  31st  January  his  wife  said  that  this 
was  the  finish  of  it,  that  she  would  go,  and  that  he  could  do  what  he 
thought  best  to  cover  up  the  scandal  with  the  Guild  and  their  mutual 
friends.  On  1st  February  he  returned  from  business  to  find  his  wife 
gone,  and  then  he  said  that  he  sat  down  to  think  how  he  could  account 
for  her  absence.  Crippen  in  this  statement  said  that  he  had  never  pawned 
any  of  hia  wife's  jewels.  That  he  must  have  known  to  be  false,  as  were 
also  the  statements  which  he  gave  to  account  for  his  wife's  disappearance. 
He  said  that  she  had  gone  to  join  Bruce  Miller.  Bruce  Miller  would  be 
called,  and  he  would  say  that  he  had  not  seen  Belle  Elmore  since  1904. 

Almost  while  he  was  in  the  act  of  making  those  statements  in  order 
to  gain  a  few  hours'  delay  from  the  police  officer  who  was  making  the 
inquiries,  the  prisoner  was  preparing  for  flight.  The  jury  had  to  ask 
themselves  why  Crippen  left,  what  it  was  he  had  to  fear  if  his  statement 
was  true,  that  as  far  as  he  knew,  Belle  Elmore  was  alive.  If  that  statement 
was  true  he  had  nothing  to  fear.  He  had  nothing  to  fly  from.  But  he 
fled.  What  he  fled  from  was  found  on  13th  July,  when  under  the  brick 
floor  in  the  cellar  of  the  house  in  Hilldrop  Crescent  where  Belle  Elmore 
was  last  seen  alive  on  1st  February,  where  she  was  left  alone  at  half- past 
one  in  the  morning  of  that  day  with  the  prisoner,  the  police  found  human 
remains.  It  would  be  for  the  jury  to  say  whether  that  was  what  Crippen 
had  fled  from. 

Whose  were  the  remains  so  found?  On  14th  July  they  were  care- 
fully examined  where  they  lay  in  the  cellar  by  Mr.  Pepper,  the  eminent 
surgeon,  and  by  Dr.  Marshall,  the  police  surgeon;  and,  having  been 
examined  so  that  those  gentlemen  were  able  to  speak  to  the  position  of 
things  as  then  existing,  those  human  remains  and  some  other  things  that 

5 


Mr.  Muir 


Hawley  Harvey  Crippen. 


were  found  with  them  were  removed  to  the  mortuary,  and  there  they  were 
subjected  to  a  critical  examination.  The  remains  were  headless,  limb- 
less, and  boneless,  and  the  sex  could  not  be  certainly  determined  on 
anatomical  grounds.  But  some  Hinde's  curlers,  with  long  human  hair 
in  them,  and  some  feminine  under-garments  might  be  said  to  indicate  that 
the  remains  were  those  of  a  woman.  On  the  other  hand,  there  were 
also  in  that  grave  with  the  remains  some  pieces  of  a  man's  pyjama  suit 
and  a  large  handkerchief  which  was  probably  not  a  woman's.  The 
identification  of  the  remains  was  almost  impossible ;  but  there  were  certain 
indications.  The  human  hair  in  the  Hinde's  curlers  was  naturally  a  dark 
brown,  and  it  had  been  bleached  to  a  lighter  colour.  Belle  Elmore's  hair 
was  a  dark  brown,  and  she  was  in  the  habit  of  bleaching  it  to  a  lighter 
colour.  Those  facts  were  undoubtedly  true  of  many  other  women  besides 
Belle  Elmore.  The  under-garments  had  been  seen  by  some  of  Belle 
Elmore's  friends,  and  they  were  such  as  Belle  Elmore  was  in  the  habit 
of  wearing,  but  they  were  also  such  as  many  other  women  besides  Belle 
Elmore  would  wear.  One  piece  of  flesh  was  identified  as  coming  from 
the  lower  part  of  the  abdominal  wall,  and  it  had  upon  it  an  old  scar. 
Belle  Elmore  was,  in  fact,  operated  upon  in  that  region  in  1892  or  1893, 
and  the  scar  remained  upon  her  body  up  to  the  time  of  her  death,  and 
was  seen  by  two  persons  who  would  be  called.  The  place  of  burial  was 
significant.  It  was  in  the  house  occupied  by  Crippen  and  Belle  Elmore 
together  from  21st  September,  1905,  up  to  1st  February,  1910,  and  by 
nobody  else,  and  in  the  house  where  Belle  Elmore  was  last  seen  alive 
alone  with  the  prisoner.  Upon  those  facts  it  was  for  the  jury  to  say  whether 
they  were  satisfied  that  those  remains  were  the  remains,  and  could  only  be 
the  remains,  of  the  missing  woman  Belle  Elmore. 

Another  question  that  the  jury  would  have  seriously  to  consider  was, 
who  put  the  remains  where  they  were  found?  In  endeavouring  to  answer 
that  question  they  would  ask  themselves,  who  but  Crippen  had.  the  oppor- 
tunity to  put  them  there,  if  the  surgeons  were  accurate  as  to  the  date  of 
the  burial — some  period  of  between  eight  months  at  the  longest  and  four 
months  at  the  shortest?  Belle  Elmore  disappeared  on  1st  February,  five 
and  a  half  months  before  13th  July,  when  the  remains  were  unearthed. 
The  remains  were  mutilated  in  a  way  which  indicated  to  the  skilled  mind 
of  the  surgeon  that  the  person  who  did  it  had  some  acquaintance  with 
anatomy  and  some  dexterity  in  dealing  with  the  dead  bodies  of  either 
human  beings  or  other  animals.  Crippen  had  a  very  good  degree;  he 
practised  in  America,  and,  according  to  his  own  statement,  before  he  took 
his  degree  in  America  he  spent  some  time  in  London  visiting  the  hos- 
pitals. The  putting  of  the  remains  in  the  place  desciibed  and  the  pre- 
paring of  the  hole  in  the  cellar  was  an  operation  which  would  require  both 
considerable  time  and  entire  freedom  from  observation.  And  from  1st 
February  onwards  for  some  considerable  time  Crippen  was  alone  in  the 
house.  There  were  grounds  for  saying  that  the  pieces  of  a  pyjama  jacket 
found  with  the  remains  belonged  to  Crippen.  That  was  what  Crippen 
leit  behind  when  he  fled  on  9th  July. 

The  prisoner  was  not  seen  again  by  Inspector  Dew  until  31st  July. 
Counsel  narrated  the  story  of  the  pursuit  of  Crippen  across  the  Atlantic- 

6 


Opening  Statement  for  the  Crown. 

Mr.  Muir 

to  Canada  and  his  arrest  on  board  the  steamship  "  Montrose,"  pointing 
out  that  Crippen  was  found  with  his  heavy  moustache  shaved  off  and 
passing  under  the  false  name  of  John  Robinson,  while  his  companion,  Ethel 
Le  Neve,  was  found  disguised  as  a  boy,  with  her  hair  cut,  and  wearing 
the  brown  suit  which  had  been  purchased  by  Crippen's  orders  on  the 
morning  of  9th  July  when  he  was  preparing  for  flight.  When  told  by 
the  inspector  that  he  would  be  arrested  for  the  murder  of  his  wife  he  at 
first  made  no  reply,  but  a  little  later  he  said,  "  I  am  not  sorry;  the 
anxiety  has  been  too  much."  He  wast  searched,  and  on  him  were  found 
two  cards,  one  of  which  claimed  their  attention.  This  was  a  card  which 
he  had  obviously  had  printed  for  the  purpose  of  disguising  himself 
under  a  false  name.  It  bore  the  name  of  John  Robinson  and  an  address 
at  Detroit.  On  the  back  was  written  a  message  obviously  intended  by 
him  to  be  left  somewhere  for  Misis  Le  Neve.  It  ran,  "  I  cannot  stand  the 
horror  I  go  through  every  night  any  longer,  and  as  I  see  nothing  bright 
ahead  and  money  has  come  to  an  end  I  have  made  up  my  mind  to  jump 
overboard  to-night.  I  know  I  have  spoiled  your  life,  but  I — but  I  hope 
some  day  you  can  learn  to  forgive  me.  With  words  of  love,  your  H." 
One  other  statement  the  prisoner  made  at  that  time  counsel  called  atten- 
tion to.  Inspector  Dew  handcuffed  him,  and  on  explaining  that  this  was 
recessary  on  account  of  the  threat  that  he  would  jump  overboard,  Crippen 
said,  "  I  won't.  I  am  more  than  satisfied,  because  the  anxiety  has  ."been 
too  awful."  On  being  further  searched  by  the  chief  inspector,  he  asked, 
"  How  is  Miss  Le  Neve?  "  adding,  "  It  is  only  fair  to  say  that  she  knows 
nothing  about  it.  I  never  told  her  anything."  The  result  of  the  search 
was  that  there  were  found  sewn  to  his  undervest  four  of  Belle  Elmore's 
rings  and  two  of  her  brooches. 

On  the  return  voyage  on  board  the  "  Megantic,"  Inspector  Dew, 
having  his  prisoner  on  what  was  for  his  purpose  British  territory,  read 
to  him  the  warrant.  All  that  Crippen  did  was  to  signify  that  he  under- 
stood, saying,  "  Right."  On  24th  August  Crippen  made  a  request  to 
see  Miss  Le  Neve  when  he  was  taken  off  the  ship.  He  said,  "  I  do  not 
know  how  things  will  go.  They  may  go  all  right,  or  they  may  go  all 
wrong  with  me;  I  may  never  see  her  again,  and  I  want  to  ask  you, 
if  you  will,  to  let  me  see  her,  but  I  won't  speak  to  her.  She  has  been 
my  only  comfort  for  the  last  three  years."  He  did,  in  fact,  see  her  in 
the  train  on  the  way  from  Liverpool  to  London.  On  four  occasions — 
on  the  day  of  his  arrest  on  31st  July,  on  the  day  when  the  warrant  waa 
read  to  him,  21st  August,  on  27th  August  when  he  was  charged  at  Bow 
Street,  and  on  21st  September,  when  he  was  committed  for  trial — oppor- 
tunities were  given  to  him  to  offer  any  explanation  of  his  flight  if  he  had 
any  to  offer,  and  he  did  not  avail  himself  of  them.  Therefore  the  fact 
remained  that  up  to  this  hour  Crippen  had  never  offered  to  any  police  officer 
or  any  magistrate  any  explanation  at  all  of  his  flight. 

He  paused  at  .this  moment  just  to  recall  to  the  minds  of  the  jury 
what  the  case  against  Crippen  was,  resting  there.  There  was  on  31st 
January  a  motive,  as  he  had  explained,  to  get  rid  of  his  wife  in  order 
that  he  might  consort  with  Ethel  Le  Neve.  There  was  the  fact  of  the 
total  disappearance  of  Belle  Elmore;  the  fact  that  Crippen  was  the  only 

7 


Hawley  Harvey  Crippen. 


Mr.  Muir 


person  who  professed  to  be  able  to  account  for  her  disappearance.  His 
first  account  was  admittedly  false;  his  second  was  followed  by  immediate 
flight.  The  human  remains  found  in  the  cellar;  the  jjyiama  jacket^ 
found  with  them;  the  remains  mutilated  by  a  persoifpossessed  of  such 
knowledge  and  skill  as  Crippen  might  be  presumed  to  be  possessed  of. 
And  if  the  case  rested  there,  whose  could  those  human  remains  be  but 
the  remains  of  Belle  Elmore,  and  who  but  Crippen  could  have  put  them 
there? 

There  was  a  further  piece  of  evidence  which  would  be  placed  before 
the  jury.  How  did  Belle  Elmore,  if  it  was  Belle  Elmore,  meet  her 
death?  How  did  the  person  whose  human  remains  were  found  in  the 
cellar  come  to  die?  Examined  by  a  skilled  surgeon  by  post-mortem 
examination,  no  cause  of  death  was  discoverable  in  the  remains.  But 
the  viscera  were  submitted  to  Dr.  Willcox,  the  senior  scientific  analyst 
to  the  Home  Office,,  for  analysis,  and  as  the  result  of  his  tests  Dr.  Willcox 
found  a  quantity  of  hyoscin,  sufficient  to  show  him  that  there  must  have 
been  in  the  body  of  the  person  whose  remains  these  were  more  than  half 
a  grain  of  hyoscin  hydrobromide,  which  was  the  form  in  which  hyoscin 
was  used  for  medicinal  purposes.  The  drug  was  a  powerful  narcotic 
poison,  but  was  not  commonly  prescribed.  The  form  in  which  it  was 
ordinarily  sold  for  use  by  medical  men  was  in  tabloids,  which  could  be 
dissolved  and  used  by  injection.  The  official  dose  was  from  a  two-hundredth 
to  a  one-hundredth  of  a  grain.  From  a  quarter  to  half  a  grain  was  a  fatal 
dose.  Dr.  Willcox  found  in  this  body  indications  that  more  than  a  fatal 
dose  of  this  deadly  poison  had  in  some  way  been  taken  by  the  person 
when  alive,  and,  from  the  distribution  of  the  poison  in  the  organs,  that 
it  had  been  taken  by  the  mouth,  and  that  the  person  had  lived  more 
than  an  hour  afterwards.  There  was  nothing  in  the  viscera  to  account 
for  death  except  hyoscin,  and  in  the  opinion  of  Dr.  Willcox  the  cause 
of  death  was  hyoscin,  administered  by  the  mouth.  Hyoscin  could  be 
taken  in  sweetened  tea  and  coffee  without  its  presence  being  detected. 

What  was  the  cause  of  death  in  this  case  ?  Was  it  a  natural  death  ? 
It  seemed  a  preposterous  question  in  view  of  the  facts  that  they  now 
knew.  Would  the  remains  have  been  buried  where  they  were  if  the 
person  when  alive  had  died  a  natural  death?  Was  that  death  the  result 
of  a  criminal  act  by  some  person?  Again,  that  seemed  a  preposterous 
question  to  ask  in  view  of  the  state  of  the  remains  when  found.  What 
reason,  other  than  the  reason  that  a  criminal  desired  to  remove  the 
evidence  of  his  crime,  would  account  for  the  state  of  the  remains  in  which 
they  were  found — every  bone  removed,  the  head  gone,  indications  of  sex 
excised  and  taken  away?  If  they  were  satisfied  that  the  person,  whoever 
it  was,  whose  remains  were  found  in  the  cellar  died  from  hyoscin  poison- 
ing, who  administered  the  drug?  Belle  Elmore,  full  of  life,  and  the 
enjoyment  of  life,  the  good  of  life,  was  not  likely  to  commit  suicide,  and 
if  she  had  done  so  no  one  was  likely  to  mutilate  her  remains.  Of  this 
drug  not  commonly  known  and  not  commonly  used  even  by  medical  men, 
Crippen,  on  17th  January,  1910,  bought  five  grains,  which  were  delivered 
to  him  on  19th  January.  He  ordered  it  from  Messrs.  Lewis  <t  Burrows, 
a  firm  of  chemists  in  a  large  way  of  business,  who  in  the  last  three  years 

8 


Opening  Statement  for  the  Crown. 

Mr.  Mulr 

had  never  had  before  such  a  quantity  in  their  possession.  Crippen,  himself 
a  customer  for  the  preceding  ten  months,  had  never  before  ordered  a 
fraction  of  a  grain  of  hyoscin  hydrobromide  from  Messrs.  Lewis  &  Burrows. 
Crippen  had  to  sign  the  poisons  book,  and  in  that  he  had  to  state  for  whom 
the  drug  was  required  and  for  what  purpose.  He  made  false  statements 
in  both  instances.  He  said  the  drug  was  required  for  Munyons,  which 
was  untrue,  because  Munyons  made  no  preparations  in  this  country;  he  also 
said  he  wanted  it  for  homoeopathic  purposes,  but  the  drug  hyoscin  hydro- 
bromide  was  not  mentioned  in  the  Homoeopathic  Pharmacopoeia.  What 
had  become  of  it?  Unless*  it  went  into  the  body  of  Belle  Elmore,  and  unless 
the  remains  were  those  of  Belle  Elmore,  no  explanation  was  forthcoming 
at  all  as  to  what  became  of  the  poison. 

He  had  opened  the  case  in  so  much  detail  in  order  that  the  jury 
might  be  able  to  appreciate  the  evidence  as  it  would  be  given  before  them 
piecemeal.  While  that  evidence  was  being  given  he  asked  them,  in  the 
interests  of  the  duty  they  had  to  perform,  the  interests  of  justice,  to  keep 
in  their  minds  these  questions — What  had  become  of  Belle  Elmore?  Whose 
remains  were  those  in  that  cellar?  If  they  were  Belle  Elmore's,  what 
explanation  of  their  being  found  in  that  place  was  there,  mutilated  as  they 
were?  Keeping  these  questions  before  their  minds  he  thought  they  would 
be  able  to  apply  the  evidence  to  their  verdict  when  the  time  came. 


Evidence  for  the  Prosecution. 

FREDERICK  LOWN,  examined  by  Mr.  TRAVERS  HUMPHREYS — I  reside  at 
12  Ashbrook  Road,  Highgate.  I  am  the  owner  of  the  house,  39  Hilldrop 
Crescent,  Camden  Road.  I  know  Crippen  the  prisoner.  I  produce  exhibit 
55,  being  an  agreement  in  which  I  let  to  the  prisoner  the  house,  39  Hilldrop 
Crescent,  on  21st  September,  1905,  for  three  years,  at  a  rent  of  £52  lOa. 
per  .annum.  After  three  years  the  tenancy  continued  from  year  to  year. 
The  agreement  is  signed  "  Hawley  Harvey  Crippen."  At  th©  expiration  of 
the  agreement  the  prisoner  continued  to  live  in  the  house.  The  rent  was 
paid  to  me  very  regularly  after  it  was  due.  On  16th  March  of  this  year 
I  went  and  saw  the  prisoner  at  his  house,  when  he  told  me  that  he  wished 
to  leave  the  house  in  three  months'  time,  because  he  had  had  property  left 
him  in  America.  He  said  that  he  was  unable  to  go  to  America  himself,  and 
his  wife  was  going  out  to  attend  to  the  business  for  him. 

Did  he  tell  you  that  his  wife  was  going  to  America,  or  had  gone? — 
He  told  me  that  his  wife  had  gone.  I  asked  for  a  written  notice,  and  I 
received  the  letter  (exhibit  56)  from  the  prisoner,  on  which  I  endorsed  on 
the  back  the  date  when  I  got  it,  22nd  March.  That  letter  reads — 

Gentlemen, — In  accordance  with  our  present  agreement,  please  accept  this 
as  a  formal  quarter's  notice  that  I  shall  give  up  my  tenancy  of  Hilldrop 
Crescent  N.,  on  June  24th,  1910.  I  have  to  thank  you  for  the  many  courtesies 
rendered  to  me  in  the  past,  and  I  hope  that  I  shall  succeed  in  securing  a  tenant 
for  you  to  succeed  me  as  discussed  in  my  conversation  with  your  Mr.  Frederick 
Lown  a  few  days  ago.  With  compliments,  I  am,  faithfully  yours, 

H.  H.  CRIPPEN. 
9 


Hawley   Harvey  Crippen. 

Frederick  Lown 

The  prisoner  called  upon  me  at  my  house  afterwards  between  17th  and  20th 
June,  and  arranged  with  me  to  stay  on  in  the  house  until  29th  September. 
On  that  occasion  I  asked  him  how  his  wife  was,  and  he  told  me  that  she 
was  dead.  I  believe  he  said  she  had  died  in  New  York,  bait  I  cannot  say 
for  certain;  it  was  in  America. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  TOBIN  —  The  rent  was  paid  regularly.  There 
might  be  a  delay  of  a  week  or  so  in  the  payment  of  the  quarterly  rent, 
but  just  the  usual  time  —  there  was  nothing  unusual  as  to  time.  When 
I  saw  the  accused  in  March,  1910,  it  was  in  his  own  house  in  Hilldrop 
Crescent.  He  was  alone  as  far  as  I  knew. 

Did  he  show  the  least  sign  of  anxiety  or  agitation?  —  No,  I  do  not 
think  so;  I  do  not  remember. 

Any  sign  of  being  harasised  in  any  way?  —  No. 

Any  indication  that  he  had  anything  on  his  mind?  —  Not  as  far  as  I 
could  judge. 

The  same  remarks  will  apply  to  the  interview  you  had  with  him  about 
17th  June?  —  Well,  I  could  not  quite  say  that.  On  that  occasion,  when  I 
asked  the  accused  after  his  wife's  health,  when  he  told  me  that  he  certainly 
seemed  to  be  a  little  bit  - 

When  he  told  you  that  his  wife  had  died  he  then  seemed  a  bit  agitated  ? 


I  mean  as  a  man  might  well  be  if  he  really  cared  for  his  wife  and  if 
in  truth  she  had  died  —  that  kind  of  look?  —  Well,  I  could  not  say  anything 
about  that. 

Can  you  describe  it  in  any  way  ?  —  I  cannot  describe  it  any  further  than 
I  have  done.  I  went  to  Hilldrop  Crescent  in  March  casually;  he  had  not 
written  asking  me  to  come. 

Dr.  JOHN  HERBERT  BURROUGHS,  examined  by  Mr.  INGLEBY  ODDIB  —  I  am 
a  doctor,  and  live  at  169  City  Road.  I  know  the  accused,  and  I  also  knew 
his  wife.  I  first  met  him  in  1902.  He  was  then  living  with  his  wife  in 
Store  Street.  I  knew  his  wife  as  Mrs.  Crippen,  and  also  by  her  professional 
name,  Miss  Belle  Elmore.  I  believe  that  she  was  occasionally  appearing 
at  a  music  hall  at  that  time.  I  was  friendly  with  both  of  them,  and  then 
I  lost  sight  of  them  for  a  time.  I  think  it  must  have  been  about  1904  when 
I  met  them  again.  They  were  istill  living  at  Store  Street  then.  I  remem- 
ber their  moving  to  Hilldrop  Crescent  about  1905.  My  wife  and  I  visited 
them  there  from  time  to  time. 

What  kind  of  woman  was  Mrs.  Crippen  ?  —  She  was  a  vivacious  woman, 
I  should  say  about  thirty  years  of  age,  bright  and  cheerful,  a  very  pleasant 
woman  generally.  She  was  very  fond  of  dress,  and  dressed  very  well 
indeed.  At  times  she  wore  a  quantity  of  jewellery.  As  far  a.g  I  know,  she 
was  in  the  very  best  of  health.  She  was  a  stoutish  woman. 

Did  she  and  her  husband  seem  to  be  well  off  at  Hilldrop  Crescent?  —  They 
lived  very  well  ;  they  seemed  to  lack  nothing.  I  do  not  think  they  had  a 
servant,  at  least  never  when  I  was  there.  They  occasionally  had  a  char- 
woman. 

They  always  seemed  to  be  on  good  terms?  —  Oh,  yes.  As  far  aa  I  can 
remember  I  last  saw  Mrs.  Crippen  alive  in  the  beginning  of  January  of 
1  > 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Dr.  J.  H.  Burroughs 

this  year,  at  a  meeting  of  the  Music  Hall  Guild.  I  am  the  honorary 
physician  to  the  Guild.  I  believe  the  committee  meet  every  Wednesday  at 
Albion  House.  When  I  last  saw  Mrs.  Crippen  she  appeared  to  be  in  her 
usual  health.  I  identify  exhibits  28  and  29  as  photographs  of  Mrs.  Crippen. 
The  photograph  No.  29  was  taken  very  shortly  after  the  annual  dinner  of 
the  Music  Hall  Guild  in  September,  1909.  I  cannot  tell  when  the  other 
^photograph  was  taken.  The  photograph  No.  29  is  a  specially  good  like- 
ness. About  eight  or  nine  persons  would  attend  the  committee  meetings 
of  the  Guild  on  the  Wednesday  afternoons.  I  first  heard  of  Mrs.  Crippen's 
death  from  Mrs.  Martinetti  in  March,  and  in  consequence  of  what  I  heard 
I  wrote  a  letter  to  the  accused,  of  which  exhibit  No.  30  is  a  copy.  That 
letter  is  dated  7th  April,  1910,  and  it  is  as  follows :  — 

••  -j 

Dear  Peter, — Both  Maud  and  myself  were  inexpressibly  shocked  and  astounded 
to  learn  of  poor  Belle's  death.  We  hasten  to  send  our  very  heartfelt  condolences 
on  your  great  loss.  As  two  of  her  oldest  friends,  why  ever  did  not  you  send 
us  a  line?  Do  please  give  us  some  details  of  how  and  where  she  died.  Maud 
is  very  much  upset,  and  so  anxious  to  hear.  Only  quite  casually  we  heard  she 
had  suddenly  left  for  America,  and  were  daily  expecting  a  letter  or  a  card  from 
her.  Maud  could  not  understand  it,  as  Belle  always  wrote  her  on  such  important 
occasions,  so  could  only  think  Belle  wanted  to  cut  all  her  old  friends.  And 
now  to  learn  she  is  no  more.  It  is  all  so  sudden  that  one  hardly  realises  the 
fact.  We  should  so  like  to  send  a  letter  of  condolence  to  her  sister,  of  whom 
she  was  so  fond,  if  you  would  kindly  supply  her  address. — Yours  sincerely, 

J.    H.  B. 

I  knew  the  accused  by  the  name  of  "  Peter."  "  Maud  "  is  my  wife.  The 
sister  to  whom  I  was  referring1  was  one  of  whom  Mrs.  Crippen  was  very 
fond ;  I  believe  her  name  was  Tessa,  and  she  lived  somewhere  in  America — 
in  New  York,  I  understood.  In  reply  to  that  letter  I  received  the  letter, 
exhibit  31,  dated  6th  April,  from  Albion  House:  — 

My  dear  Doctory— I  feel  sure  you  will  forgive  me  for  my  apparent  neglect, 
but  really  I  have  been  nearly  out  of  my  mind  with  poor  Belle's  death  so  far 
away.  She  was  not  with  her  sister,  but  out  in  California  on  business  for  ine, 
and,  quite  like  her  disposition,  would  keep  up  when  she  should  have  been  in 
bed,  with  the  consequence  that  pleuro-pneumonia  terminated  fatally.  Almost 
to  the  last  she  refused  to  let  me  know  there  was  any  danger,  so  that  the  cable 
that  she  had  gone  came  as  a  most  awful  shock  to  me.  I  fear  I  have  sadly 
neglected  my  friends,  but  pray  forgive,  and  believe  me  most  truly  appreciative 
of  your  sympathy.  Even  now  I  am  not  fit  to  talk  to  my  friends,  but  as  Boon 
as  I  feel  I  can  control  myself  I  will  run  in  on  you  and  Maud  one  evening.  I 
am,  of  course,  giving  up  the  house,  and  every  night  packing  things  away.  With 
love  to  both,  and  again  thanking  you  for  your  kindness,  I  am,  as  ever,  yours, 

PETEE. 

That  letter  is  written  on  ordinary  black-edged  mourning  paper.  I  have 
not  seen  anything  of  the  accused  since  then,  except  in  Court. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  HUNTLY  JENKINS — I  had  known  Dr.  Crippen  and 
his  wife  for  the  past  eight  years  and  I  have  seen  them  off  and  on  for  the 
last  six  years. 

You  have  had  conversations  with  Dr.  Crippen  a®  regards  hisi  profes- 
sion?— I  have  discussed  professional  matters  at  times  probably. 

Did  he  tell  you  that  ho  made  a  specialty  of  the  ear,  the  eye,  and  the 
nosef — Yes. 

And  that  he  had  not  acted  as  a  general  practitioner? — Certainly.  He 

11 


Hawley  Harvey   Crippen. 

Dr.  J.  H.  Burroughs 

told  me  that  some  considerable  time  ago,  in  the  early  stages  of  our 
acquaintanceship. 

You  had  an  opportunity  of  observing  his  manner  towards  his  wife, 
had  you  not? — Yes. 

Would  you  describe  him  as  a  kind-hearted,  well-mannered  man? — 
He  always  appeared  exceedingly  kind-hearted  and  courteous  towards  his 
wife. 

Always  wilHng  to  render  her  any  little  service  he  could  ? — Certainly. 

Would  you  describe  Mrs.  Crippen  as  a  well-dressed  woman? — Yes, 
certainly.  She  was  of  smart  appearance,  and  always  tidily  and  neatly 
dressed — at  all  events  outside,  not  so  much  indoors,  of  course.  I  would 
call  her  a  smart  woman,  and  a  woman  of  neat  appearance. 

Have  you  noticed  at  times  that  she  was  sometimes  hasty  in  her  manner 
towards  Dr.  Crippen  ? — Yes,  at  times,  somewhat  hasty. 

Mrs.  CLARA  MARTTNETTI,  examined  by  Mr.  TRAVERS  HUMPHREYS — I  live 
at  1  King  Edward's  Mansions',  Shaftesbury  Avenue,  with  my  husband, 
Mr.  Paul  Martinetti,  who  is  a  retired  music  hall  artiste.  I  first  made  the 
acquaintance  of  Dr.  and  Mrs.  Crippen  about  eighteen  months  ago,  and 
from  that  time  I  knew  Mrs.  Crippen  as  honorary  treasurer  of  the  Music 
Hall  Ladies'  Guild.  I  was  a  member  of  that  Guild,  and  we  had  our 
meetings  every  Wednesday  at  Albion  House,  New  Oxford  Street.  As 
honorary  treasurer  Mrs.  Crippen  always  attended. 

The  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — Has  Albion  House  any  other  connection 
with  the  case? 

Mr.  TRAVERS  HUMPHREYS — In  fact,  the  prisoner  had  his  business  there 
as  a  dentist,  as  well  as  Munyons  also. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — The  Guild  had  one  room  there  in  which 
they  met,  and  for  which  they  paid. 

Examination  continued — I  saw  Mrs.  Crippen  at  the  meetings  every 
Wednesday.  I  knew  her  and  her  husband  pretty  well.  I  used  to  go  and 
see  them  at  Hilldrop  Crescent,  and  they  came  to  see  me  and  my  husband 
at  our  flat.  The  last  time  I  saw  Mrs.  Crippen  was  on  Monday,  31st 
January  of  this  year.  I  saw  Mr.  Crippen  first  on  that  day  when  he  called 
at  my  flat  between  four  and  five  o'clock,  and  said  that  Belle  would  like 
us  to  come  and  have  dinner  with  them  that  evening.  I  said  that  I  did 
not  know  whether  we  could  go,  as  my  husband  Paul  had  gone  to  the  doctor, 
and  that  when  he  came  home  from  the  doctor  he  felt  rather  weak,  and  I 
did  not  think  he  would  care  to  go  out  afterwards.  Mr.  Crippen  said,  in 
reply  to  that,  "  Make  him  come;  it  will  cheer  him  up  if  we  have  a  game  of 
whist  afterwards."  I  did  not  give  any  decided  answer  then,  because  I  had 
to  wait  till  my  husband  came  home;  I  expected  him  home  about  six  o'clock. 
Mr.  Crippen  said  he  would  come  back,  and  then  he  left.  My  husband  came 
home  about  six  o  clock,  and  I  mentioned  the  invitation  to  him.  Mr.  Crippen 
came  back  about  the  same  time,  and  my  husband  agreed  to  go,  and,  in 
fact,  Le  and  I  went  to  39  Hilldrop  Crescent,  and  had  dinner  there  with 
Mr.  Crippen  and  his  wife.  We  arrived  there  about  eight  o'clock.  There 
were  just  the  four  of  us  there.  We  had  dinner  in  the  room  next  the 
kitchen;  it  is  really  called  the  breakfast  room,  but  it  is  their  dining  room. 
12 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Mrs.  C.  Martinetti 

The  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — Is  it  on  the  ground  floor  or  on  the  basement  1 

Mr.  TRAVERS  HUMPHREYS — It  is  the  level  of  the  garden;  the  other 
rooms  are  up  a  step. 

The  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — The  cellar  is  on  the  same  floor? 

Mr.  TRAVEKS  HUMPHREYS — On  the  same  floor. 

Examination  continued — There  was  no  servant  in  the  house.  Mrs. 
Crippen  herself  cooked  the  dinner,  and  I  helped  to  serve  it.  After  dinner 
we  went  upstairs  to  their  parlour,  which  was  above  the  room  which  we 
had  just  left,  and  began  our  game  of  whist.  I  helped  Mrs.  Crippen  to  clear 
away  the  dinner  things.  We  spent  the  evening  playing  cards,  and  we  left 
about  half -past  one.  It  was  quite  a  nice  evening. 

Was  there  any  quarrel  of  any  sort  that  you  saw  or  heard  during  the 
evening? — No,  I  saw  nothing. 

Was  your  husband  quite  well  during  the  evening  or  not? — Well,  he 
was  not  well  altogether  from  the  beginning,  you  see,  and  then  he  caught  a 
chill  there;  he  went  into  a  certain  room  where  there  was  a  window  open. 
When  we  left  at  1.30  Mrs.  Crippen  stood  at  the  top  of  the  steps,  and  I 
said  "  Good-night,  Belle,"  and,  of  course,  kissed  her;  she  wanted  to  come 
down  the  steps  with  me,  but  I  said,  "  Don't  come  down,  Belle,  you  will 
catch  a  cold." 

All  that  evening  did  she  seem  to  be  in  quite  good  health  ? — She  seemed 
so,  yes,  to  me. 

And  spirits? — She  was  quite  herself. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — Just  tell  us  what  sort  of  a  lady  Mrs. 
Crippen  was?  Was  she  always  bright  and  in  good  spirits? — Oh,  yes.  She 
was  very  jolly. 

Full  of  spirits,  you  mean? — Yes,  she  was  nice. 

On  this  evening  did  she  appear  to  you  to  be  well? — Oh,  yes,  she  was 
quite  well. 

Examination  continued — I  never  saw  her  again  after  that  night. 
Next  day,  1st  February,  I  saw  Mr.  Crippen  about  mid-day  when  he  called 
at  our  flat,  and  said,  "  How  rs  Paul?  "  I  said,  "Well,  he  is  not  worse, 
thank  God,  and  he  has  just  gone  into  a  nice  sleep  ;  if  you  don't  mind  I 
won't  waken  him."  My  husband  was  then  in  bed.  I  said  to  Mr. 
Crippen,  "  How  is  Belle?  "  and  he  said,  "  Oh,  she  is  all  right."  I  said, 
"  Give  her  my  love,"  and  he  said,  "  Yes,  I  will.  '  I  do  not  think  I  saw 
him  again  for  about  a  week  when  he  came  to  see  me  at  my  flat.  Before 
I  saw  him  I  heard  from  Miss  May  that  Miss  Elmore  had  left  for  America. 
When  Mr.  Crippen  came  I  said,  "  Well,  you're  a  nice  one;  Belle  gone  to 
America,  and  you  don't  let  us  know  anything  about  it.  Why  did  you 
not  send  us  a  wire?  I  would  have  liked  to  go  to  the  station  and  bring  some 
flowers."  He  said  there  had  not  been  any  time;  that  late  on  the  Tuesday 
night  they  received  a  cable  to  say  that  one  of  them  must  go  to  America, 
"  and  as  she  wanted  to  go  I  let  her  go."  He  said  he  had  to  look  out 
for  some  papers,  and  the  rest  of  the  night  they  did  the  packing.  I 
said,  ''Packing  and  crying,  I  suppose?"  He  said,  "Oh,  we  have  got 
past  that."  I  said,  "Did  she  take  all  her  clothes  with  her?"  He 
said,  "  One  basket."  I  said,  "  That  would  not  be  enough,  one  basket, 
to  go  all  that  way,"  or  something  like  that.  He  said,  "  She  can  buy 
D  13 


Hawley   Harvey  Crippen. 

Mrs.  C.  Martinettl 

something  more  over  there."  Then  I  said,  "Oh,  she  is  sure  to  send  me 
a  postcard  from  the  ship."  I  do  not  know  what  he  said  in  reply  to  that, 
but  I  think  he  nodded  his  head.  He  then  left  me.  He  called  again  about 
a  week  afterwards,  and  I  said  to  him  that  Belle  had  never  sent  me  a 
postcard,  adding,  "  I  suppose  she  will  write  when  she  gets  to  New  York; 
I  suppose  she  will  write  from  New  York."  He  said,  "  Oh,  she  does  not 
touch  New  York;  she  goes  straight  on  to  California."  I  again  saw  him 
some  days  after  that,  and  I  asked  him  if  he  had  heard  from  Belle,  but 
he  said  "No."  I  asked  him  if  he  was  going  to  the  ball  of  the  Music 
Hall  Ladies'  Benevolent  Fund,  and  he  said  that  he  did  not  think  so.  I 
said,  "If  you  want  to  go,  Paul  can  get  you  the  tickets  from  the  club  ; 
they  are  half  a  guinea  each,"  and  he  replied,  "  All  right,  I  will  take  two." 
I  attended  the  ball,  which  I  think  was  held  on  20th  February.  Mr. 
Crippen  was  there,  and  Miss  Le  Neve,  his  lady  typist,  was  along  with  him. 
A  lady  came  up  to  me,  and  after  she  had  spoken  to  me  I  looked  at  Miss  Le 
Neve  and  noticed  that  she  was  wearing  a  brooch  very  similar  to  the  brooch 
exhibit  11,  which  is  now  shown  to  me. 

The  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — It  is  a  sort  of  star,  gentlemen,  with 
apparent  brilliants. 

Examination  continued — When  you  saw  her  wearing  that  brooch, 
or  one  like  it,  did  you  recognise  it  as  one  that  you  had  seen  anybody  else 
wear? — Well,  I  only  thought  Belle  Elmore — I  only  thought  that  Mrs. 
Crippen  wore  it,  but  I  am  not  sure.  After  the  ball  Mr.  Crippen  called 
again  at  my  flat',  and  I  asked  him  if  he  had  not  heard  yet  from  Belle. 
He  said,  "  Yes,  and  I  cannot  make  it  out;  I  have  a  letter  from  my 
relations  to  say  that  she  is  very  ill,  and  had  something  the  matter  with 
one  of  her  lungs.  At  the  same  time  I  also  got  a  letter  from  Belle  to  say 
that  I  must  not  worry,  she  is  not  as  bad  as  they  say."  I  do  not  remember 
how  long  that  was  after  the  ball.  The  next  thing  I  heard  from  the  accused 
was  by  the  letter  exhibit  No.  32,  dated  Sunday,  20th  March.  That 
letter  is  as  follows  :  — 

Dear  Clara  and  Paul, — Please  forgive  me  not  running  in  during  the  week, 
but  I  have  really  been  so  upset  by  very  bad  news  from  Belle  that  1  did  rot 
feel  equal  to  talking  about  anything,  and  now  I  have  just  a  cable  saying  she  is 
so  dangerously  ill  with  double  pleuro-pneumonia  that  I  am  considering  if  I  had  not 
better  go  over  at  once.  I  do  not  want  to  worry  you  with  my  troubles,  but  I 
felt  I  must  explain  why  I  had  not  been  to  see  you.  I  will  try  and  run  in  during 
the  week  and  have  a  chat.  Hope  both  of  you  are  well.  With  love  and  best 
wishes. — Yours  sincerely,  PETER. 

I  saw  the  accused  again  on  the  Wednesday  before  Easter,  23rd  March, 
after  our  Guild  meeting.  Mrs.  Eugene  Stratton  and  I  came  downstairs 
and  met  Mr.  Crippen  at  the  big  door  at  the  entrance.  Mr.  Crippen  said 
that  he  had  a  cable  to  say  that  Belle  was  very  dangerously  ill,  and  he 
expected  another  every  minute  to  say  that  she  was  gone.  Then  he  said 
if  anything  should  happen  to  Belle  he  would  go  to  France  for  a  week, 
that  he  wanted  some  change  of  air.  I  got  a  telegram  next  morning, 
Thursday,  from  Victoria  Station — "  Belle  died  yesterday  at  six  o'clock. 
Please  'phone  to  Annie.  Shall  be  away  a  week.  Peter."  "Annie" 
is  Mrs.  Stratton.  Peter  is  the  name  I  knew  the  accused  by.  I  saw  him 
14 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Mrs.  C.  Martinetti 

on  the  Wednesday  after  Easter,  30th  March.  Mrs.  Smythson  and  I  went 
to  his  office  at  Albion  House  and  offered  our  condolence.  We  asked 
him  where  his  wife  had  died,  and  he  said  in  Los  Angelos  with  his  relations. 
I  asked  if  he  would  give  us  the  address,  because  the  Guild  wanted  to  send 
a  letter  of  sympathy  and  an  everlasting  wreath,  and  he  said  that  it  was 
not  necessary  to  do  so,  that  his  relations  did  not  know  what  the  Guild 
meant.  I  said,  "  Oh,  yes,  we  have  to  do  that,  we  would  like  to  do  it," 
and  then  he  said,  "  I  will  give  you  my  son's  address."  He  gave  his  son's 
address  to  Mrs.  Smythson,  but  I  do  not  remember  what  it  was.  I  said, 
"Was  your  son  with  her  when  she  died?"  and  he  said,  "Yes."  We 
did  not  have  any  more  conversation  then.  He  called  at  our  flat  some  time 
after  that — I  cannot  say  on  what  day.  I  said  something  about  Belle's 
funeral,  and  he  said,  "Oh,  she  is  not  going  to  be  buried;  she  is  going 
to  be  cremated,  and  I  am  going  to  have  the  ashes  sent  over." 

After  you  heard  from  Mr.  Crippen  of  his  wife's  death  did  you  ever 
go  tip  to  the  house  at  Hilldrop  Crescent? — Yes,  I  went  there  along  with 
Mrs.  Stratton  and  her  nephew.  Mrs.  Stratton's  nephew  knocked  at  the 
door.  We  were  in  a  taxi-cab,  and  Mr.  Crippen  came  down  and  spoke  to 
us  there.  We  asked  him  what  boat  Belle  left  by,  and  he  mentioned 
some  name  which  I  do  not  remember.  It  was  something  like  "  La 
Tourenne  "  or  "La  Touvee."1 

Do  you  remember  whether,  when  you  saw  him  at  any  other  times, 
he  told  you  anything  more  about  his  wife,  or  have  you  told  us  all? — I 
think  that  is  all.  I  have  seen  Mrs.  Crippen  in  furs;  I  know  I  have  seen 
her  in  two  sets  of  furs.  She  had  fox  furs.  (Shown  exhibit  18) — That  is  a 
foz  fur  muff.  I  have  seen  Mrs.  Crippen  with  a  muff  very  similar  to  that. 
When  she  wore  the  muff  she  also  had  the  fox  furs  round  her  neck.  (Shown 
exhibit  15) — That  is  like  the  cape  part  of  the  set  of  fox  furs. 

After  Mrs.  Crippen  disappeared  did  you  see  anybody  else  wearing 
a  set  exactly  like  that? — I  have  seen  Miss  Le  Neve.  I  only  saw  Miss  Le 
Neve  wearing  .such  a  set  on  one  occasion,  I  do  not  remember  when,  but 
it  was  after  I  had  heard  of  Belle  Elmore'e  death. 

Mr.  TOBIN — There  will  not  be  any  dispute  at  all  as  to  Miss  Le  Neve 
wearing  the  jewellery  and  furs  that  once  belonged  to  Mrs.  Crippen.  I 
say  that  in  order  to  save  time. 

The  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — I  am  much  obliged  to  you,  Mr.  Tobin. 

Examination  continued — In  the  summer  of  1909  Mrs.  Crippen  stayed 
with  me  in  my  bungalow  that  I  had  on  the  river.  When  she  was  staying 
with  me  I  saw  part  of  her  body  when  she  was  dressing  or  undressing,  and 
I  noticed  a  mark  on  the  lower  part  of  her  stomach.  It  was  right  in  the 
middle,  and  it  looked  to  me  to  be  the  mark  of  an  old  cut.  It  seemed 
to  be  a  little  darker  than  the  rest  of  the  skin.  It  would  be  about 
6  inches  long,  I  think. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  TOBIN — I  saw  her  navel.  I  knew  Mr.  and 
Mrs.  Crippen  for  about  eighteen  months.  Mr.  Crippen  came  often 
enough  to  my  flat  where  my  husband  and  I  were,  and  Mrs.  Crippen  also 
came  with  her  husband.  My  husband  and  I  often  enough  went  to  their 

1  "  La  Touraine,"  probably.— ED. 

15 


Hawley   Harvey  Crippen. 

Mrs.  C.  Martinetti 

house  in  Hilldrop  Crescent.  We  were  on  very  friendly  terms  with  them, 
and  we  liked  them  both. 

You  had  many  opportunities  no  doubt  of  judging  Dr.  Crippen's  char- 
acteristics as  regards  his  being  a  kind-hearted  man  apparently? — Yes. 

And  did  you  form  the  opinion  from  what  you  saw  of  him  and  heard 
him  say  and  the  way  he  acted,  that  he  was  a  kind-hearted  man  appar- 
ently 1 — Yes. 

You  liked  him  and  you  liked  his  wife? — Yes. 

And  your  husband  did,   too? — Yes. 

Did  he  seem  a  good-tempered  man  always? — He  seemed  so. 

Take  the  dining  party  on  the  Monday,  31st  January.  It  was  a 
happy  party  as  you  have  told  us — a  pleasant  party? — Yes. 

Everything  seemed  natural  about  it — everybody  talked  naturally? — 
Yes. 

You  did  not  notice  any  indication  of  Dr.  Crippen'e  manner  being 
different  from  usual  ? — I  did  not  notice  anything — I  have  not  noticed  it. 

You  never  thought  so  at  the  time? — I  have  not  noticed  it. 

It  struck  you,  did  it  not,  that  Dr.  Crippen' s  manner  was  just  the  same 
as  usual  at  that  dinner  party? — Yes. 

Happy,  talking,  and  all  that  kind  of  thing? — Yes.  During  that 
evening  my  husband,  who  had  been  unwell  and  in  the  doctor's  hands,  had 
occasion  to  go  to  the  lavatory  after  dinner.  He  went  out  of  the  room  by 
himself.  Next  day,  about  noon,  Dr.  Crippen  came  to  my  flat  by  himself. 

Was  his  manner  then  just  the  same  asi  it  had  been  during  the  eighteen 
months  that  you  had  known  him? — Yes. 

You  did  not  think  it  was  at  all  odd  that  Dr.  Crippen  should  call  on 
you  to  ask  after  your  husband,  who  had  been  in  the  doctor's  hands? — No. 

You  thought  it  was  quite  a  natural  thing  for  the  doctor  to  do? — Yes. 

And  when  he  came  and  asked  after  your  husband  on  the  next  day  at 
noon,  the  1st  February,  did  his  manner  seem  just  the  same  as  it  had 
always  been? — Yes,  it  did  to  me. 

No  sign  of  anxiety  or  fright  or  agitation? — No.  I  have  not  noticed 
anything. 

You  did  not  notice  anything  of  that  kind  ? — No. 

About  a  week  later  he  came  to  your  flat,  did  he  not,  and  you  said  to 
him,  "  You're  a  nice  one;  why  did  you  not  tell  me  that  your  wife  <vas 
going  off  to  America  "? — Yes. 

He  came  to  your  flat  on  several  occasions  between  the  dinner  party 
on  31st  January  and  the  Easter  time? — Yes. 

On  none  of  those  occasions  did  you  ever  notice  any  sign  of  his  being 
agitated,  upset,  or  frightened? — No. 

From  the  fact  that  he  came  to  your  flat  on  several  occasions  between 
the  dinner  party  and  the  Easter  time  he  never  showed,  I  suppose,  any 
desire  to  avoid  you  or  your  husband? — It  did  not  look  like  it. 

In  fact,  you  yourself  rather  pressed  him  a  little  to  go  to  the  ball  on 
20th  February,  did  you  not? — I  asked  him  if  he  would  go — I  think  I  said, 
"  Are  you  going?  "and  then  I  said,  "  If  you  want  to  go,  the  tickets  are 
half  a  guinea  each." 

That  was  a  place  where  he  knew  it  would  be  quite  likely  that  Miss 
16 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Mrs.  C.  Martinetti 

Le  Neve,  if  she  went  -with  him,  would  meet  a  great  many  of  Mrs.  Crippen's 
friends,  because  it  was  the  Guild  ball? — Yes. 

And  that  piece  of  jewellery  which  the  jury  have  seen  was  worn  quite 
openly,  I  suppose,  upon  the  bodice  of  her  dress? — Yes. 

Did  his  manner  at  the  ball  seem  just  the  same  as  usual? — To  me  it 
was  the  same.  I  never  saw  Mrs.  Crippen  doing  her  hair  at  my  bungalow. 
She  told  me  that  she  dyed  her  hair,  that  she  used  some  stuff  to  bleach  it 
a  little,  to  make  it  lighter.  I  would  siay  that  her  hair  when  she  dyed 
it  was  fair. 

Auburn? — Yes,  it  might  be  auburn,  a  kind  of  gold  coloured.  Her 
own  natural  hair  was  darker. 

Was  her  own  hair  dark  brown? — I  cannot  say  about  it  being  dark 
brown;  I  know  it  was  darker.  She  was  very  particular  about  dressing 
up  her  hair.  I  have  noticed  when  her  hair  was  a  little  untidy  from  taking 
her  hat  off  that  it  was  darker  at  the  roots. 

Looking  at  the  photograph,  apparently  she  did  not  wear  a  fringe? — 
She  wore  her  hair  thrown  over  like  this  (indicating).  It  is  like  when 
a  lady  brushes  her  hair  down  and  then  you  throw  it  over,  you  see,  and 
leave  it  with  a  puff — you  see. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — I  had  seen  Miss  Le  Neve  in  the  office 
before  the  ball.  I  might  have  heard  her  name  before  the  ball.  I  always 
called  her  the  typist,  and  when  I  saw  her  at  the  ball  I  recognised  her 
as  the  typist.  When  I  saw  the  scar  on  Mrs.  Crippen's  body  she  was 
wearing  a  dressing-gown  or  something  like  that.  I  had  never  seen  this 
mark  before,  and  when  I  saw  it  I  did  not  speak  to  her  about  it.  It 
caught  my  eye  as  being  what  might  be  called  a  substantial  mark  of  some- 
thing like  6  inches  long,  like  a  long  cut.  I  said  to  her,  "  Oh  Belle, 
does  that  sometimes  hurt  you?"  and  she  put  her  two  hands  to  it,  and 
said  "  No." 

Mrs.  LOUISE  SMTTHSON,  examined  by  Mr.  TRAVEBS  HUMPHREYS — I  live  at 
38  Plaistow  Road,  Brixton  Hill.  I  knew  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Crippen  for 
about  fifteen  months  I  should  think.  I  am  a  member  of  the  committee 
of  the  Music  Hall  Ladies'  Guild.  I  attended  a  meeting  of  the  committee 
on  Wednesday,  26th  January.  Mrs.  Crippen  was  present  and  seemed 
to  be  in  her  perfect  health  and  spirits.  I  attended  the  dinner  and  ball 
of  the  Music  Hall  Benevolent  Fund  on  20th  February.  I  saw  Mr.  Crippen 
there  along  with  Miss  Le  Neve,  his  typist.  I  knew  her  as  his  typist. 
She  was  wearing  a  brooch  similar  to  exhibit  1 1 . 

Mr.  TOBIN — I  do  not  dispute  that  it  was  Mrs.  Crippen's  brooch  that 
she  was  wearing. 

Examination  continued — In  the  course  of  the  evening  I  spoke  to  Mr. 
Crippen  and  asked  if  he  had  heard  from  his  wife  lately,  and  then  I  aaked 
for  her  address. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — When  I  asked  if  he  had  heard  from  hia 
wife  lately,  he  said,  "  Oh  yes,"  and  then  when  I  asked  for  her  address 
he  eaid  she  was  right  up  in  the  wilds  of  the  mountains  of  California. 

Examination  continued — I  then  said  to  him,  "  When  you  get  to  hear 
of  her  will  you  let  us  know?  "  and  he  said,  "  Yes,  when  she  has  a  settled 

17 


Hawley  Harvey  Crippen. 

Mrs.  L.  Smythson 

address  I  will  let  you  know."  Some  time  afterwards  he  gave  me  the 
address  of  his  son.  (Shown  exhibit  50) — I  identify  that  a-s  a  page  from 
The  Era  of  26th  March,  and  I  see  an  advertisement  there  in  the  column 
under  the  heading  of  "  Deaths,"  the  advertisement  being — "  Elmore, 
March  23rd.  In  California,  U.S.A.,  Miss  Belle  Elmore  (Mrs.  H.  H. 
Crippen)."  After  seeing  that — about  30th  March — I  went  to  Mr. 
Crippen's  office  along  with  Mrs.  Martinetti.  We  offered  him  our  sympathy, 
and  asked  him  if  he  would  kindly  give  us  the  address:  where  his  wife  died. 
He  told  us  it  was  quite  unnecessary  as  she  was  now  dead;  none  of  her 
friends  in  America  knew  of  the  Ladies'  Guild,  and  so  he  thought  it  was 
quite  unnecessary  to  give  us  the  address1.  We  then  said  we  were  very 
anxious  to  send  some  little  token  if  he  would  let  us  know  where  she  was 
to  be  buried.  He  said  that  was  also  unnecessary,  as  they  thought  of 
having  her  cremated,  and  the  ashes  would  be  brought  here,  and  we  could 
have  a  little  ceremony  here.  Mrs.  Martinetti  then  spoke  to  him  for  a 
few  minutes,  and  I  again  asked  him  for  the  address.  He  said,  "  I  will 
give  you  the  address  of  my  son,"  and  he  wrote  it  in  pencil  and  gave  it 
to  me.  (Shown  exhibit  37) — That  is  what  he  gave  me,  and  it  bears 
"  H.  0.  Crippen,  1427  N.  Hoover  Street,  Rural  Delivery,  Los  Angelos, 
California."  I  wrote  a  letter  and  a  postcard  to  that  address.  On 
24th  May,  during  my  absence  from  the  Guild,  Miss  May  received  a  letter. 
While  we  were  talking  to  Mr.  Crippen  on  30th  March  he  told  us  that  his 
son  was  present  when  Mrs.  Crippen  died.  We  asked  that  particularly. 
I  saw  Mr.  Crippen  again  on  Wednesday,  18th  May,  I  think  it  was,  in  a 
shop  in  Tottenham  Court  Road.  Miss  Le  Neve  was  with  him.  When 
ehe  saw  us  she  left  him,  and  went  out  of  the  shop.  I  went  over  and 
asked  him  if  he  had  heard  anything  more  about  his  wife's  funeral,  and 
he  said,  "  Yes,  it  is  all  over,  and  I  have  her  ashes  at  home." 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  ROOME — I  saw  Dr.  Crippen  and  Mrs.  Crippen 
together  about  eight  time®. 

Would  you  agree  that  Dr.  Crippen  seemed  always  a  good-tempered, 
kind-hearted  man? — Yes,  he  always  eeemed  so. 

Mrs.  TERESA  HUNN,  examined  by  Mr.  Mura — I  am  known  as  "  Tessie." 
I  am  the  sister  of  Belle  Elmore ;  she  was  older  than  me.  Her  maiden  name 
was  Cora  Mackamotzki,  and  at  home  she  was  known  as  Cora.  The 
first  time  I  saw  the  accused  was  when  he  came  to  my  father's  house  with 
my  sister  about  1892  or  1893.  My  sister  showed  me  a  wedding  card, 
but  the  accused  was  not  with  her  when  she  showed  me  it.  He  was  with 
her  when  she  spoke  to  me  about  his  having  married  her.  She  introduced 
him  to  my  father  and  mother  ae  her  husband. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — I  had  not  seen  him  before. 

Examination  continued — According  to  the  wedding  card  which  was 
shown  to  me  they  were  married  on  1st  September,  1892.  They  came  soon 
after  that  to  us,  and  then  they  left.  We  were  living  at  Long  Island,  and 
my  sister  went  to  New  York,  and  then  to  Philadelphia.  She  came  back 
to  New  York  a  few  months  after  her  marriage,  and  stopped  at  New 
York,  and  from  there  ehe  came  to  our  house.  At  that  time  I  saw  a  scar 
on  her  stomach;  it  was  not  all  healed,  it  was  fresh.  I  saw  that  scar 
again  seven  years  ago;  it  was  healed  much  better  then  than  it  was  the 
18 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Mrs.  Teresa  Hunn 

first  time  I  saw  it.  It  would  be  about  4  or  5  inches  long  and  about 
1  inch  wide,  but  I  could  not  quite  exactly  say.  It  was  more  a  cream 
colour  than  the  rest  of  her  skin,  and  paler  looking.  The  outside,  near 
the  flesh,  was  paler  than  the  centre  of  the  scar.  I  remember  on  15th 
April  of  this  year  my  half-sister,  Mrs.  Mills,  getting  a  letter  from  Dr. 
Crippen.  (Shown  letter  exhibit  No.  71) — My  half-sister  brought  that 
letter  to  my  home.  It  is  from  39  Hilldrop  Crescent,  N.  London, 
England,  and  it  is  written  on  black-edged  paper.  It  is  as  follows  :  — 

My  Dear  Louise  and  Robert, — I  hardly  know  how  to  write  to  you  of  my 
dreadful  loss.  The  shock  to  me  has  been  so  dreadful  that  I  am  hardly  able  to 
control  myself.  My  poor  Cora  is  gone,  and,  to  make  the  shock  to  me  more 
dreadful,  I  did  not  even  see  her  at  the  last.  A  few  weeks  ago  we  had  news  that 
an  old  relative  of  mine  in  California  was  dying,  and,  to  secure  important  pro- 
perty for  ourselves,  it  was  necessary  for  one  of  us  to  go  and  put  the  matter  into 
a  lawyer's  hands  at  once.  As  I  was  very  busy,  Cora  proposed  she  should  go, 
and  as  it  was  necessary  for  some  one  to  be  there  at  once,  she  would  go  straight 
through  from  here  to  California  without  stopping  at  all  and  then  return  by  way 
of  Brooklyn,  and  she  would  be  able  to  pay  all  of  you  a  long  visit.  Unfortunately, 
on  the  way  my  poor  Cora  caught  a  severe  cold,  and  not  having  while  travelling 
taken  proper  care  of  herself,  it  has  settled  on  her  lungs,  later  to  develop  into 
pleuro-pneumonia.  She  wished  not  to  frighten  me,  so  kept  writing  not  to  worry 
about  her  and  it  was  only  a  slight  matter,  and  the  next  I  heard  by  cable  was 
that  she  was  dangerously  ill,  and  two  days  later  after  I  cabled  to  know  should 
I  go  to  her  I  had  the  dreadful  news  that  she  had  passed  away.  Imagine  if  you 
can  the  dreadful  shock  to  me — never  more  to  see  my  Cora  alive  nor  hear  her  voice 
again.  She  is  being  sent  back  to  me,  and  I  shall  soon  have  what  is  left  of  her 
here.  Of  course,  I  am  giving  up  the  house ;  in  fact,  it  drives  me  mad  to  be  in 
it  alone,  and  I  will  sell  out  everything  in  a  few  days.  I  do  not  know  what  I 
shall  do,  but  probably  find  some  business  to  take  me  travelling  for  a  few  months 
until  I  can  recover  from  the  shock  a  little,  but  as  soon  as  I  have  a  settled 
address  again  I  will  write  again  to  you.  As  it  is  so  terrible  to  me  to  have  to  write 
this  dreadful  news,  will  you  please  tell  all  the  others  of  our  loss.  Love  to 
all.  Write  soon  again,  and  give  you  my  address  probably  next  in  France. 

From  DOCTOE. 

The  envelope  is  postmarked  "London,  W.C.,  10.30  a.m.,  7th  April, 
10,"  and  it  is  addressed  to  "  Mrs.  Robert  Mills,  o/o  Mr.  F.  Mackamotzki, 
Green  Street,  West  Avenue,  Brooklyn,  New  York."  Mr.  Mackamotzki 
is  my  stepfather.  I  did  not  see  that  letter  at  my  father's  house  before 
my  sister  brought  it  to  my  home. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  TOBIN — I  am  a  full  sister  of  Belle  Elmore. 
My  father's  name  was  Mackamotzki. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — My  mother  was  twice  married. 

Cross-examination  continued — Mackamotzki  was  my  sister's  maiden 
name.  My  father  was  a  Pole. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — The  second  time  I  saw  the  ecar  it  wag 
more  healed  than  the  first  time.  I  cannot  exactly  say  whether  it  was 
a  scar  resulting  from  an  operation  or  not,  but  I  know  it  was  a  ecar. 

BRUCE  MILLER,  examined  by  Mr.  Mum — I  am  a  real  estate  agent,  and 
live  at  East  Chicago,  Indiana,  U.S.A.  I  wae  formerly  engaged  in  the 
music  hall  profession,  and  I  came  to  England  to  follow  that  profession. 
While  I  was1  in  England  I  made  the  acquaintance  of  Belle  Elmore.  I  first 
met  her  some  time  in  the  month  of  December,  1899.  I  saw  her  for  the 
last  time  about  the  first  part  of  April  in  1904.  I  saw  her  then  at  37 
Store  Street,  London.  I  am  living  in  East  Chicago  now  with  my  wife 

19 


Hawley  Harvey   Crippen. 


Bruce  Miller 


and  child,  and  have  been  there  for  the  past  four  years.  I  waa  travelling 
when  I  first  went  there,  but  I  have  been  with  my  wife  ever  since. 

Has  there  been  any  proposition  at  all  that  Belle  Elmore  should  come 
out  to  you? — Never,  I  never  heard  of  such  a  thing. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — I  never  saw  Belle  Elmore  again  after 
April,  1904,  but  I  have  had  communication  with  her.  She  would  write 
to  me  about  three  or  four  times  a  year  perhapsi — always  on  Christmas, 
New  Year,  and  my  birthday.  She  wrote  me  good  wishes  and  that  sort 
of  thing. 

Cross- examined  by  Mr.  TOBIN — I  have  been  a.  real  estate  agent  since 
December,  1906.  I  became  an  estate  agent  because  I  was  tired  of  the  show 
business,  and  I  saw  a  chance  of  making  a  little  more  money.  I  was  not 
a  failure  on  the  music  hall  stage.  I  first  met  Mrs.  Crippen  at  a  house 
in  Torrington  Square,  London,  in  December,  1899.  Her  husband  was 
in  America  at  that  time,  so  far  as  I  understood.  I  do  not  know  how 
long  it  was  after  I  was  first  introduced  to  Mrs.  Crippen  that  her  husband, 
Dr.  Crippen,  came  back  from  America;  it  would  be  some  time  during  the 
spring,  about  the  time  of  the  opening  of  the  Paris  Exposition.  I  visited 
Mrs.  Crippen  very  often  at  the  house  where  she  was  living  during  her 
husband's  absence.  I  think  her  house  was  in  a  street  called  Guildford 
Street,  but  I  could  not  say  for  certain.  I  could  not  say  how  much  of  the 
house  she  had,  because  I  was  only  in  the  one  front  room.  I  would  visit 
her  two  or  three  times1  a  week  sometimes,  and  then  sometimes  I  would  not 
see  her  for  a  week  or  two  weeks  or  about  three  weeks.  I  visited  her 
sometimes1  in  the  afternoons  and  sometimes  in  the  evenings1.  When  I  first 
met  her  I  was  on  my  way  to  Paris  for  the  Paris  Exposition.  I  was  in 
Paris  for  about  eight  or  twelve  weeks,  and  I  was  there  about  the  time  Dr. 
Crippen  came  back  from  America. 

During  a  period  of  four  or  five  months  when  Dr.  Crippen  was  in 
America,  were  you  engaged  in  London  on  the  music  hall  stage? — I  was  not 
playing  on  the  stage  at  that  time. 

Were  you  earning  money? — No.  I  was  in  a  sort  of  partnership  with 
a  friend  of  mine,  and  he  was  furnishing  the  money  for  the  attractions 
at  that  time,  and  had  arranged  for  the  Paris  Exposition  and  some  Paris 
people — I  do  not  know  who  they  were,  they  were  French  people — who  were 
managing  the  attractions  at  the  other  end ;  it  was  a  sort  of  partnership 
affair.  While  I  was  in  Paris  I  wrote  to  Mrs.  Crippen,  but  not  very 
frequently — often  enough  to  be  sociable,  to  be  friends.  I  was  not 
writing  her  on  business ;  I  was  writing  her  in  friendship. 

Were  you  writing  to  her  as  a  lover? — No. 

Were  you  fond  of  her? — Yes. 

Did  you  ever  tell  her  that  you  loved  her? — Well,  I  do  not  know  that 
I  ever  put  it  in  that  way. 

Did  you  indicate  to  her  that  you  did  love  her? — She  always  under- 
etood  it  that  way,  I  suppose. 

Then  you  did  love  her,  I  presume? — I  do  not  mean  to  say  that.  1 
did  not  exactly  love  her ;  I  thought  a  great  deal  of  her  as  far  as  friendship 
was  concerned.  She  was  a  married  lady,  and  we  will  let  it  end  at  that. 
It  was  a  platonic  friendship. 

I  rather  gathered  from  the  answers  you  gave  me  that  you  communi- 
20 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Bruce  Miller 

cated  to  her  in  some  way  that  you  did  love  her  ? — A  little  present  once  in  a 
while  or  something  of  that  kind. 

Do  you  know  the  difference  between  friendship  and  love? — Yes. 

Were  you  more  than  a  friend? — I  could  not  be  more  than  a  friend. 
She  was  a  married  lady  and  I  was  a  married  man. 

Were  you  more  than  a  friend,  sir? — I  could  not  be  more  than  a 
friend — I  was  not. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — Answer  the  question  whether  you  were  or 
were  not? — I  was  not  more  than  a  friend. 

Were  there  any  improper  relations  between  you  and  her? — No. 

Cross-examination  continued — Did  you  ever  write  love  letters  to  her? 
— I  have  written  to  her  very  nice  letters  perhaps. 

You  know  what  a  love  letter  is.  Did  you  ever  write  a  love  letter 
to  her? — Well,  I  do  not  remember  that  I  ever  put  it  just  in  that  way.  I 
often  wrote  to  her  very  friendly  letters;  I  might  say  they  were  affectionate 
letters. 

Then  you  wrote  affectionate  letters  to  her.  Did  you  write  love  letters 
to  her? — Affectionate  letters. 

Ending  ' '  Love  and  kisses  to  Brown  Eyes  ' '  ? — I  have  done  so. 

Now,  sir,  do  you  think  those  are  proper  letters  to  write  to  a  married 
woman? — Under  the  circumstances,  yes. 

What  circumstances? — Because  Dr.  Crippen  always  knew  all  about 
it.  I  could  not  say  whether  it  was  from  France  that  I  wrote  those  letters, 
as  it  is  a  long  time  ago. 

You  told  the  jury  that  the  introduction  was  in  December,  1899,  and 
that  Dr.  Crippen  returned  from  America  about  May,  1900? — Yes. 

During  that  period  you  were  part  of  the  time  in  London  and  about 
twelve  weeks  in  Paris? — Yes. 

I  understand  you  wrote  letters  to  her  of  this  kind  when  you  were 
away? — Yes,  about  that  time. 

Why  did  you  say  then,  her  husband  being  in  America,  that  he  knew 
all  about  it? — I  did  not  say  when  he  knew  about  it.  He  knew  about  it 
when  he  came  back. 

You  do  not  suggest  he  knew  about  it  at  the  time  you  were  writing 
them? — That  I  do  not  know.  When  he  came  back  from  America  he 
knew  all  about  it. 

Do  you  agree  now  that  those  letters  were  most  improper  letters  to 
write  to  a  married  woman  during  her  husband's  absence? — I  do  not  think 
they  were,  under  the  circumstances. 

Were  you  her  lover,  sir? — I  was  not. 

Have  you  been  to  any  house  in  London  with  her  for  the  purpose  of 
illicit  relationship? — I  have  not. 

Bloomsbury  Street? — No  place. 

Have  you  ever  kissed  her? — I  have. 

Never  done  anything  more  than  kiss  her? — That  is  all. 

Why  did  you  stop  at  that  ? — Because  I  always  treated  her  as  a  gentle- 
man, and  never  went  any  further.  I  last  wrote  to  Mrs.  Crippen  some 
time  after  Easter  Sunday  of  the  present  year.  I  addressed  my  letter  to 
39  Hilldrop  Crescent.  I  did  not  get  any  answer.  I  also  wrote  to  her 
about  5th  January  of  this  year. 

21 


Hawley  Harvey  Crippen. 

Bruce  Miller 

Was  that  an  affectionate  letter? — I  do  not  remember.  I  think  it 
was  very  short,  because  I  had  not  heard  from  her  previous  to  that — only 
just  a  card.  I  cannot  be  positive  about  that,  it  being  quite  a  while  ago. 
I  was  writing  letters  to  her  during  the  year  1909. 

Were  those  affectionate  letters — "  Love  and  kisses  to  Brown  Eyes," 
and  that  kind  of  thing? — They  may  have  been.  Sometimes  I  wrote  to 
her  that  way,  and  sometimes  I  did  not. 

You  are  still  very  fond  of  her? — I  should  be  if  she  were  here.  We 
have  always  been  friends,  and  I  should  not  stop  now.  She  wrote  letters 
back  to  me. 

Were  her  letters  couched  in  the  same  kind  of  terms  as  your  letters 
to  her! — Perhaps  not  quite  so  endearing. 

But  still  they  were  sufficiently  endearing? — They  were  friendly;  they 
were  generally  very  short,  and  they  were  letters  that  my  wife  has  read. 
They  did  not  contain  endearing  terms  somewhat  similar  to  those  that  I 
used  when  writing  to  her. 

Never  ? — Never. 

Did  she  encourage  your  attentions? — My  attentions  were  not  of  the 
kind  you  are  perhaps  speaking  of. 

I  call  it  attentions  when  you  write  "  Love  and  kisses  to  Brown 
Eyes."  Did  she  discourage  those  expressions  in  your  letters? — She  did 
not,  because  they  were  not  expressed  as  you  want  to  interpret  them. 

Did  she  ever  write  back  saying  that  she  did  not  like  such  expressions? 
— She  never  did ;  she  did  not  say  anything  about  it  in  her  letters. 

Re-examined  by  Mr.  Mum — How  was  it  you  came  first  to  make  Belle 
Elmore's  acquaintance? — In  December,  1899,  a  friend  of  mine — a  music 
teacher — and  I  were  occupying  apartments  in  Torrington  Square.  Belle 
Elmore  was  dining  with  my  friend  one  evening,  and  he  introduced  me  to 
her.  I  merely  shook  hands  with  her  and  went  away.  I  visited  her  at 
37  Store  Street,  and  later  on  in  Guildford  Street  during  the  time  her 
husband  was  in  London.  I  gave  her  several  of  my  photographs.  One 
of  the  photographs  now  shown  to  me  was  set  on  a  piano  in  her  husband's 
house.  I  do  not  know  where  the  other  photograph  that  is  now 
shown  to  me  was  hanging.  There  were  other  two  large  photographs,  which 
were  hanging  in  her  parlour  at  the  time  when  I  left  and  while  her  husband 
was  in  London. 

Were  your  relations  with  her,  whatever  they  may  have  been,  intended 
to  be  kept  secret  from  her  husband? — Not  at  all. 

Were  they  in  any  way  improper  relations? — No,  sir. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — I  must  put  a  question  to  you  because 
we  are  dealing  with  a  woman  who  is  supposed  to  be  dead.  I  wish  to  ask 
you  definitely  this  :  were  there  any  improper  relations  between  you  and 
Mrs.  Crippen? — There  never  were. 

You  were  an  affectionate  friend,  I  understand? — Yes,  I  was. 

How  often  did  you  see  her  husband  and  herself  during  the  four  years 
from  May,  1900,  up  till  April,  1904? — I  never  met  her  husband.  During 
the  past  two  years  I  do  not  think  I  saw  her  more  than  perhaps  six  times. 

What  I  do  not  quite  understand  is  this,  why  did  you  say  to  Mr. 
Tobin  that  her  husband  knew  that  you  were  going  there  if  you  never  saw 
him? — For  the  simple  reason  that  I  always  went  there  when  I  felt  like 

22 


Mrs.  H.  H.  Crippen  (Miss  Belle  Elmore). 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Bruce  Miller 

going  to  call  on  her;  I  never  thought  anything  about  it.  I  never  tried 
to  avoid  Dr.  Crippen  in  any  manner,  shape,  or  form,  and  there  were 
several  occasions  that  I  had  reason  to  believe  Dr.  Crippen  was  in  the 
house.  In  fact,  I  would  always  have  been  glad  at  any  time  to  meet  him 
when  I  should  happen  to  call  at  the  house.  I  cannot  remember  exactly 
when  I  gave  Belle  Elmore  those  photographs  that  have  been  shown  to 
me,  but  I  think  it  was  during  the  last  year  of  our  acquaintance.  The 
larger  photographs  were  given  to  her  just  a  short  time  before  I  went  to 
America.  I  went  to  America  about  the  21st  of  April,  1904.  From  1901 
to  1903  I  was  living  in  Clapham  with  some  friends. 

Mr.  Mum — This  gentleman  has  come  over  from  America  specially  to 
give  evidence,  leaving  his  business  and  his  family.  Can  he  go  back 
now? 

The  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — If  Mr.  Tobin  has  no  objection. 

Mr.  TOBIN — No,  my  lord. 

The  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — Then  he  can  go. 

MELINDA  MAY,  examined  by  Mr.  INGLEBT  ODDIE — I  am  the  secretary 
of  the  Music  Hall  Ladies'  Guild,  and  I  live  at  5  White  Gardens,  Clapham 
Road.  I  knew  Mrs.  Crippen;  she  was  the  treasurer  of  the  Guild  for 
about  two  years,  and  she  attended  every  Wednesday  afternoon.  I  last 
saw  her  alive  at  the  meeting  on  Wednesday,  26th  January.  She  was  then 
in  her  usual  health.  As  regards  her  spirits,  she  was  quite  bright,  and 
she  was  in  her  usual  spirits  when  I  saw  her.  I  have  known  the  prisoner 
for  over  two  years.  I  visited  at  their  house,  39  Hilldrop  Crescent. 
There  was  a  meeting  of  the  Guild  held  on  Wednesday,  2nd  February, 
which  I  expected  Mrs.  Crippen  to  attend,  but  she  did  not  come.  Miss 
Le  Neve  came  to  the  door  at  ten  minutes  to  one  with  a  pass  book,  a 
paying- in  book,  a  cheque  book,  a  letter  to  myself,  and  a  letter  to  the 
committee.  Exhibit  33  is  the  letter  addressed  to  me  that  was  brought 
by  Miss  Le  Neve.  It  is  as  follows  :  — 

39  Hilldrop  Crescent,  February  2nd. 
Dear  Miss  May, 

Illness  of  a  near  relative  has  called  me  to  America  on  only  a  few  hours'  notice, 
so  I  must  ask  you  to  bring  my  resignation  as  treasurer  before  the  meeting  to-day, 
so  that  a  new  treasurer  can  be  elected  at  once.  You  will  appreciate  my  haste 
when  I  tell  you  that  I  have  not  been  to  bed  all  night  packing,  and  getting  ready 
to  go.  I  shall  hope  to  see  you  again  a  few  months  later,  but  cannot  spare  a 
moment  to  call  on  you  before  I  go.  I  wish  you  everything  nice  till  I  return  to 
London  again.  Now,  good-bye,  with  love  hastily, 

Yours,  BELLE  ELMORE,  p.p.  H.  H.  C. 

I  knew  Mrs.  Crippen's  writing,  but  I  could  not  say  in  whose  writing 
that  letter  is  in.  Exhibit  34  is  the  letter  that  was  addressed  to  the 
committee  of  the  Guild.  It  is  as  follows  :  — 

39  Hilldrop  Crescent,  London,   N. 
To  the  Committee  of  the  Music  Hall  Ladies'  Guild. 

Dear  Friends, — Please  forgive  me  a  hasty  letter  and  any  inconvenience  I  may 
cause  you,  but  I  have  just  had  news  of  the  illness  of  a  near  relative  and  at  only 
a  few  hours'  notice  I  am  obliged  to  go  to  America.  Under  the  circumstances 

23 


Hawley  Harvey  Crippen. 

Melinda  May 

I  cannot  return  for  several  months,  and  therefore  beg  you  to  accept  this  as  a 
formal  letter  resigning  from  this  date  my  hon.  treasurership  of  the  M.H.L.G.  I 
am  enclosing  the  cheque  book  and  deposit  book  for  the  immediate  use  of  my 
successor,  and  to  save  any  delay  I  beg  to  suggest  that  you  vote  to  suspend  the 
usual  rules  of  election  and  elect  to-day  a  new  honorary  treasurer.  I  hope  some 
months  later  to  be  with  you  again,  and  in  meantime  wish  the  Guild  every  success 
and  ask  my  good  friends  and  pals  to  accept  my  sincere  and  loving  wishes  for 
their  own  personal  welfare. 

Believe  me,  your  faithfully,  BELLE   ELMOBE. 

That  letter  is  not  in  Mrs.  Crippen' s  handwriting.  A  fresh  treasurer 
for  the  Guild  was  elected  that  afternoon.  I  remember  speaking1  to  Dr. 
Crippen  about  17th  February  regarding  his  wife's  subscription.  I  spoke 
to  him  in  the  corridor  at  Albion  House.  I  told  him  that  Miss 
Elmore's  subscription  became  due  on  17th  February,  and  I  asked  him 
to  let  me  have  her  address  so  that  I  could  write  to  her.  He  said  that 
she  was  away  up  in  the  hills1  in  California — right  up  in  the  mountains — 
and  that  if  I  would  hand  him  the  letter  he  would  forward  it  to  her,  and 
no  doubt  she  would  authorise  him  to  pay  the  guinea.  I  wrote  a  letter 
and  left  it  in  his  office,  so  that  he  could  redirect  it  to  her.  I  saw  Dr. 
Crippen  several  times  during  the  following  month  of  March.  I  remember 
seeing  him  on  Wednesday,  23rd  March,  when  he  told  me  that  Mrs.  Crippen 
was  ill — very  ill  indeed — and  he  was  waiting  for  worse  news. 

I  have  seen  Mrs.  Crippen  wearing  jewellery.  (Shown  exhibits  10, 
11,  and  12) — These  pieces  of  jewellery  are  exactly  like  those  I  have  seen 
her  wear  often.  (Shown  marquise  ring,  exhibit  22) — There  was  one 
very  often  on  her  hand  exactly  like  this.  (Shown  pair  of  earrings, 
exhibit  23) — She  had  a  pair  exactly  like  this.  (Shown  diamond  brooch, 
exhibit  25) — I  have  seen  one  like  this  often  on  her  bodice.  (Shown  rings, 
exhibits  26  A  to  F) — I  recognise  one  of  these  rings,  which  has  a  stone 
out.  I  remember  on  10th  March  we  were  selling  programmes  in  aid 
of  the  St.  Saviour's  Hospital  Charity,  and  she  told  me  that  she  had  lost 
a  stone  out  of  her  ring.  (Shown  gold  watch,  exhibit  35,  and  brooch, 
exhibit  36) — I  recognise  these  also.  (Shown  exhibits  13,  16,  and  20) — 
I  have  seen  Mrs.  Crippen  wear  furs  exactly  like  these.  The  size  of  gloves 
that  she  wore  was  6f . 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  HUNTLT  JENKINS — The  handwriting  of  the  two 
letters  which  have  been  shown  to  me  is  not  in  the  least  like  that  of  Mrs. 
Crippen.  (Shown  exhibits  44,  45,  and  46,  being  jars  containing  hair) — 
I  was  shown  those  jars  by  Sergeant  Mitchell,  who  asked  me  if  I  knew 
whose  hair  was  in  the  jars:,  was  it  like  Miss  Elmore's,  and  I  said,  "  No." 
Two  were  darker  than  her  hair  as.  I  knew  her,  and  one  was  rather  like  it. 

Two  had  not  the  slightest  resemblance? — Two  of  them,  I  said,  I 
did  not  recognise,  because  they  were  darker  than  hers,  but  the  other 
one  was  rather  like  it — the  fair  one.  I  had  been  told  that  they  came 
from  Hilldrop  Crescent. 

Re-examined  by  Mr.  MUIR — I  was  shown  these  jars  by  Sergeant 
Mitchell  and  another  gentleman.  I  do  not  remember  the  date,  but  I 
think  it  was  the  Thursday  previous  to  Mr.  Mitchell  going  to  America. 

Mrs.  EMILY  JACKSON,  examined  by  Mr.  MUIR — I  am  the  wife  of  Robert 
Jackson.       In  1908  I  was  living  at  80  Constantino  Road,  Hampstead.     A 
24 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Mrs.  Emily  Jackson 

young  woman  called  Ethel  Le  Neve  came  to  stay  with  me  as  a  lodger  in 
September  of  that  year,  and  she  stayed  on  to  March,  1909.  During 
that  period  she  slept  every  night  at  home.  She  then  went  away,  and 
came  back  to  my  house  in  August,  1909.  She  finally  left  me  on  12th 
March  of  this  year.  On  some  occasions  in  February  she  slept  away  from 
home;  she  stayed  away  one  night,  and  then  she  would  sleep  at  home, 
and  then  she  would  stay  away  two  nights,  and  then  she  finally  slept  away 
from  home  altogether.  I  cannot  exactly  say  when  she  began  to  sleep 
away  a  Itogether . 

Did  she  ever  sleep  out  at  night  before  the  time  you  are  speaking  of 
in  February  of  this  year? — Occasionally  at  her  sister's — so  she  told  me. 
In  January  or  February — the  early  part  of  February,  as  far  as  I  can 
remember — I  noticed  that  she  was  wearing  jewellery  that  she  had  not 
been  wearing  before.  (Shown  ring  with  four  diamonds'  and  ruby,  exhibit 
10) — I  saw  her  wearing  a  ring  exactly  like  that.  (Shown  brooch,  exhibit 
11) — I  saw  her  wearing  a  brooch  like  that,  a  sort  of  star  brooch,  but  I 
do  not  know  whether  it  was  the  same.  I  saw  her  wearing  a  watch. 
(Shown  watch,  exhibit  25) — I  do  not  think  I  have  seen  that  one  before. 
The  watch  she  was  wearing  was  a  gold  one — chased  I  think.  I  saw  her 
wear  on  the  wedding-ring  finger  a  plain  gold  band,  like  a  gentleman's 
plain  ring;  I  should  not  call  it  a  wedding  ring.  (Shown  brown  fur  coat, 
exhibit  69) — Miss  Le  Neve  gave  me  that  coat  early  in  February.  Exhibit 
70  is  a  list  of  the  clothes  that  she  gave  me.  It  begins  with  the  short, 
brown  fur  coat  which  I  have  just  spoken  to,  and  then  the  list  contains  the 
following  articles,  "  1  black  feather  boa;  a  long  cream  coat;  a  long  brown 
coat ;  a  long  black  coat ;  a  black  voile  blouse  and  skirt ;  a  grey  and  black 
striped  coat  and  skirt;  mole  coat  and  skirt;  black  facings;  a  yellow 
underskirt;  black  underskirt;  black  skirt  length,  accordion  pleated; 
heliotrope  costume  length ;  white  lace  blouse ;  blue  and  white  silk  and 
lace  blouse ;  two  back  hair  combs  ;  heart-shaped  locket,  blue  stones ;  a 
lizard  brooch,  green  and  white  stones;  three  new  nightgowns;  two  brown 
hats;  two  old  black  blouses;  four  pairs  of  brown  stockings;  two  pairs  of 
blue,  one  pair  of  black,  one  pair  of  black  and  white,  one  pair  of  pink, 
one  pair  of  white,  and  one  pair  of  pink  shoes."  She  gave  me  all  those 
articles  at  different  times1  during  February  and  March.  Before  that  she 
had  only  given  me  a  few  odd  things  of  her  own — nothing  much  to  speak 
of.  I  remember  on  one  occasion  when  Miss  Le  Neve  and  Dr.  Crippen 
brought  in  a  cab  some  things  in  a  dress  basket.  I  visited  Miss  Le  Neve 
at  Hilldrop  Crescent  once  before  she  finally  left  me  on  12th  March,  and 
twice  after  that  date.  Miss  Le  Neve  was  there  by  herself  the  first  time ; 
Miss  Le  Neve  and  the  French  maid  were  there  the  second  time;  and  Miss 
Le  Neve,  Dr.  Crippen,  and  the  French  maid  were  there  on  the  third 
occasion.  I  cannot  remember  when  I  saw  her  for  the  last  time,  but  it 
was  the  night  before  Mr.  Dew  paid  hrs  first  visit  to  Hilldrop  Crescent. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  ROOMB — I  was  very  friendly  with  Miss  Le 
Neve.  Before  she  finally  left  my  house  on  12th  March  she  lived  away 
from  the  house  from  time  to  time. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — After  the  middle  of  February,  or  after 
early  in  February? — After  early  in  February  she  slept  away  from  my 

25 


Hawley   Harvey   Crippen. 

Mrs.  Emily  Jackson 

Cross-examination  continued — I  have  seen  Dr.  Crippen  a  good  many 
times. 

Do  you  agree  that  he  was  a  good-tempered  and  kind-hearted  man? — He 
always  gave  me  that  impression. 

I  think  you  said  at  the  Police  Court  that  you  thought  he  was  one  of 
the  nicest  men  you  ever  met? — I  did. 

FREDERICK  PEDGRIFT,  examined  by  Mr.  INGLEBT  ODDIE — I  am  the 
manager  of  The  Era  Newspaper  Company.  In  consequence  of  a  letter 
which  came  to  the  office  on  24th  March  of  this  year  we  inserted  an 
advertisement  in  the  column  of  The  Era  headed  "  Deaths."  That  letter 
has  been  destroyed.  I  produce  a  page  of  our  newspaper  of  26th  March 
containing  the  advertisement.  Along  with  the  letter  there  was  a  postal 
order  for  10s.  Our  charge  for  inserting  the  advertisement  was  Is.  6d., 
and  we  returned  the  balance  of  8s.  6d.  to  Dr.  Crippen,  which  he  acknow- 
ledged by  the  letter,  exhibit  51. 

The  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — After  that  I  think  we  may  take  it  that 
the  advertisement  was  inserted  on  Dr.  Crippen's  behalf. 

Mr.  TOBIN — Certainly,  my  lord. 

ERNEST  WILLIAM  STUART,  examined  by  Mr.  TRAVBRS  HUMPHREYS — I 
am  manager  to  Messrs.  Attenboroughs,  pawnbrokers,  142  Oxford 
Street.  (Shown  marquise  diamond  ring,  exhibit  22,  and  pair 
of  diamond  earrings,  exhibit  33) — These  articles  of  jewellery  were 
brought  to  me  on  2nd  February,  last  year,  by  a  person  whom  I 
believe  to  be  the  prisoner.  He  asked  me  for  a  loan  upon  the  articles:, 
and  I  agreed  to  lend  £80  on  them.  He  then,  in  my  presence,  signed  the 
contract  note  (exhibit  24),  "  H.  H.  Crippen,  39  Hilldrop  Crescent." 
On  9th  February  the  same  man  came  back  again  and  brought  the  diamond 
brooch  (exhibit  25)  and  six  diamond  rings  (exhibit  26).  I  advanced  £115 
upon  those  articles,  and  he  signed  the  contract  note  (exhibit  27),  "  H.  H. 
Crippen,"  in  my  presence.  I  do  not  remember  whether  I  paid  the  money 
in  notes  or  gold,  but  we  generally  pay  in  notes.  We  do  not  pay  by 
cheque  unless  it  is  specially  asked  for.  Our  bankers  are  the  London 
County  and  Westminster  Bank,  the  Oxford  Street  branch. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  HUNTLY  JENKINS — I  did  not  know  Dr.  Crippen 
before  these  transactions,  but  I  have  heard  that  he  was  quite  well  known 
at  our  shop. 

He  wasi  known  both  by  name  and  by  address? — Yes,  I  think  so.  He 
has  not  had  articles  of  jewellery  pawned  at  our  place  in  the  past,  but  he 
has  had  articles  repaired.  He  may  have  pawned  things  on  other  occasions, 
but  I  personally  do  not  know  about  it.  When  the  police  came  to  our 
shop  there  was  no  difficulty  in  giving  Dr.  Crippen's  name  and  address. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — I  should  think  that  the  diamond  ring  and 
the  pair  of  earrings  might  be  worth  £100.  The  articles  on  which  we 
advanced  the  £115  would  be  worth  about  £130  in  the  ordinary  way. 

CHARLES   JOHN  WILLIAMS,   clerk   in  the  Bank   of  England,   produced 
exhibit   52,  Bank    of   England  note,    No.    52688,    issued    to   the   London 
County  and  Westminster  Bank  on  4th  February,  1910.       On  the  back  of 
the  note  there  is  the  name  "  M.  L.  Curnow." 
26 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Frederick  Hayles 

FREDERICK  HAYLES,  cashier  at  the  Berners  Street  Branch  of  the 
London  County  and  Westminster  Bank,  identified  the  Bank  of  England 
note,  No.  52688,  as  having  been  issued  by  his  bank  to  Messrs.  Atten- 
boroughs  on  9th  February,  1910. 

MARION  LOUISA  CURXOW,  examined  by  Mr.   MUIR — I   am  manageress 

to  "  Munyon's  Remedies,"  who  have  an  office  at  Albion  House,   Oxford 

Street.      For  some  time  before  November,  1909,  Dr.  Crippen  was  manager, 

and  afterwards,    between  November,    1909,    and   31st  January,    1910,  he 

wasi  agent  on  commission.       His  salary  ceased  in  November,  and  he  was 

afterwards     paid     commission.       On     1st     February,     when     I     became 

manageress,  his  connection  with  Munyon's  ceased.       I  knew  Mrs.  Crippen 

slightly;    when   she  came  into  the  office  I   generally   spoke  to  her.        I 

first  heard  of  her  being  away  from  London  about  the  end  of  February.     I 

asked  Dr.  Crippen  if  she  was  away,  and  he  .said,  "  Yes,  she  has  gone  for 

a  trip  to  America."       He  did  not  give  me  any  reason  for  her  going.       I 

first  heard   it   said   at   Easter   time   that  she   was   dead.        I   asked   Dr. 

Crippen  if  he  had   enjoyed  his  holiday — he   had  been  away   during  the 

Eastertide — and  he  said,  "  As  well  as  he  could  under  the  circumstances." 

I  asked  him  if  it  was  true  that  Mrs.  Crippen  was  dead,  and  he  bowed  his 

head.       Ethel  Le  Neve  was  employed  with  the  Yale  Tooth  Specialists,  in 

the  same  building.       I  do  not  know  where  she  was  at  Easter  time.     (Shown 

Bank  of  England   note,    exhibit   52) — I    got  that  note  changed    for   Dr. 

Crippen  on  9th  February.       In  the  beginning  of  March  I  put  two  envelopes 

in  my  safe  for  Dr.   Crippen.       One  of  them  had  "  Dr.  Crippen  "  on  it, 

and  the  other  one  had   "  Dr.   Crippen,   personal."        He  asked   me  if  I 

would  mind  it  for  him.       On  8th  July  Dr.  Crippen  asked  me  if  any  one 

knew  I  had  anything  of  his  in  the  safe,  and  I   said  no.     He  then  said, 

"If  any  one  should  ask  you,  know  nothing,"  or  "say  nothing" — I  am 

not  sure  which — "  and  if  anything  happens  to  me  please  give  what  you 

have  there  to  Miss-  Le  Neve,"  and  I  answered  "  All  right."       This  would 

be  about  half -past  four   in  the   afternoon.        The  envelopes   were  opened 

by  me  on  Monday,   llth  July.        In  one  of  the  envelopes  I  found  nine 

deposit  notes  with  the  Charing  Cross  Bank  for  £600,  and  I  also  found 

some    insurance    receipts.         Four    of    these    are   receipts    from     "  Miss 

Belle  Elmo  re,"   amounting  to   £300   on   various  dates    from    September, 

1906,  to  March,   1909,  and  three  are  for  £10,   £250,  and  £10,  in  the 

names  of    "Miss  B.    Elmore"  and    "  H.    H.    Crippen."       In  the  second 

envelope   I   found   some  jewellery,    which   I   recognise  as  the  watch   and 

brooch  (exhibits  35  and1  36).       At  our  meeting  on  9th  July  Dr.  Crippen 

asked  me  to  let  him  know  what  he  owed  me,  and  he  settled  up  with  me. 

Roughly,  he  was  owing  me  about  £5  for  some  advertisements  that  I  put 

in  for  him  during  the  week.     (Shown  exhibit  61) — That  is  a  cheque  on 

the  Charing  Cross  Bank  for  £37,  bearing  the  signatures  of  Crippen  and 

Elmore,  and  dated  9th  July.        Dr.   Crippen  filled  that  cheque  in  in  my 

presence.     It  already  had  Belle  Elmore's  signature  upon  it.       He  asked 

me  to  cash  the  cheque  for  him,  and  he  showed  me  the  pass  book  to  show 

that  there  was  £37  and  some  few  shillings  at  the  bank.       I  cashed  the 

cheque  for  him. 

The  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — Is  Miss  Elmore'e  signature  believed  to  be 
her  genuine  signature  or  not? 

27 


Hawley  Harvey  Crippen. 

Marion  L.  Curnow 

Mr.   MUIR — Yes,  as  far  as  we  know. 

Examination  continued — Munyon's  do  not  make  any  of  their  remedies 
in  this  country,  nor  do  they  purchase  any  drugs  in  this  country.  All 
their  remedies  are  imported  ready  from  America.  On  19th  January  of 
this  year  1  was1  simply  working  with  Dr.  Crippen,  looking  after  Munyon's 
books.  I  do  not  know  anything  about  the  purchase  of  hyoscin  on  19th 
January. 

Was  any  cash  paid  out  from  Munyon's  or  any  entry  made  in  Munyon's 
books  of  such  a  purchase? — No.  (Shown  letters,  exhibits  33,  34,  and 
71) — I  recognise  the  handwriting  there  as  that  of  Dr.  Crippen. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  TOBIN — The  handwriting  is  not  in  any  way 
disguised.  One  of  the  letters  is  signed  "  Belle  Elmore,  per  H.  H.  C."  I 
have  known  Dr.  Crippen  for  about  twelve  years.  When  I  first  met  him 
he  was  general  manager  at  Munyon's.  I  was  also  employed  there  at  the 
same  time.  I  have  known  him  regularly  ever  since,  and  have  been  in 
contact  with  him  endless  times. 

Have  you  always  formed  the  opinion  that  he  was  a  kind-hearted  and 
amiable  man? — Oh,  yes. 

He  was  in  the  habit,  was  he  not,  of  compounding  medicinea  that  had 
to  go  by  post? — Yes,  as  far  asi  I  know. 

He  compounded  scores  of  special  prescriptions? — Yes. 

You  do  not  yourself  know  whether,  for  those  special  prescriptions, 
he  had  or  had  not  to  buy  drugs  from  chemists? — No,  I  do  not  know  about 
that, 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — That  waa  for  something  other  than 
Munyon'<s? — I  had  nothing  to  do  with  that;  that  was  hisi  own  private 
business. 

Cross-examination  continued — Apart  from  his  duties  as  manager  for 
Munyon's,  he  to  my  knowledge  made  up  prescriptions  for  patients.  He 
had  a  room  of  his  own  at  Albion  House;  it  would  be  what  one  might  call 
his  own  private  room,  and  he  was  generally  in  that  room  alone.  I  do 
not  know  what  he  kept,  or  what  he  had  in  that  room.  I  do  not  think 
there  was  a  cupboard  there,  but  I  am  not  certain.  I  am  not  aware  that 
he  ever  had  any  general  practice  as  a  medical  man.  I  knew  that  he 
was  a  specialist  for  the  eye,  throat,  and  nose.  I  am  aware  that  after  he 
ceased  to  be  agent  for  Munyon's  on  1st  February  of  this1  year  he  continued 
to  compound  prescriptions  as  he  had  done  before  for  patients,  but  I  do 
not  know  whether  or  not  he  had  to  buy  drugs  for  that  purpose.  After 
he  ceased  to  be  agent  for  Munyon's  on  1st  February  he  still  came  to 
Albion  House  in  connection  with  the  tooth  specialist  business;  he  used 
to  come  in  almost  every  morning  and  see  me.  The  room  in  which  he 
carried  on  the  tooth  specialist  business  in  Albion  House  was  on  the  same 
floor  as  Munyon's,  but  quite  distinct.  Dr.  Crippen  ceased  to  be  manager 
in  November,  1909,  and  acted  as  agent  on  commission  from  then  until  1st 
February,  1910.  During  those  three  months  from  November  to  January, 
I  was  still  working  with  Dr.  Crippen.  I  had  practically  no  definite 
position — we  used  to  work  together  really.  I  became  manageress  on 
1st  February.  After  that  Dr.  Crippen  used  to  come  and  eee  me  very 
often  in  the  mornings. 
28 


Evidence  for   Prosecution. 

Marion  L.  Curnow 

Are  you  pretty  confident  that  he  came  and  saw  you  on  the  morning 
of  1st  February? — I  cannot  remember  his  not  coming. 

During  the  rest  of  that  week,  and  the  following  fortnight,  did  he  come 
regularly  every  day? — Yes. 

Did  you  notice  any  signs  whatever  of  agitation  or  terror  on  his  face? — • 
— No,  I  cannot  say  that  I  did. 

Were  his  manner  and  conversation  just  the  same  as1  they  always  had 
been  1 — Yes. 

No  frightened  or  hunted  look  about  him? — No. 

Nothing  that  you  observed  unusual? — No. 

Re-examined — Although  Dr.  Crippen  was  a  specialist  for  the  eye,  ear, 
throat,  nose,  and  teeth,  he  had  patient®  for  other  things. 

As  a  general  practitioner,  do  you  mean? — Yes,  practically;  he  could 
give  them  anything  for  whatever  their  disease  was. 

GILBERT  MEKVIN  RYLANCE,  examined  by  Mr.  MUIR — I  carry  on  business 
as  a  surgeon  dentist  under  my  own  name  at  Albion  House.  I  met  Dr. 
Crippen  for  the  first  time  about  the  middle  of  1907.  In  1908  I  started 
the  business  of  "  The  Yale  Tooth  Specialists  "  at  Albion  House,  and  Dr. 
Crippen  became  my  partner.  About  March  of  this  year  I  entered  into  a 
fresh  agreement  with  him.  I  have  not  got  the  agreement  here ;  the  police 
have  a  copy.  Dr.  Crippen  agreed  to  put  £200  into  the  business,  and  I 
was  to  put  in  my  experience,  knowledge,  and  skill.  We  were  each  to 
have  half  profits.  I  remember  seeing  Mrs.  Crippen  about  26th  January 
of  this  year.  I  heard  from  Dr.  Crippen  about  1st  or  2nd  February 
that  she  had  left.  He  asked  me  if  I  did  not  notice  that  he  was  lonely, 
that  his  wife  was  half-way  across  to  America,  that  she  had  gone  over 
on  legal  business,  to  settle  up  estates  on  account  of  his  mother's  death,  I 
think  it  was. 

When  did  you  hear  it  said  that  Mrs.  Crippen  wasi  dead? — A  lady 
came  to  my  place  about  24th  March,  the  Thursday  before  Good  Friday, 
with  a  telegram.  Dr.  Crippen  was  then  at  Dieppe  along  with  Miss 
Le  Neve.  He  had  told  me  himself  a  few  days  before  Easter  that  Miss 
Le  Neve  and  her  aunt  were  going  over  with  him.  When  he  came  back 
I  asked  him  about  his  wife,  and  he  told  me  that  she  was  dead,  but  that 
he  did  not  send  me  a  telegram  so  as  not  to  spoil  my  holiday.  On 
Saturday,  9th  July,  I  got  to  business  about  eleven  o'clock.  I  saw  Dr. 
Crippen,  but  he  did  not  say  anything  to  me  at  all.  I  should  say  that 
I  saw  him  for  the  last  time  that  day,  between  twelve  and  one  o'clock.  I 
waited  till  two  o'clock  for  him  to  come  back,  and  then  I  could  not  wait 
any  longer.  I  did  not  see  him  again  until  I  saw  him  at  Bow  Street  Police 
Office.  (Shown  letter  exhibit  66) — That  letter,  which  is  written  on  my 
own  headed  paper,  reached  me  on  the  Monday  morning.  It  is  dated  9th 
July,  1910,  and  it  is  as  follows:  — 

Dear  Dr.  Rylance, 

I  now  find  that  in  order  to  escape  trouble  I  shall  be  obliged  to 
absent  myself  for  a  time.  I  believe  with  the  business  as  it  is  now  going  you 
will  run  on  all  right  so  far  as  money  matters  go.  Plucknett's  last  account  you 
will  find  in  my  desk.  As  to  rent,  you  have  only  to  send  Goddard  &  Smith 
£10  12s.  6d.,  as  I  have  already  paid  them  £30  off  £40  12s.  6d.  (this  ia  in  advance 
B  29 


Hawley  Harvey  Crippen. 

Gilbert  M.  Rylance 

up  to  Sept.  25).  If  you  want  to  give  notice  you  should  give  six  months'  notice  in 
jny  name  on  Sept.  25th,  1910.  Long  knows  pretty  much  all  of  the  business,  and 
can  take  over  the  book-keeping.  There  will  be  several  paid  bills  to  enter  on  my 
file  in  my  desk,  the  key  to  which  you  will  find  in  the  upper  drawer  of  the  little 
cabinet  in  Coulthard's  office.  I  shall  write  you  later  on  more  fully.  With 
kind  wishes  for  your  success.  —  Yours  sincerely, 

H.  H.  CRIPPEN. 


.  —  I  am  enclosing  Plucknett's  account,  which  you  can  attend  to  for  your- 
self personally. 

That  letter  is  in  Dr.  Crippen's  handwriting.  I  kept  on  the  business 
in  my  own  name.  I  had  seen  Chief  Inspector  Dew  at  the  office  on  the 
previous  day,  8th  July.  I  asked  Dr.  Crippen  who  he  was,  and  he  said 
that  he  was  a  Scotland  Yard  officer  who  had  come  to  find  out  if  Mrs. 
Crippen  had  any  estates  to  pay  taxes  on.  After  1st  February  I  saw 
Dr.  Crippen  in  the  company  of  Miss  Le  Neve.  Mrs.  Crippen's  death 
was  announced  as  having  taken  place  on  23rd  March  —  two  days  before 
Good  Friday  —  and  about  a  fortnight  or  so  later  he  told  me  that  he  had 
married  Miss  Le  Neve. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  HUNTLT  JENKINS  —  Did  you  know  that  Dr. 
Crippen  was  making  up  private  prescriptions?  —  Yes,  I  knew  he  made  up 
private  prescriptions,  but  I  did  not  know  for  whom. 

WILLIAM  LONG,  examined  by  Mr.  Mum  —  I  am  a  dental  mechanic.  I 
have  known  Dr.  Crippen  since  1886.  I  have  been  in  various  businesses  with 
him.  I  first  knew  Ethel  Le  Neve  about  1901  or  1902.  At  that  time 
she  was  a  typist  in  the  employment  of  the  Drouet  Institute.  Dr.  Crippen 
wasi  looking  after  that  business  as  the  consulting  specialist.  I  have  been 
in  the  same  employment  as  Dr.  Crippen  ever  since,  off  and  on,  and,  as 
far  as  I  know,  Ethel  Le  Neve  has  also  been  in  the  same  employment.  Dr. 
Crippen's  usual  time  for  coming  to  the  office  was  about  ten  or  half-past 
ten.  On  9th  July  he  was  in  the  office  when  I  arrived  there  between 
quarter  -past  nine  and  half-past  nine.  I  asked  him  if  there  was  any 
trouble,  and  he  said,  "  Only  a  little  scandal."  He  gave  no  further  ex- 
planation. He  gave  me  a  list  of  clothes  which  he  sent  me  out  to  buy 
for  him.  I  bought  a  brown  tweed  suit. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE  —  Were  you  to  buy  them  for  a  man  or  a 
woman,  or  what?  —  A  boy. 

Examination  continued  —  (Shown  exhibit  67)  —  That  is  the  suit  that  I 
bought,  as  far  as  I  can  say.  I  also  bought  a  brown  felt  hat,  two  shirts, 
two  collars,  a  tie,  and  a  pair  of  boots.  These  were  all  for  a  boy.  The 
size  of  the  felt  hat  was  6|ths.  I  thought  it  would  be  for  the  same  person, 
but  I  did  not  know.  I  took  these  things  to  the  back  room 
of  the  Yale  Tooth  Specialists  on  the  third  floor—  room  No.  91  —  and 
I  left  them  there.  There  was  nobody  there  when  I  left.  The  room  is 
shut  up  on  Saturday.  I  saw  Ethel  Le  Neve  about  eleven  o'clock  that 
morning.  She  was  wearing  a  hat,  but  I  could  not  describe  it.  I  saw  her 
again  about  half  -past  eleven.  I  did  not  see  her  any  more  that  day.  I 
should  say  that  I  last  saw  Dr.  Crippen  that  day  about  one  o'clock.  I  did 
not  know  that  he  was  going  to  leave.  (Shown  exhibits  68  and  68a)  —  I 
30 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

William  Long 

got  that  letter  on  the  evening  of  Saturday,  9th  July.       It  is  on  the  Rylance 
Dental  Specialists'  paper,  and  is  as  follows  :  — 

Liear  Mr.  Long, — Will  you  do  me  the  very  great  favour  of  winding  up  as 
best  you  can  my  household  affairs.  There  is  £12  10s.  due  to  my  landlord  for 
the  past  quarter's  rent,  and  there  will  be  also  this  quarter's  rent,  a  total  due  to 
him  of  £25,  in  lieu  of  which  he  can  seize  the  contents  of  the  house.  I  cannot 
manage  about  the  girl.  She  will  have  to  get  back  to  France,  but  should  have 
sufficient  saved  from  her  wages  to  do  this.  After  the  girl  leaves,  kindly  send 
the  keys  with  a  note  explaining  to  the  landlord ;  address  Messrs.  Lown  &  Sons, 
12  Ashbrook  Road,  St.  John's  Villas,  Holloway.  Thanking  you  in  anticipation 
of  fulfilling  my  wishes,  I  am,  with  best  wishes  for  your  future  success  and  happi- 
ness, yours  faithfully,  H.  H.  CBJPPEN. 

I  went  to  39  Hilldrop  Crescent  that  evening;  the  key  had  come  in  the 
letter.  I  did  not  take  possession  of  any  of  the  things  that  were  there. 
My  wife  pawned  some  of  the  things  on  the  Monday  afternoon.  The  police 
came  there  on  the  Monday.  My  wife  went  round  to  Hilldrop  Crescent 
on  the  Monday  to  give  the  French  maid  some  food,  and  I  went  round  in 
the  evening.  I  saw  my  wife  pick  up  a  piece  of  paper,  which  I  identify 
as  exhibit  41 — "  Mackamotzki.  Will  Belle  Elmore  communicate  with 
H.  H.  C.  or  authorities  at  once.  Serious  trouble  through  your  absence. 
25  dollars  reward  to  any  one  communicating  her  whereabout  to  (blank)." 
That  paper,  which  is  in  Dr.  Crippen's  handwriting,  was  found  in  the 
sitting-room.  On  the  same  day,  llth  July,  I  found  at  Albion  House  the 
hat  which  I  had  seen  Miss  Le  Neve  wear.  I  also  found  a  suit  of  clothes 
belonging  to  Dr.  Crippen. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — I  could  not  say  whether  it  was  the  same 
hat  that  Miss  Le  Neve  had  on  the  Saturday. 

Examination  continued — I  found  the  French  maid  in  possession  of  the 
house  when  I  got  there.  The  police  sent  her  back  to  France.  Between 
1st  February  and  that  date  I  on  two  occasions  moved  some  things  in  a 
van  from  Hilldrop  Crescent  to  Albion  House.  Amongst  other  things  there 
was  a.  wooden  box.  (Shown  ermine  jacket,  exhibit  57,  and  white  fur, 
exhibit  58.)  I  found  these  in  a  wooden  box  after  Dr.  Crippen  had  gone 
away.  They  were  taken  possession  of  by  Inspector  Dew.  About  two 
months  before  Dr.  Crippen  went  away  he  gave  me  some  of  his  own  clothing, 
and  also  some  theatrical  women's  clothing,  and  feminine  vests  and 
stockings. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  TOBIN — I  have  known  Dr.  Crippen  since 
about  1896  or  1897,  and  I  have  worked  with  him  more  or  lessi  since. 

You,  like  the  other  witnesses,  remember  that  he  was  a  kind-hearted 
and  amiable  man  as  far  as  you  could  see  from  his  outward  manner? — I 
have  always  found  him  so.  I  could  not  say  whether  he  had  any  general 
practice  during  the  time  I  was  with  him,  but  I  knew  that  he  used  to 
make  up  special  prescriptions.  He  would  have  to  buy  the  drugs  for  those 
prescriptions.  He  used  to  buy  bottles,  which  he  kept  in  a  cupboard  or 
cabinet  in  the  room  that  was  used  as  the  office  after  he  joined  Dr.  Rylance. 
During  the  period  up  to  November,  1909,  when  he  was  manager  for 
Munyon's,  he  used  to  prescribe  for  patients,  making  up  drugs  and  posting 
them  off.  During  that  period  he  would  be  likely  to  have  bottles,  but  I 
could  not  say  where  he  kept  them.  During  the  period  between  November, 

31 


Hawley   Harvey  Crippen. 

William  Long 

1909,  and  1st  February,  1910,  he  used  similarly  to  prescribe  for  patients, 
and  he  would  be  likely  to  have  bottles.  These  bottles  were  kept  in  the 
office  of  the  Yale  Tooth  Specialists,  where  he  used  to  make  up  the  pre- 
scriptions. 

Take  the  critical  time,  which  is  early  in  February  of  this  year;  used 
he  during  that  time  to  come  daily  to  his  work  just  the  same  as  usual? 
Did  he  ever  omit  a  single  day  as  far  as  you  remember? — No. 

Did  he  come  at  the  regular  times? — Yes. 

Did  he  ever  show  any  trace  of  uneasiness  1 — No. 

Any  worried  appearance  about  him? — No. 

No  hunted  or  worried  appearance  or  anything  of  that  kind — nothing 
unusual  about  his  manner? — Nothing  whatever. 

And  diligent  in  his  work  as  before? — Yes. 

No  trace  of  abruptness  as.  if  he  had  got  anything  on  hia  mind? — Not 
the  slightest.  He  was  just  as  kind  as  ever. 

And  talking  as  freely  and  in  the  same  way  as  he  always  did,  with- 
out constraint  or  restraint? — Yes. 

Re-examined — Miss  Le  Neve  was  the  book-keeper  in  the  business  that 
Dr.  Crippen  carried  on. 

EDGAR  BRETT,  examined  by  Mr.  TRAVERS  HUMPHREYS — I  am  the  assistant 
manager  of  the  Charing  Cross  Bank,  128  Bedford  Street,  Strand.  A  current 
account  was  opened  at  our  bank  on  30th  September,  1903,  in  the  joint  names 
of  Belle  Elmore  and  H.  H.  Crippen,  Store  Street,  Tottenham  Court  Road. 
They  had  to  sign  cheques  jointly.  Exhibit  60  is  a  certified  copy  of  the 
account  as  from  September,  1909.  The  state  of  the  account  on  31st 
January,  1910,  was  £2  7s.  8d.  debtor.  On  the  next  day,  1st  February, 
that  was  increased  to  £2  13s.  lid.,  and  then  on  that  day  there  was  paid 
in  in  cash  £17  13s.  9d.  On  3rd  February  £40  in  cash  was  paid  in, 
and  from  that  time  right  to  the  end  of  the  account  the  account  remained 
in  credit.  On  30th  June  there  was  a  credit  balance  of  £37  19s.  4d., 
which  continued  until  llth  July.  On  the  llth  July  we  honoured  a 
cheque  for  £37  drawn  on  that  account,  that  cheque  being  the  exhibit 
which  has  been  produced.  There  was  also  a  deposit  account  opened  at 
our  bank  on  15th  March,  1906,  in  the  joint  names  of  Belle  Elmore  and 
H.  H.  Crippen.  £250  was  paid  in  to  the  credit  of  that  account  on  that 
date.  Exhibit  74  is  a  certified  copy  of  that  deposit  account.  So  far  as 
that  payment  in  of  £250  in  the  joint  names  of  Belle  Elmore  and  H.  H. 
Crippen  is  concerned,  it  could  be  drawn  out  by  either  of  those  persons, 
but  only  with  the  authority  of  the  other  person.  We  would  require  to 
have  a  notice  of  withdrawal  signed  by  both  persons.  On  20th  November, 
1906,  £50  was  put  on  deposit  in  the  name  of  Belle  Elmore.  Other  sums 
were  put  on  deposit  in  the  name  of  Belle  Elmore,  the  last  being  £15,  on 
24th  March,  1909,  amounting  to  £330.  That,  along  with  the  £270  in 
the -two  names,  made  £600,  which  was  subject  to  twelve  months  notice  of 
withdrawal.  It  bore  interest  at  7  per  cent.  We  got  a  notice  of  with- 
drawal of  the  whole  amount,  dated  15th  December,  1909,  and  signed  by 
Belle  Elmore  only.  We  accepted  that,  notwithstanding  that  part  of  the 
account  was  in  the  two  names. 
32 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Edgar  Brett 

If  the  notice  had  expired  would  you  have  paid  it  over  without  the 
signature  of  Dr.  Crippen? — Yes,  I  think  so.  The  notice  of  withdrawal 
of  the  whole  £600  would  expire  on  15th  December  next.  Dr.  Crippen 
has  not  attempted  to  draw  out  any  of  that  money  or  to  raise  any  loan. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  TOBIK — I  know  from  my  experience  that  it  is 
quite  a  common  practice  where  husbands  and  wives  have  a  joint  account 
for  the  wife  to  sign  blank  cheques  and  the  husband  to  put  in  the  amount 
and  sign  it  himself.  When  the  money  was  paid  into  the  deposit  account 
the  bank  stamped  a  piece  of  paper  showing  that  it  was  payable  to  either, 
or  to  the  survivor.  With  a  deposit  account  at  7  per  cent,  there  must 
always  be  twelve  months'  notice  of  withdrawal.  That  notice  will  do 
if  it  is  signed  by  either  party,  and  at  the  end  of  the  twelve  months  the 
money  would  be  paid  by  our  bank  upon  the  receipt  of  either.  Mrs. 
Crippen  gave  notice  of  withdrawal  on  15th  December.  The  money  could 
not  be  payable  to  any  one  until  15th  December,  1910.  Mrs.  Crippen 
herself  sometimes  paid  money  into  the  joint  deposit  account.  I  believe 
Dr.  Crippen  sometimes  came  and  paid  money  into  the  Belle  Elmore  deposit 
account.  There  were  six  payments  into  the  single  account  and  four  into 
the  joint  account.  Four  of  the  payments  are  signed  by  Belle  Elmore 
alone,  and  the  other  two  bear  H.  H.  Crippen's  name.  As  regards  the  7 
per  cent,  interest  payable  on  both  the  joint  account  and  the  Belle  Elmore 
account,  Dr.  Crippen  signed  a  good  many  of  the  receipts  for  interest. 

That  means,  I  suppose,  that  he  came  for  the  interest  and  signed  the 
receipt? — Yes,  the  interest  on  both  the  accounts  was  handed  to  him. 
We  had  a  verbal  authority  from  the  wife  to  do  that.  All  the  cheques 
on  the  current  account  were  signed  by  both  parties. 

The  Court  then  adjourned. 


Second  Day— Wednesday,   19th  October,   1910. 

WALTER  DEW,  examined  by  Mr.  TRAVERS  HUMPHREYS — I  am  chief 
inspector  of  New  Scotland  Yard.  On  30th  June  a  Mr.  Nash  came  to 
Scotland  Yard  and  made  a  statement  in  consequence  of  which  I  made 
inquiries,  between  30th  June  and  8th  July,  with  reference  to  the  dis- 
appearance of  Mrs.  Crippen.  On  8th  July  I  went  with  Sergeant  Mitchell 
to  39  Hilldrop  Crescent,  and  was  admitted  by  a  French  servant.  After 
a  few  minutes  I  saw  Miss  Le  Neve.  At  that  time  she  was  wearing  the 
brooch,  exhibit  11.  I  did  not  see  anybody  else  at  Hilldrop  Crescent.  I 
had  a  conversation  with  Miss  Le  Neve,  and  then  I  went  with  her  to  Albion 
House,  where  I  saw  the  prisoner  Crippen.  Miss  Le  Neve  brought  him 
down  to  see  me  on  the  stairs.  He  was  a  stranger  to  me  up  to  that  time. 
He  was  then  wearing  a  rather  heavy  moustache.  He  took  me  upstairs  to 
a  room,  and  then  I  said  to  him — "  I  am  Chief  Inspector  Dew,  of  Scot- 
land Yard,  and  this  is  Sergeant  Mitchell.  Some  of  your  wife's  friends 
have  been  to  us  concerning  the  stories  you  have  told  them  about  her 

33 


Hawley  Harvey  Crippen. 


Walter  Dew 


death,  with  which  they  are  not  satisfied.  I  have  made  exhaustive  in- 
quiries, and  I  am  not  satisfied,  eo  I  have  come  to  see  you  to  ask  if  you 
care  to  offer  any  explanation."  He  said,  "  I  suppose  I  had  better  tell  the 
truth."  I  said,  "Yes,  I  think  that  would  be  best."  He  said,  "The 
stories  I  have  told  them  about  her  death  are  untrue.  As  far  as  I  know, 
she  is  still  alive."  I  said,  "Any  explanation  you  desire  to  make  shall 
be  written  down  in  your  own  words,  and  perhaps  it  would  be  more  con- 
venient if  you  told  me  all  about  yourself."  He  expressed  his  willingness 
to  do  so,  and  he  then  made  a  statement  which  Sergeant  Mitchell  wrote 
down.  That  statement  (exhibit  39)  was  read  over  to  him  and  he  signed 
it  and  initialled  each  page. 

Mr.  TRACKS  HUMPHREYS  read  the  following  statement: — "Albion 
House,  61  New  Oxford  Street,  8th  July,  1910.  Hawley  Harvey  Crippen 
states: — I  am  forty-eight  years  of  age.  After  being  questioned  by 
Chief  Inspector  Dew  as  to  the  statements  made  by  me  that  my  wife, 
known  as  Belle  Elmore,  is  dead,  I  desire  to  make  a  voluntary  statement 
to  clear  the  whole  matter  up. 

"  I  was  born  at  Cold  Water,  Michigan,  U.S.A.,  in  the  year  1862, 
my  father's  name  being  Myron  Augustus  Crippen,  a  dry  goods  merchant. 
My  mother's  name  was  Andresse  Crippen,  nee  Skinner. 

"  My  mother  is  now  dead,  but  my  father  lives  at  Los  Angeles,  Cal. 

"  I  was  educated  first  at  Cold  Water,  Indiana,  and  California,  and 
then  attended  the  University  at  Michigan  until  I  was  about  twenty,  and 
finished  my  education  at  the  Hospital  College  at  Cleveland,  where  I  took 
the  degree  of  M.D. 

"  I  came  over  to  England  in  1883,  and  attended  various  hospitals 
to  see  the  operations,  and  returned  to  the  States,  and  was  assistant  for 
three  or  four  months  to  Dr.  Porter,  of  Detroit.  After  that  I  went  to 
New  York  and  took  a  degree  in  special  eye  and  ear  work  at  the  Ophthalmic 
Hospital.  This  would  be  in  1885. 

"  After  then  I  returned  to  Detroit,  where  I  remained  about  two  years 
as  assistant  to  the  same  doctor.  I  then  went  to  San  Diego,  where  I 
practised  as  an  eye  and  ear  specialist  for  about  two  years.  Before  going 
to  this  place  I  was  married  to  a  lady  named  Charlotte  Bell,  of  New  York, 
and  she  accompanied  me  to  San  Diego. 

"  We  then  came  to  New  York.  I  have  had  only  one  child  by  my  first 
wife.  He  was  born  at  San  Diego  about  1887  or  1888,  and  his  name 
is  Otto  Hawley  Crippen.  He  is  now  married  and  lives  at  Los  Angeles. 

"  My  first  wife  died,  so  far  as  I  can  remember,  in  1890  or  1891.  We 
were  living  at  Salt  Lake  City,  where  I  was  practising  as  an  eye  and  ear 
specialist.  She  was  buried  at  Salt  Lake  in  my  name. 

"  After  this  my  son  went  to  live  with  his  grandmother,  my  mother, 
until  she  died.  I  then  went  to  New  York,  and  went  as  an  assistant  to  Dr. 
Jeffery,  of  Brooklyn,  and  I  lived  with  him. 

"  About  1893,  while  with  Dr.  Jeffery,  I  met  Belle  Elmore,  who  was 
being  attended  by  him.     Her  name   at  that  time  was   Cora  Turner.      I 
forget  where  she  was  living,    but    she  was    living   alone.     She  was  only 
about  seventeen  years  of  age,  and  I,  of  course,  was  about  thirty. 
34 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Statement  by  Accused 

"  She,  at  this  time,  was  living  under  the  protection  of  a  man  named 
C.  C.  Lincoln,  a  stove  manufacturer,  of  Water  Street,  New  York.  She  had 
been  living  with  him,  but  he  had  given  up  his  house  and  had  taken  a  room 
for  her  and  was  paying  all  her  expenses. 

"  I  took  her  to  several  places  for  some  weeks,  as  I  was  very  fond  of 
her,  and  one  day  she  told  me  Lincoln  wanted  her  to  go  away  with  him.  I 
told  her  I  could  not  stand  that,  and  would  marry  her  right  away,  and  a 
few  days  after  this  I  married  her  at  a  minister's  house  at  Jersey  City.  I 
forget  his  name  and  the  name  of  the  street. 

"  I  had  been  married  to  her  some  little  time  when  she  told  me  her 
name  was  not  Turner,  but  Kunigund©  Mackamotzki.  She  said  her  mother 
had  been  married  twice,  and  her  name  then  was  Marsinger,  and  she  was 
living  in  Brooklyn.  Her  mother  had  been  dead  some  years.  My  wife  told 
me  her  father  was  a  Russian  Pole  and  her  mother  was  a  German. 

"  Her  stepfather,  so  far  as  I  know,  is  still  living,  and  resides  at  Forrest 
Avenue,  Brooklyn. 

"  Her  parents  were  in  rather  ordinary  circumstances,  but  she  had  a 
good  education,  and  spoke  German  well. 

"  After  getting  married  to  her  we  went  to  St.  Louis,  where  I  practised 
as  consulting  physician  to  an  optician  in,  I  think,  Olive  Street.  His  name 
was  Hirsch,  I  think. 

"  We  stayed  there  about  a  year,  and  we  returned  to  New  York,  where 
I  took  a  position  as  consulting  physician  to  the  Munyon  Company.  We 
lived  in  the  office  at  East  Fourteenth  Street. 

"  I  was  in  New  York  for  only  a  few  months  when  the  company  trans- 
ferred me  to  Philadelphia.  I  was  there  with  my  wife  about  a  year,  and 
was  then  transferred  to  the  firm's  place  at  Toronto,  where  I  managed  their 
business.  I  forget  where  I  lived,  but  we  were  there  only  six  months,  and 
then  returned  to  Philadelphia. 

"  I  was  there  some  time,  and  while  there,  about  1899,  my  wife,  who 
had  a  good  voice,  went  to  New  York  to  have  her  voice  trained,  as  she 
thought  of  going  in  for  grand  opera. 

"  I  paid  all  her  expenses,  and  occasionally  visited  her  at  New  York, 
and  then  in  about  1900  I  came  to  England  alone,  where  I  was  manager  for 
Munyon' s  at  their  offices  in  Shaftesbury  Avenue,  and  I  lived  at  Queen's 
Road,  St.  John's  Wood. 

"  It  wasi  in  April  I  came  over,  and  she  joined  me  in  August,  as  she 
wrote  and  told  me  she  was  giving  up  her  lessons  in  grand  opera,  and  was 
going  in  for  music  hall  sketches.  To  this.  I  objected,  and  told  her  to  come 
over  here.  She  came,  and  we  went  to  live  at  South  Crescent. 

"  When  she  came  to  England  she  decided  to  give  sketches1  on  the  music 
hall  stage,  and  adopted  the  name  of  "  Macamotzki,"  but  she  did  not  make 
anything  at  it.  She  gave  a  sketch  at  the  Old  Marylebone  Music  Hall,  but 
it  was  a  failure,  and  she  gave  it  up. 

"  After  this  she  did  not  do  anything  in  it  for  two  or  three  years,  until 
I  had  to  go  to  America  about  two  years  after  coming  here.  My  firm  sent 
for  me,  and  I  became  manager  in  Philadelphia. 

"  When  I  left  England  my  wife  and  I  were  living  at,  I  think,  62 
Guildford  Street,  and  she  remained  there  while  I  was  away.  I  remained 

35 


Hawley   Harvey   Crippen. 

Statement  by  Accused 

in  Philadelphia  from  November  till  the  following  June,  and  sent  my  wife 
money  regularly. 

"  When  I  returned  I  found  she  had  been  singing  at  smoking  concerts 
for  payment,  and  that  an  American  music  hall  artiste,  named  Bruce  Miller, 
had  been  a  frequent  visitor  at  her  house. 

"  She  told  me  that  this  man  visited  her,  had  taken  her  about,  and 
was  very  fond  of  her,  also  she  was  fond  of  him. 

"  I  may  say  that  when  she  came  to  England  from  America  her  manner 
towards  me  was  entirely  changed,  and  she  had  cultivated  a  most  ungovern- 
able temper,  and  seemed  to  think  I  was1  not  good  enough  for  her,  and 
boasted  of  the  men  of  good  position  travelling  on  the  boat  who  had  made  a 
fuss  of  her,  and,  indeed,  some  of  these  visited  her  at  South  Crescent,  but 
I  do  not  know  their  names. 

"  I  never  saw  the  man  Bruce  Miller,  but  he  used  to  call  when  I  was 
out,  and  used  to  take  her  out  in  the  evenings. 

"  When  I  returned  to  this  country,  I  did  not  take  up  my  position  at 
Munyon's,  but  went  as  manager  to  the  '  Sovereign  Remedy  Company,'  13 
Newman  Street. 

"  They  failed  about  eight  months  afterwards1,  and  I  then  went  as 
physician  to  the  Drouet  Institute,  Regent's  Park,  and  afterwards  at  10 
Marble  Arch,  and  they  also  failed. 

"  From  there  I  took  a  position  "with  the  Aural  Clinic  Company,  102 
New  Oxford  Street,  where  I  remained  until  they  failed  in  about  six  months. 

"  I  then  went  back  to  Munyon's,  272  Oxford  Circus,  as  manager  and 
advertising  manager. 

"  I  removed  to  Albion  House  as  manager  about  eighteen  months  ago, 
after  which  I  took  it  on  as  an  agency,  but,  as  it  did  not  pay,  I,  in  February 
last,  handed  it  over  to  the  company  again,  but  for  the  last  two  years  I  had 
been  running  the  Yale  Tooth  Specialist  Company,  with  Dr.  Rylance  as 
partner,  and  am  still  doing  so. 

"  I  ran  what  I  termed  the  Imperial  Press  Agency,  in  connection  with 
Munyon's,  because  by  BO  doing  I  got  their  advertisements  inserted  at  a 
reduction. 

"  At  the  present  time  I  am  interested  in  an  ear-cure  business,  called 
the  '  Aural  Remedy,'  at  Craven  House,  Kingsway,  and  I  work  at  an  address 
in  Vine  Street. 

"  I  did  not  think  anything  of  Bruce  Miller's  visiting  my  wife  at  the 
time. 

"  After  returning  from  America  we  went  to  live  at  34  Store  Street  for 
about  a  year.  During  this  time  she  adopted  the  stage  name  of  '  Belle 
Elmore,'  although  she  had  had  it  in  her  mind  when  she  came  over,  but  I 
persuaded  her  to  use  the  other  name. 

"  She  got  an  engagement  at  the  Town  Hall,  Teddington,  to  sing,  and 
then  from  time  to  time  she  got  engagements  at  music  halls.  She  went  to 
the  Oxford  as  a  comedienne,  and  was  there  about  a  week. 

"  She  also  went"  to  the  Camberwell,  and  also  at  a  hall  at  Balham.  She 
also  sang  at  the  Empire,  Northampton,  and  various  towns. 

"  She  would  probably  go  away  for  about  two  weeks  and  return  for 
about  six  weeks,  but  used  to  earn  very  little. 
36 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Statement  by  Accused 

"  We  remained  at  34  Store  Street  for  some  time,  and  went  to  37  same 
street  for  about  two  years,  and  about  five  years  ago,  in,  I  think,  1905, 
removed  to  39  Hilldrop  Crescent,  for  which  I  pay  £50  a  year. 

"It  is  quite  four  years  since  she  ever  went  out  at  all  to  sing,  and, 
although  we  apparently  lived  very  happily  together,  as  a  matter  of  fact 
there  were  very  frequent  occasions  when  she  got  into  most  violent  tempers, 
and  often  threatened  she  would  leave  me,  saying  she  had  a  man  she  could 
go  to,  and  she  would  end  it  all. 

"  I  have  eeen  letters  from  Bruce  to  her,  which  ended  '  with  love  and 
kisses  to  Brown  Eyes.' 

"  About  four  years,  ago,  in  consequence  of  these  frequent  outbursts, 
I  discontinued  sleeping  with  her,  and  have  never  cohabited  with  her  since. 

"  She  did  all  the  housework  herself,  with  the  exception  of  having  a 
charwoman  in  occasionally. 

"  About  two  years  ago  she  became  honorary  treasurer  of  the  Music 
Hall  Ladies'  Guild,  and  was  here  every  Wednesday. 

' '  I  never  interfered  with  her  movements  in  any  way ;  she  went  in  and 
out  just  as  she  liked,  and  did  what  she  liked;  it  was  of  no  interest  to  me. 

"  As  I  say,  she  frequently  threatened  to  leave  me,  and  said  that  if  she 
did  she  would  go  right  out  of  my  life,  and  I  should  never  see  or  hear  from 
her  again. 

' '  On  the  Monday  night,  the  day  before  I  wrote  the  letter  to  the  Guild 
resigning  her  position  as  treasurer,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Paul  Martinetti  came  to 
our  place  to  dinner,  and  during  the  evening  Mr.  Martinetti  wanted  to  go 
to  the  lavatory.  As  he  had  been  to  our  house  several  times,  I  did  not  take 
the  trouble  to  go  and  show  him  where  it  was.  After  they  had  left  my  wife 
blamed  me  for  not  taking  him  to  the  lavatory,  and  abused  me,  and  said, 
'  This  is  the  finish  of  it.  I  won't  stand  it  any  longer.  I  shall  leave  you 
to-morrow,  and  you  will  never  hear  of  me  again.' 

"  She  had  said  this  so  often  that  I  did  not  take  much  notice  of  it, 
but  she  did  say  one  thing  which  she  had  never  said  before,  viz.,  that  I  was 
to  arrange  to  cover  up  any  scandal  with  our  mutual  friends  and  the  Guild 
the  best  way  I  could. 

"  Before  this  she  had  told  me  frequently  that  the  man  she  would  go 
to  was  better  able  to  support  her  than  I  was. 

"  I  came  to  business  the  next  morning,  and  when  I  went  home  between 
five  and  six  p.m.  I  found  she  had  gone. 

"  I  realised  that  she  had  gone,  and  I  sat  down  to  think  it  over  as  to 
how  to  cover  up  her  absence  without  any  scandal. 

"  I  think  the  same  night,  or  the  next  morning  (Wednesday)  I  wrote  a 
letter  to  the  Guild  saying  she  had  gone  away,  which  I  also  told  several 
people. 

"  I  afterwards  realised  that  this  would  not  be  a  sufficient  explanation 
for  her  not  coming  back,  and  later  on  I  told  people  that  she  was  ill  with 
bronchitis  and  pneumonia,  and  afterwards  I  told  them  she  was  dead  from 
this  ailment. 

"  I  told  them  she  died  in  California,  but  I  have  no  recollection  of 
telling  any  one  exactly  where  she  died. 

"  Some  one  afterwards  asked  me  where  my  son  lived,  and  I  told  them. 

37 


Hawley  Harvey  Crippen. 

Statement  by  Accused 

"  I  then  put  an  advertisement  in  the  Era  that  she  was  dead,  as  I 
thought  this  would  prevent  people  asking  a  lot  of  questions. 

"  Whatever  I  have  said  to  other  people  in  regard  to  her  death  is 
absolutely  wrong,  and  I  am  giving  this  as  an  explanation. 

"  So  far  as  I  know,  she  did  not  die,  but  is  still  alive. 

"  It  is  not  true  that  she  went  away  on  legal  business  for  me,  or  to  see 
any  relations  in  America. 

"  I  did  not  receive  any  cables  to  say  that  she*  was  ill,  and  it  is  not  true 
that  she  was  cremated  at  San  Francisco,  and  that  the  ashes  were  sent  to  me, 
or  that  she  sailed  from  Havre. 

"  So  far  as  I  know,  she  has  no  claim  to  any  title.1 

"  I  have  no  recollection  of  telling  any  one  my  son  was  with  her  when 
she  died. 

"  We  had  a  joint  account  at  the  Charing  Cross  Bank,  subject  to  the 
signature  of  either,  but  it  pleased  her  to  think  she  was  signing  cheques, 
and  she  also  did  so,  and  several  blank  cheques  were  always  already  signed 
by  her,  and  some  of  them  have  been  changed  by  me  since  her  departure, 
and  there  is  one  here  now  (produced). 

"  When  my  wife  went  away  I  cannot  say  if  she  took  anything  with 
her  or  not,  but  I  believe  there  is  a  theatrical  travelling  basket  missing, 
and  she  might  have  taken  this  with  some  clothes. 

"  She  took  some  of  her  jewellery,  I  know,  with  her,  but  she  left  four 
rings  behind — three  single  stone  (or  solitaire)  diamonds,  and  one  of  four 
diamonds  and  a  ruby,  also  a  diamond  brooch. 

"  She  had  other  jewellery,  and  must  have  taken  that  with  her. 

"  I  have  never  pawned  or  sold  anything  belonging  to  her  before  or 
after  she  left. 

"  Everything  I  have  told  you  is  true. 

"  I  do  not  know  what  clothes,  if  any,  she  took  away;  she  had  plenty. 

"  Whenever  we  quarrelled,  and  she  threatened  to  leave  me,  she  told 
me  she  wanted  nothing  from  me. 

"  I  have  bought  all  her  jewellery,  and,  so  far  as  I  know,  she  never 
had  any  jewellery  presents,  and  I  do  not  know  that  she  ever  had  any  money 
sent  her,  except  that  Bruce  Miller  used  to  send  her  small  amounts  on  her 
birthday  and  at  Easter  and  Christmas,  to  purchase  a  present. 

"  She  suffered  from  bilious  attacks,  and  I  have  given  her  medicine 
for  that — homoeopathic  remedies. 

"It  is  true  that  I  was  at  the  Benevolent  Fund  dinner  at  the  Criterion 
with  Miss  Le  Neve,  and  sihe  wore  the  brooch  my  wife  left  behind.  She 
has  also  worn  my  wife's  furs. 

"  Miss  Le  Neve  has  been  in  my  employ,  and  known  to  me  through 
being  employed  by  the  firms  I  have  worked  for,  for  the  past  eight  years, 
and  she  is  now  living  with  me  as  my  wife  at  Hilldrop  Crescent.  I  have 
been  intimate  with  her  during  the  past  three  years,  and  have  frequently 
stayed  with  her  at  hotels,  but  was  never  from  home  at  nights:. 

"  After  I  told  people  my  wife  was  dead  Miss  Le  Neve  and  I  went  to 
Dieppe  for  about  five  days,  and  stayed  at  a  hotel  there  (I  forget  the  name, 

1  Presumably  Crippen  meant  "claim  to  any  title-deeds  or  estate." — ED. 
38 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Statement  by  Accused 

but  the  proprietor's  name  was  Vacher)  in  the  names  of  Mr.    and  Mrs. 
Crippen. 

"  My  belief  is  that  my  wife  has  gone  to  Chicago  to  join  Bruce  Miller, 
whose  business  on  the  music  hall  stage  isi  a  musical  instrument  turn,  but 
I  think  he  has  now  gone  into  another  business,  and  has  speculated  and 
made  money.  Mr.  Didcot  was  his  agent  when  he  was  over  here. 

"  I  shall,  of  course,  do  all  I  can  to  get  in  touch  with  her,  so  as  to 
clear  this  matter  up. 

"  She  has  a  sister  named  Louise,  whose  name  is  Mills,  living  with  her 
husband,  who  is  a  soapmaker  living  at  Brooklyn.  They  live  with  my 
wife's  stepfather,  Mr.  Haraanger. 

"  I  do  not  know  where  any  of  her  other  relations  live. 

"  I  cannot  tell  you  how  you  can  find  or  trace  her,  except  as  I  have 
already  said. 

"  I  will  willingly  go  to  my  house  with  you  to  see  if  I  can  find  any 
letter®  which  may  throw  any  light  on  the  matter,  and  I  invite  you  to  look 
round  the  house,  and  do  whatever  you  like  in  the  house. 

"  This  is  all  I  can  tell  you. 

"  Any  notes  that  I  have  changed  through  any  one  in  this  building 
were  in  connection  with  my  business1. 

"  This  statement  has  been  read  over  to  me.  It  is  quite  correct,  and 
has  been  made  by  me  quite  voluntarily,  and  without  any  promise  or  threat 
having  been  held  out  to  me. 

"  (Sgd.)         HAWLBT  HARVET  CRIPPEN. 

"  (Sgd.)         WALTER  DEW,  Chief  Inspector,   Witness. 
"  (    ,,  )         ABTHUB  MITCHELL,    Witness." 

Examination  of  Mr.  Dew  continued — I  was  engaged  some  hours  taking 
the  statement,  from  about  twelve  noon  till  about  six  in  the  afternoon.  I 
then  called  Miss  Le  Neve  in,  and  she  was  with  me  for  a  time  while  Crippen 
was  out  of  the  room.  After  a  short  time  I  saw  Crippen  again,  and  went 
with  him,  Miss  Le  Neve,  and  Sergeant  Mitchell  to  39  HilJdrop  Crescent. 
Crippen  quite  readily  agreed  to  come  with  me.  He  showed  me  into  every 
room  in  the  house,  and  I  also  looked  round  the  garden.  There  were  some 
things  packed  up  in  one  of  the  rooms,  and  he  said  that  they  were  about 
to  remove.  He  told  me  that  his  wife  did  not  keep  a  servant,  and  to  save 
herself  trouble  she  had  locked  up  the  two  bedrooms  on  the  first  floor,  and 
that  he  occupied  the  one  on  the  top  and  she  the  one  next  to  him.  There 
are  two  rooms  in  the  basement,  quite  level  with  the  garden ;  these  would 
be  the  breakfast  room  and  the  kitchen.  On  that  floor  there  is  a  coal  cellar 
under  the  front-door  steps.  Then  on  the  first  floor,  at  the  top  of  the 
steps,  there  are  two  sitting  rooms.  Above  these  there  was  the  front 
bedroom,  and  then  behind  that  was  a  bed  and  sitting  room.  Those  are 
the  rooms  which  Crippen  told  me  were  kept  shut  up.  Above  that  again 
there  were  three  small  bedrooms,  one  at  the  front  and  two  at  the  back  of 
the  house,  bathroom,  and  the  ordinary  offices.  After  going  over  the  house 
I  went  into  the  breakfast  room,  the  room  next  to  the  kitchen,  and  I  asked 
Crippen  if  he  would  show  me  the  jewellery  his  wife  had  left  behind.  He 

39 


Hawley   Harvey   Crippen. 

Walter  Dew 

said,  "  With  pleasure,"  and  lie  went  away,  and  then  came  back  bringing 
exhibits  7,  8,  9,  10,  and  11.  I  said  to  him,  "  Of  course  I  shall  have  to  find 
Mrs.  Crippen  to  clear  this  matter  up."  He  said,  "  Yes,  I  will  do  everything 
I  can.  Can  you  suggest  anything  ?  Would  an  advertisement  be  any  good  ? ' ' 
I  said  that  I  thought  that  was  an  excellent  idea.  He  said  he  would  insert 
it  in  various  American  newspapers,  and  together  we  composed  an  advertise- 
ment. Exhibit  41  is  the  draft  advertisement  in  Crippen's  handwriting — 
"  Mackamotzki.  Will  Belle  Elmore  communicate  with  H.  H.  C.  or  authori- 
ties at  once.  Serious  trouble  through  your  absence.  Twenty-five  dollars 

reward  to  any  one  communicating  her  whereabouts  to ."     I  left  that 

draft  advertisement  with  Crippen.  I  left  him  somewhere  about  eight  o'clock 
that  evening.  Next  day,  Saturday,  the  9th  July,  I  circulated  a  full  descrip- 
tion of  Mrs.  Crippen  as  being  a  missing  person.  I  sent  that  description 
to  every  police  office  in  London,  and  I  made  various  inquiries.  1  did  not 
tell  Crippen  about  that.  I  continued  my  inquiries  on  Sunday,  the  10th, 
and  I  went  through  and  considered  the  statement  that  had  been  made. 
On  Monday,  the  llth,  I  went  to  Albion  House,  but  I  did  not  succeed  in 
seeing  Crippen  or  Miss  Le  Neve.  I  ascertained  that  he  was  not  in  the 
house  at  the  time.  I  saw  the  two  witnesses,  Mr.  Rylance  and  Mr.  Long, 
and  they  showed  me  the  two  letters  which  they  have  produced.  Not  finding 
Crippen  at  Albion  House,  I  went  on  to  Hilldrop  Crescent,  on  the  same 
Monday,  and  I  made  a  careful  search  of  the  house.  Long  came  to  the 
house  after  me,  and  while  I  was  searching  the  house  he  handed  me  the  draft 
advertisement,  exhibit  41.  I  dug  up  portions  of  the  garden,  and  I  also 
examined  the  coal  cellar.  On  that  day  I  circulated  a  description  of  the 
prisoner  Crippen  and  of  Miss  Le  Neve,  and  I  continued  my  inquiries.  I 
forwarded  the  description  to  various  ports  in  England  and  abroad.  On 
Tuesday,  12th  July,  I  made  a  further  examination  of  the  house,  and  also  on 
the  13th,  when,  amongst  other  things,  I  again  searched  the  coal  cellar. 
The  coal  cellar  had  a  brick  floor.  There  was  a  very  small  quantity  of  coal 
there,  and  also  a  little  rubbish,  cuttings  from  small  branches  of  trees,  an  old 
chandelier,  and  such  things  as  that.  I  went  down  with  Mitchell  on  to  my 
knees,  and  probed  about  with  a  small  poker  which  I  had  got  out  of  the 
kitchen.1  I  found  that  the  poker  went  in  somewhat  easily  between  the 
crevices  of  the  bricks,  and  I  managed  to  get  one  or  two  up,  and  then  several 
others  came  up  pretty  easily.  I  then  produced  a  spade  from  the  garden  and 
dug  the  clay  that  was  immediately  underneath  the  bricks.  After  digging 
down  to  about  a  depth  of  four  spadefuls  I  came  across  what  appeared  to  be 
human  remains.  After  digging  further,  I  sent  for  Dr.  Marshall,  the 
divisional  surgeon  of  police  in  that  district,  and  Sir  Melville  Macnaghten, 
the  chief  of  the  Criminal  Investigation  Department.  Dr.  Marshall  came 
between  five  and  six  o'clock,  and  he  saw  a  portion  that  I  had  unearthed. 
After  I  had  procured  assistance,  we  dug  further,  and  Dr.  Marshall  came 
back  later  on.  We  left  the  remains  where  they  were  that  night,  without 
moving  them;  we  covered  them  up,  locked  up  the  house,  and  left  it  in 
charge  of  two  police  officers. 

On  the  next  day,  the  14th,  Dr.   Marshall  again  attended,  along  with 
Mr.  Pepper.     Under  their  instructions  the  remains  were  removed  from  the 


40  l  See  Introduction. 


METROPOLITAN  POLICE 

MURDER 

AND    MUTILATION. 

Portraits,  Description  and  Specimen  of  Handwriting  of  HAWLEY 
HARVEY  CRIPPEN,  alias  Peter  Crippen,  alias  Franckel;  and 
ETHEL    CLARA    LE   NEVE,   alias    Mrs.   Crippen,   and   Neave. 


O 


r 
/•*»-*''/- 


Wanted    for    Ihe    Murder   of  CORA    CRIPPEN    otherwise   Belle 

Elmore:     Kunifunde  Mackamoliki :    Martan^ar    and    Turner,  on, 

or  about,  2nd  February  tail. 

Description  of  Crippen.  Age  »0.  height  6  ft,  9  or  4, 
eample.lon  fresh,  hair  light  brown,  Inclined  sandy,  teanty,  bald  on 
lop,  raiher  long  wanly  moustache,  wmcivhal  tlrsftHlV,  «>*»*«>•  bridge 
ofnatf  raiher  Itat.  lake  leeth.  medium  build.  throw,  hu  feet  outwardi 
When  walking.  Ma>  be  clean  shavtn  or  wearing  n  heard  and  a..l.| 
rimmed  apeclule-i,  and  may  poaaikly  ax-lime  a  win. 

Sometimes  wears  a  Jacket  suit,  and  a|  other  time*  frock  cool 
and  ailk  hai.  Nay  tie  drnued  In  a  brown  jacket  suit,  brawn  hat  and 
aland  up  collar  (SIM  IS). 

Somewhat  ilavenly  appearance,  wcanhUhal  raiher  at  back  of  head 

Very  plausible  and  quirt  (poked,  remarkably  'cool  and  collected 

Speak*  French  and  probably  German,    Carrie*  Firearm*. 

An  American  ri<l«rn,  and  b>  profession  a  0«el«r. 

Hu  lived  in  Nan  York,  Philadelphia,  Si.  toula,  Detroit.  Michigan, 
Coldwaler,  and  other  parts  of  America. 

Hay  obtain  a  poallion  u  »isi»iant  to  a  docior  or  cy*  apreialUt, 
or  may  pnteiae  u  an  eye  specialist,  Drnliit.or  open  a  builne.v*  lor  the 
trealmcal  of  deafness,  advertising  freel.v. 

H*.»  rrprcwnled  Mftnyon's  Rrmrilim,  In  various  cities  in  America. 

Description  of  Ue  Neve  alias  Neave.— A  short  hand  »riler 
and  l»ni»l,  age  IT,  height  6  fi.  6,  complexion  pale,  hair  light  brown 
(irwy  dye  «ame),  urge  «r«y  or  blue  eyes,  food  leeih,  nice  lookina, 
rather  IgnailnMtl  now^ood  shape),  medium  build,  ple.wm.  ladv-llfe 
appearance.  Qukl,  *ubd»cd  nwnnef,  lalka  quleily,  looki  Inlenily  when 


i.   ,..„,,,.,„.  jp. 
u,     C...    lT 


.  tf  Londe* 

Drr.v.  well,  but  quietly,  and  may  wear  a  blue  >rr«e  costume  (coal  reaching  ID  hip*)  trimmed  hc.vy  braid,  about 
I  Inch  wide,  round  edge,  over  ifcouldrn  and  poakcli.  Three  large  braid  hultoni  down  front,  aboui  «iie  of  n  Itorin.  three 
jinall  oni-~  on  each  poekei,  two  on  each  cuff,  wveral  rown  iif  iliichina  round  bollom  of  nkirl :  or  a  liuhl  grey  •dindoo-'tripe 
coiiumr.  same  alyle  a*  above,  but  Irimmed  grey  molrr  -ilk  ln<icad  or  braid,  and  two  roos  of  silk  round  bollom  of  akin; 
or  a  while  prlnce«  robe  will)  gold  »cquln<:  or  a  mole  coloured  striped  coaiume  with  black  molrr  illk  collar;  or  a  dark 
vlemrote  cl«lh  costume,  trimmed  blark  velvet  callar:  or  a  light  hellglrapt  drew. 

May  have  In  her  poavaalon  and  endeavour  la  dlipoae  of  «me!— a  round  a  old  brooch,  with  polnli  radiating  tlf-it/t  from 
renire,  each  poi"1  "b"L"  •"  lllch  '""*•  '"sniond  In  centre,  raeh  Mint  ael  brllllani.,  Ihe  brooch  In  all  beintf  >riuhTly  turger 
than  a  half~ero»n:  an>l  two  single  Mnr  diamond  ring*,  and  a  diamond  noil  sapphire  (or  ruby)  ring,  >lonea  ralHrr  l»r«.-. 


Ab»«pndc 
Tie 


Irui,  and  may  have  left,  or  will  endeavour  to  leave  the  country, 
very  enquiry  41  fthlpplnti  Officer.  Hotel*,  and  other  likely  place*  and  ciuae  *hlpa  to  be  watched 


i»Uo«  ta  be  (tvm  U  UM  M«lr»poliun  Pollea  OOUw   Maw  »cotl>n«  Y«r4   London  S  W.,  or  al  any  PolU.  •UUcn 

E.  R.  HENRY, 


Reproduction  of  Police  Bill. 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Walter  Dew 

cellar  and  put  into  a  coffin  and  removed  to  the  mortuary.  In  addition  to 
the  remains  which  we  put  into  the  coffin  there  were  some  articles  which 
we  put  into  a  tray,  one  of  these  articlesi  being  a  Hinde's  curler.  From 
that  time,  the  14th  July,  the  remains  were  in  charge  of  the  doctors,  so  far 
as  I  know.  I  made  some  measurements  of  the  cellar,  at  the  request  of 
Mr.  Pepper.  The  distance  from  the  surface  of  the  brick  floor  to  the  upper 
portion  of  the  remains  was  8  inches;  the  depth  of  the  brick  was  3  inches, 
so  that  there  was  5  inches  of  earth  or  clay.  The  bricks  had  been  laid  on 
the  flat.  Some  of  the  remains  were  lower  than  others;  the  distance  from 
the  upper  surface  of  the  brick  to  these  would  be  12  inches.  All  the  remains 
were  found  within  a  depth  of  12  inches,  including  the  brick — within  9  inches 
of  earth. 

When  I  was  searching  the  house  on  the  14th  I  found  a  large  quantity 
of  ladies'  clothes.  In  addition  to  the  clothes  which  I  found  in  the  wardrobes 
and  in  the  chest  of  drawers  I  found  three  baskets  and  one  large  trunk  full 
of  clothes.  I  also  saw  a  quantity  of  fure,  which  I  afterwards  removed. 
There  was  a  box  underneath  the  bed  in  the  first  floor  front  bedroom.  In 
that  box  I  found  two  suits  of  pyjamas  and  one  odd  pair  of  pyjama  trousers. 
Exhibit  48  is  the  odd  pair  of  trousers.  I  did  not  find  any  jacket  to  corre- 
spond with  those  trousers,  although  I  looked  for  it.  The  two  suits  and  the 
odd  trousers  were  made  of  the  same  sort  of  material,  but  not  quite  the 
same  pattern.  The  pair  of  trousers  was  what  might  be  called  a  single 
pattern — the  only  one  of  that  pattern.  I  also  found  exhibit  43,  which  is  in 
Latin,  and  is  a  diploma  of  the  Hospital  College  of  Cleveland,  Ohio.  On 
the  back  I  found  the  following  endorsements  :  — 

Presented  and  Registered  in  the  Office  of  the  Clerk  of  the  County  of  King's  by 
Hawley  H.  Crippen,  as  his  authority  to  practice  physic  and  surgery,  this  8th  day 
of  July,  1900.  Wm.  J.  Kaisu,  Clerk  (King's  County  Seal).  Registered  also  in  New 
York  County — P.  Joseph  Scully,  Clerk  of  the  City  and  County  of  New  York. 
Bowling  Green,  N.Y.  This  will  certify  that  the  within  diploma  is  from  a 
reputable  Medical  College  legally  chartered  under  the  laws  of  the  State  of  Ohio. 
Given  under  my  hand  this  December  3rd,  1892.  J.  N.  M.,  M. D.,  Secretary, 
State  Board  of  Health.  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  March  22nd,  1893.  This  diploma  having 
been  found  to  be  a  genuine  document  issued  by  a  legally  chartered  college,  is 
endorsed  by  order  of  the  faculty  of  the  Medical  College  of  Philadelphia.  A.  R. 
Thomas,  M.D. ,  Dean. 

It  also  certifies  that  Hawley  Harvey  Crippen  is  of  good  moral  conduct, 
and  has  been  instructed  in  a  course  of  studies  of  medicine,  and  is  well 
qualified  to  practise  the  art  of  medicine  and  kindred  sciences.  That  is 
signed  by  W.  H.  Burridge,  secretary;  George  Willey,  president;  and 
John  C.  Sanders,  professor  of  obstetrics;  N.  Schneider,  M.D.,  chirurgical 
professor;  H.  H.  Baxter,  professor  of  materia  medica  and  medical  clinics; 
S.  A.  Boynton,  professor  of  physiology  and  microscopical  anatomy;  G.  J. 
Jones,  professor  of  the  principle  and  practice  of  medicine;  H.  E.  Biggar, 
professor  of  gynaecology;  W.  A.  Phillips,  professor  of  ophthalmics;  Q.  Y. 
Mover,  a  professor  of  histology;  B.  F.  Gamber,  professor  of  anatomy;  E. 
B.  Bauder,  professor  of  medical  jurisprudence;  and  Herbert  C.  Foote,  pro- 
fessor of  clinics. 

The  two  suits  of  pyjamas  which  are  now  shown  me  are  the  suits 
which  I  found  in  the  same  box  as  the  odd  pair  of  trousers.  The  necks  of 

41 


Hawley  Harvey  Crippen. 

Walter  Dew 

the  two  jackets  bear  the  name  of  the  makers,  "  Shirt-makers,  Jones 
Brothers  (Holloway),  Limited,  Holloway,  N."  There  is  no  maker's 
name  on  the  trousers.  In  the  garden  I  found  a  raised  heap  of  earth 
covered  with  garden  litter  and  empty  flower  pots.  I  caused  that  to  be 
dug,  and  I  found  on  the  top  there  was  a  small  quantity  of  loam  or  garden 
mould,  and  underneath  6  inches  to  8  inches  of  clay,  and  below  that  again 
all  loam. 

You  saw  the  amount  of  clay  that  had  been  dug  from  the  hole  in  the 
cellar  1 

The  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — Is  not  that  going  a  little  too  far?  It 
is  quite  sufficient  that  somebody  did  find  clay  there. 

Examination  continued — As  I  have  already  mentioned,  we  circulated 
the  description  of  Mrs.  Crippen  and  made  inquiries,  but  I  did  not  take 
any  further  specific  steps  after  14th  July.  On  16th  July  a  warrant  for 
the  arrest  of  the  prisoner  was  granted  at  Bow  Street,  and  it  was  entrusted 
to  me  for  execution.  Some  days  afterwards  I  received  some  information, 
and  I  proceeded  to  Canada.  On  31st  July  I  went  on  board  the  steamship 
"  Montrose  "  at  Father  Point;  she  was.  on  the  voyage  from  Antwerp  to 
Quebec.  Near  the  captain's  cabin  on  the  deck  I  saw  the  prisoner 
Crippen.  He  was  clean  shaven  then.  He  was  brought  into  the  captain's 
cabin.  I  said,  "  Good  morning,  Dr.  Crippen;  I  am  Chief  Inspector  Dew." 
He  said,  "  Good  morning,  Mr.  Dew."  I  said,  "  You  will  be  arrested  for 
the  murder  and  mutilation  of  your  wife,  Cora  Crippen,  in  London,  on  or 
about  the  2nd  of  February  last."  Chief  Inspector  McCarthy,  of  the 
Canadian  Provincial  Police,  cautioned  him,  and  he  made  no  reply.  Mr. 
McCarthy  and  Inspector  Dennis  then  searched  him  in  my  presence. 
Exhibits  7,  8,  9,  10,  and  11,  which  are  the  same  articles  of  jewellery  as 
he  had  shown  me  as  being  the  ones  which  his  wife  had  left  behind  her, 
were  found  on  the  lower  part  of  his  under-vest ;  the  two  rings  were  sewn 
in  and  the  two  brooches  were  pinned  in.  Exhibit  12  was  fastened  to 
his  under-vest  with  a  pin.  There  were  also  two  cards  found  upon  him. 
I  then  left  him  and  went  to  No.  5  cabin,  where  I  found  Miss  Le  Neve. 
In  the  same  cabin  I  found  some  of  Crippen's  clothes.  At  that  time  Miss 
Le  Neve  was  dressed  as  a  boy,  with  her  hair  cut  short.  After  speaking 
to  her  I  returned  to  the  captain's  cabin,  where  Crippen  was,  and  then 
he  was  taken  from  that  to  another  cabin.  Asi  we  were  doing  that  he  said, 
"I  am  not  sorry;  the  anxiety  has  been  too  much."  I  then  read  the 
warrant  in  detail  to  him,  but  he  did  not  make  any  reply.  Mr.  M'Carthy 
then  put  handcuffs  on  him,  and  I  said,  "  We  must  put  these  on,  because 
on  a  card  found  on  you  you  have  written  that  you  intend  jumping  over- 
board." He  replied,  "  I  won't.  I  am  more  than  satisfied,  because  the 
anxiety  has  been  too  awful."  Exhibit  2  is  one  of  the  cards  found  upon 
him.  It  is  a  printed  card,  "  E.  Robinson  &  Co.,  Detroit,  Mich.  Presented 
by  Mr.  John  Robinson,"  and  on  the  back  isi  written,  "  I  cannot  stand 
the  horror  I  go  through  every  night  any  longer,  as  I  see  nothing  bright 
ahead."  Exhibit  3  is  the  other  card,  a  piece  of  similar  card,  and  on  it 
is  written,  "Shall  we  wait  until  to-night  about  10  or  11  o'clock?  If 
not,  what  time?  "  In  my  opinion  the  handwriting  on  those  cards  is  Dr. 
42 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Walter  Dew 

Crippen's.        In  his    portmanteau  I    found    several  other  similar  printed 
cards. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — The  cabin  that  Miss  Le  Neve  was  in  was 
a  two-berth  cabin,  which  could  be  converted  into  a  four-berth  cabin. 
The  cards  to  which  I  have  spoken  were  found  almost  immediately  after 
my  first  speaking  to  Dr.  Oippen  on  the  steamer.  He  was  searched 
immediately. 

Examination  continued — Referring  to  the  signature  upon  the  manifest 
which  is  now  shown  to  me,  "  Kobinson  "  is  written  backwards,  but  it 
seems  to  me  to  be  Dr.  Crippen's  handwriting.  While  Dr.  Crippen  was 
being  further  searched  he  said,  "How  is  Miss  Le  Neve?"  I  said, 
"  Agitated,  but  I  am  doing  all  I  can  for  her."  He  said,  "It  is  only 
fair  to  say  that  she  knows  nothing  about  it;  I  never  told  her  anything." 
On  20th  August  I  left  with  the  prisoner  and  Miss  Le  Neve  in  my  custody 
for  England  on  board  the  steamer  "  Majestic."  On  21st  August  I  again 
read  to  the  prisoner  the  warrant  charging  him  with  the  wilful  murder  of 
his  wife,  and  in  reply  he  said  "  Right."  On  24th  August,  during  the 
voyage,  I  was  taking  Crippen  for  deck  exercise,  and  on  that  occasion  he 
said,  "  I  want  to  ask  you  a  favour,  but  I  will  leave  it  till  Friday."  I 
said,  "  Tell  me  what  it  is  now  and  I  can  answer  as  well  now  as  on  Friday." 
He  said,  "  When  you  took  me  off  the  ship  I  did  not  see  Miss  Le  Neve, 
and  I  don't  know  how  things  may  go;  they  may  go  all  right  or  they  may 
go  all  wrong  with  me,  and  I  may  never  see  her  again ;  and  I  want  to  ask 
you  if  you  will  let  me  see  her;  but  I  won't  speak  to  her.  She  has  been 
my  only  comfort  for  the  last  three  years."  On  29th  August,  having 
arrived  in  England,  he  was  formally  charged  at  Bow  Street  Police  Court. 
He  did  not  make  any  reply. 

The  furs  (exhibits  13,  15,  16,  and  18)  were  taken  away  by  me  from 
Hilldrop  Crescent  on  5th  September.  Those  are  some  of  the  furs  which 
I  had  seen  on  14th  July  and  other  dates.  They  were  in  a  large  trunk  in 
the  first-floor  back  room.  Inside  the  fur  muff  (exhibit  18)  I  found  a  pair 
of  gloves  (exhibit  19),  size  6.  I  also  found  the  fur  muff  (exhibit  20)  at 
the  same  time.  I  found  the  photograph  (exhibit  28)  in  one  of  the  sitting- 
rooms,  and  I  took  possession  of  it  on  5th  September.  The  other  photo- 
graph (exhibit  29)  was  sent  to  me  by  one  of  the  witnesses.  I  saw  the 
photograph  of  Mr.  Bruce  Miller  (exhibit  72)  several  times  in  the  top 
bedroom  at  39  Hilldrop  Crescent.  I  am  not  quite  sure  where  the  other 
photograph  of  Mr.  Bruce  Miller  (exhibit  73)  was  found,  but  it  was  found 
in  the  house  somewhere.  When  the  furniture  was  removed  all  the  photo- 
graphs were  retained  and  put  in  one  corner.  On  10th  September  I  again 
went  to  39  Hilldrop  Crescent  and  took  possession  of  the  ermine  muff  and 
necklet  (exhibit  59).  On  28th  September  I  went  to  Albion  House,  and 
I  took  from  a  wooden  box  there  the  ermine  jacket  and  white  fur  jacket 
(exhibits  57  and  58). 

The  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — You  do  not  want  this  in  great  detail  because 

Mr.  Tobin  has  told  us  most  frankly  and  properly  that  he  does  not  dispute 

that  Miss  Le  Neve  did  wear  furs  which  were  the  property  of  Mrs.  Crippen. 

Mr.    TRAVERS   HUMPHREYS — I   do  not  think   it  is   suggested  that  she 

wore  these. 

43 


Hawley   Harvey  Crippen. 

Walter  Dew 

The  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — She  wore  some  of  them;  that  is  sufficient. 

(To  the  Witness) — I  suppose  you  probed  with  the  poker  between  the 
bricks? — That  is  so. 

"Was  there  any  mortar  between  the  bricks  then  or  not? — It  could  not 
be  described  as  mortar;  it  had  been  very  closely  packed  down,  and  was 
covered  with  coal  dust  and  that  sort  of  thing.  I  saw  no  mortar,  and  I 
do  not  think  that  any  had  been  used.  The  clay  would  keep  the  bricks 
very  firm. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  TOBIN — It  was  about  ten  o'clock  on  Friday, 
8th  July,  when  I  went  to  the  Hilldrop  Crescent  house  and  saw  Miss  Le 
Neve.  I  then  went  on  to  Albion  House,  and  I  saw  Dr.  Crippen  very 
shortly  before  ten.  I  was  with  Miss  Le  Neve  between  the  time  I  arrived 
at  Hilldrop  Crescent  and  the  time  I  arrived  at  Albion  House;  she  had  no 
opportunity  of  communicating  in  any  way  with  Dr.  Crippen  during  that 
time.  My  visit  to  Hilldrop  Crescent  was  a  surprise  visit  to  Miss  Le  Neve, 
as  was  also  my  visit  to  Albion  House,  so  far  as  Dr.  Crippen  was  concerned. 
When  I  arrived  at  Albion  House  Miss  Le  Neve  volunteered  to  go  and  find 
Crippen.  She  was  with  him  for  two  or  three  minutes,  quite  a  short  space 
of  time.  At  our  interview  I  put  a  number  of  questions  to  him  and  he 
answered  every  one  of  them  quite  readily.  I  suggested  going  with  him  to 
the  house  and  to  go  over  it,  and  he  readily  agreed. 

He  did  not  show  the  smallest  reluctance? — None  at  all.  I  think  it 
would  be  between  six  and  seven  in  the  evening  when  we  arrived  at  the 
Hilldrop  Crescent  house.  Dr.  Crippen  went  with  me  into  every  room, 
and  he  did  not  attempt  to  conceal  anything.  I  said  that  I  should  like 
to  go  into  the  cellar,  and  he  came  with  me. 

No  difficulty  whatever  about  it? — No. 

Did  he  show  the  smallest  trace  of  worry  or  anxiety  as  to  going  into 
the  cellar  with  you? — He  was  perfectly  cool.  I  should  think  that  we 
would  stay  in  the  cellar  for  about  a  couple  of  minutes.  It  is  a  very  dark 
cellar.  It  would  be  approximately  in  the  middle  of  the  floor  that  I 
afterwards  found  the  remains.  I  do  not  think  there  was  any  coal  lying 
about  the  floor  at  the  part  where  I  found  the  remains ;  I  think  the  coal 
was  at  the  side  of  the  cellar. 

The  part  where  the  remains  were  subsequently  found  was,  as  far  as 
you  remember,  not  covered  by  coal  at  all? — No,  except  dust,  and  perhaps 
a  small  portion  of  coal,  but  not  much.  I  suppose  I  was  with  Dr.  Crippen 
in  the  house  for  about  an  hour  or  an  hour  and  a  half. 

At  that  time,  of  course,  you  were  suspicious,  although  you  had  not 
sufficient  ground  to  go  upon  for  arrest?  Was  that  not  your  state  of 
mind? — Well,  I  was  trying  to  keep  a  perfectly  clear  mind. 

I  am  sure  of  that,  but  at  the  same  time  you  would  naturally  be 
suspicious? — I  was  not  satisfied. 

And  you  indicated  that  to  him? — I  told  him  so.  I  told  him  that  I 
should  have  to  find  his  wife. 

Did  you  say,  "  You  must  find  your  wife,"  or  "  I  must  find  your  wife  "  ? 
— "  I  shall  have  to  find  her."  He  said,  "  I  will  do  all  I  can  to  find  her." 

Did  he  then  in  any  way  indicate  alarm  or  fright,  or  anything  of  that 
kind? — No,  he  did  not.     I  went  next  into  the  cellar  on  Monday,  the  llth, 
44 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Walter  Dew 

and  I  looked  round  and  tested  the  bricks  with  the  heel  of  my  boot.  That 
is  all  I  did,  except  to  look  at  the  floor  as  far  as  I  could  with  a  candle.  I 
would  spend  two  or  three  minutes  in  the  cellar  that  day.  I  pushed  the 
bricks  with  my  heel  to  see  if  they  were  loose,  but  I  did  not  find  anything 
to  arouse  my  suspicions.  On  an  ordinary  examination  there  was  nothing 
to  indicate  to  my  eye  or  to  my  foot  that  the  cellar  floor  had  been  disturbed 
for  years;  there  was  nothing  to  indicate  that  there  was  anything  wrong. 

1  went  back  again  on  the  Tuesday  and  looked  all  round,  examined  the 
rubbish  and  moved  it,  and  probably  tapped  it  with  my  foot,  but  there 
was  nothing  to  notice.       My  examination  on  the  Tuesday  lasted  about  the 
same  time  as  the  one  on  the  Monday.      On  the  Wednesday  I  made  a  further 
examination  with  a  small  poker.       I  went  down  on  my  hands  and  knees  and 
probed  all  round  the  cellar  with  the  poker,  and  at  last  I  found  the  place 
where  the  remains  were.       I  found  loose  bricks,  and  on  digging  up  with  a 
spade  I  found  the  remains.       The  remains  were  what  might  be  called  close 
packed,  heavily  packed,  with  clay  above  them  to  a  depth  of  5  inches. 

They  were  rammed  in? — Yes,  rammed  in,  but  looser  there  than  in 
other  parts  of  the  cellar  where  there  were  no  remains.  I  would  describe 
the  remains  as  close  packed  with  clay.  The  cellar  wasi  3  yards  long  by 

2  yards  3  inches  wide;  the  length  of  the  remains  was  4  feet  1  inch,  and  the 
greatest  width  20  inches.     It  was  a  fairly  regular  oblong  area.     The  remains 
were  mixed  altogether,  packed  close  together  in  a  mass  extending  over  that 
area.        There  was  lime  mixed  up  with  the  remains.        Of  course,   as  we 
dug  we  may  have  taken  some  of  the  lime  off  the  clay. 

Take  a  bit  of  flesh  there  and  another  bit  of  flesh  below  it,  might  there 
have  been  lime  between — a  sprinkling  of  lime,  then  some  remains,  then 
another  sprinkling  of  lime,  and  then  more  remains? — No,  there  was  one 
mass.  There  would  be  nothing  actually  in  between ;  it  would  all  be  either 
at  the  bottom  or  at  the  side.  So  far  as  I  could  judge,  the  lime  was  all 
round  the  remains,  over  them,  under  them,  and  at  the  side  of  them,  but 
not  mixed  up  with  them  in  the  sense  of  layers.  There  were  different  bits 
of  skin  of  different  sizes  found  amongst  the  remains. 

Mixed  up  and  folded  over  in  parts,  jumbled  up  all  together? — All 
together ;  this  huge  mass  of  flesh  was  all  together. 

Were  any  parts  of  those  bits  of  skin  folded  over? — I  cannot  say.  It 
was  impossible  for  me  to  make  such  a  close  examination  as  that.  I  found 
the  first  lot  of  remains  about  five  o'clock,  and  then  I  sent  for  Dr.  Marshall. 
They  remained  there  till  he  came,  but  I  had  not  taken  up  much  then. 

Then  when  Dr.  Marshall  came  the  remains  were  taken  out? — Oh,  no, 
not  touched  at  all.  I  sent  for  two  police  officers  with  spades  and  other 
implements,  and  we  then  dug  completely  round  this  mass  of  flesh  and 
uncovered  it.  We  covered  that  up  about  twelve  o'clock  midnight,  and 
locked  the  cellar  door;  we  left  two  police  officers  in  charge  and  left  the 
house.  We  did  not  touch  the  remains  at  all  as  far  as  we  could  help. 
We  laid  some  boards  over  the  hole  that  we  had  made.  Mr.  Pepper  and 
Dr.  Marshall  came  about  eleven  o'clock  next  day,  and  they  stayed  till  the 
remains  were  removed  by  an  undertaker.  They  made  some  examination  of 
them,  and  then  about  two  o'clock  the  remains  were  placed  in  a  shell  and 
removed  to  the  mortuary,  and  passed  out  of  my  care  entirely. 

*  45 


Hawley  Harvey  Crippen. 


Walter  Dew 


I  boarded  the  "  Montrose  "  at  Father  Point  about  8.30  in  the  morning 
of  31st  July.  Passengers  by  that  boat  would  not  disembark  there  in 
ordinary  course,  and  it  would  be  against  the  regulations  for  the  cargo  to 
be  landed.  Father  Point  is  about  twelve  hours  on  this  side  of  Quebec  for 
a  vessel  like  the  "  Montrose."  It  all  depends  on  how  long  they  are  delayed 
at  the  quarantine  station  before  they  reach  Quebec.  It  took  us  sixteen 
hours,  as  we  were  delayed.  The  quarantine  station  is  about  12  or  14  miles 
off  Quebec.  A  pilot  must  always  be  taken  on  board  at  Father  Point  for 
vessels  going  up  to  Quebec. 

The  two  cards  that  have  been  read  were  found  on  Crippen  shortly  after 
I  got  on  board.  I  am  absolutely  satisfied  that  Crippen  had  no  opportunity 
of  writing  those  cards  after  I  had  spoken  to  him.  One  of  the  cards  has 
on  the  back  of  it,  "I  cannot  stand  the  horror  I  go  through  every  night 
any  longer,  and,  as  I  see  nothing  bright  ahead,  and  money  has  come  to 
an  end,  I  have  made  up  my  mind  to  jump  overboard  to-night.  I  know 
I  have  spoilt  your  life,  but  I  hope  some  day  you  can  learn  to  forgive  me ; 
with  best  words  of  love,  your  H."  That  is  written  in  his  handwriting, 
as  I  believe.  As  far  as  I  know,  Miss  Le  Neve  and  Crippen  occupied  the 
earn©  cabin  the  whole  way  across. 

Therefore  if  the  information  on  that  card,  "  I  cannot  stand  the  horror, 
I  have  made  up  my  mind  to  jump  overboard,"  was  intended  for  Miss  Le 
Neve,  really  there  was  no  need  to  put  it  in  writing? — I  do  not  know.  During 
the  progress  of  this  case  I  made  inquiries  as  to  whether  Mrs.  Crippen  (Belle 
Elmore)  had  been  earning  money  on  the  music  hall  stage  or  otherwise 
during  the  last  few  years,  and  I  found  that  she  had  earned  money,  but  not 
much,  I  should  think.  During  the  last  four  years  she  earned  very  little 
indeed.  So  far  as  I  can  understand,  Dr.  Crippen  was  really  the  bread- 
winner. 

Did  you  find  out  that  Belle  Elmore  was  never  regularly  on  the  music 
hall  stage  or  any  other  stage  in  London? — She  was  not  regarded  as  a 
"  star."  I  found  that  she  had  been  at  various  music  halls  and  variety  halls, 
in  Bristol,  and  so  on — principally  local,  but  not  so  much  in  the  last  three 
or  four  years. 

I  have  had  charge  of  this  case  since  30th  June.  I  have  not  made 
any  inquiries  as  to  whether  Crippen  owed  debts  when  he  left  this  country, 
and  I  do  not  think  he  did. 

Re-examined  by  Mr.  MUIR — When  I  interviewed  Dr.  Crippen  on  8th 
July  at  Albion  House  and  at  Hilldrop  Crescent  he  appeared  to  be  perfectly 
calm,  and  on  the  voyage  from  Canada  to  this  country  he  was  perfectly 
cool  and  collected.  He  conversed  with  me  on  various  subjects  other  than 
this  case.  He  did  not  appear  to  be  at  all  dejected.  There  was  no  difference 
in  his  manner  after  his  arrest  from  what  it  was  before  his  arrest.  The 
hole  in  the  cellar  where  the  earth  was  loose  was  practically  limited  to  the 
space  occupied  by  the  remains. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — Round  the  hole  in  which  the  remains  were 
the  earth  was  very  firm,  as  if  it  had  never  been  disturbed. 

When  you  found  the  bricks  were  loose,  or  could  be  removed  without 
difficulty,  did  you  happen  to  notice  whether  that  extended  over  the  whole 
area? — Oh,  no.     I  had  previously  tested  round  the  sides  of  the  cellar  and 
46 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Walter  Dew 

at  each  end,  and  it  was  when  I  came  to  this  particular  spot  that  I  found 
those  bricks  were  loose.  The  others  were  quite  firm.  In  my  judgment, 
the  area  of  loose  bricks  about  corresponded  with  the  hole. 

ALBERT  FRANK  LEVERTON,  examined  by  Mr.  MUIR — I  am  an  under- 
taker. I  attended  with  a  shell  and  coffin  at  the  cellar  at  39  Hilldrop  Crescent 
on  14th  July.  I  did  not  see  the  remains  put  into  the  shell.  I  screwed  the 
shell  down  myself  and  took  it  to  the  mortuary,  and  left  it  there  screwed 
down. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  HUNTLY  JENKINS — Was  there  earth  all  over  the 
remains? — I  did  not  have  sufficient  opportunity  to  examine  the  remains  to 
see  what  they  were.  Before  the  magistrate  I  said  I  saw  some  earth  with  the 
remains,  what  little  I  saw  of  them. 

I  do  not  suggest  that  you  thoroughly  examined  them,  but  you  did  see 
some  earth  mixed  up  with  the  remains? — Yes.  I  could  not  tell  how  the 
remains  were  put  into  the  coffin,  whether  by  hand  or  by  spade. 

DANIEL  GOOCH,  examined  by  Mr.  MUIR — I  am  police  constable  501  of 
the  "  Y  "  Division.  On  13th  July  I  assisted  in  digging  in  a  cellar  at  39 
Hilldrop  Crescent,  and  on  the  14th,  with  another  constable  named  Martin, 
I  put  the  remains  into  a  shell.  We  used  nothing  but  our  hands  in  doing  so. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  HUNTLT  JENKINS — The  floor  of  the  cellar  was 
laid  with  bricks.  There  was  a  very  bad  smell  coming  from  the  remains, 
which  were  in  a  number  of  small  pieces. 

Dr.  AUGUSTUS  JOSEPH  PEPPER,  examined  by  Mr.  Mum — I  am  a  Master 
in  Surgery  at  the  London  University  and  a  Fellow  of  the  Royal  College 
of  Surgeons.  I  am  consulting  surgeon  at  St.  Mary's  Hospital.  I  have 
been  in  active  practice  as  a  surgeon  for  about  thirty-five  years.  On  14th 
July  of  this  year  I  went  to  39  Hilldrop  Crescent  with  Chief  Inspector  Dew, 
and  I  met  Dr.  Marshall  there.  In  the  cellar  I  found  that  part  of  the  floor 
had  been  taken  up,  and  in  a  hole  in  the  ground  I  saw  what  appeared  to 
be  animal  remains,  including  in  the  word  "  animal,"  human.  I  looked 
at  the  soil  and  saw  that  it  was  composed  partly  of  loam  and  partly  of  clay 
with  some  lime  mixed  in  it.  I  also  found  some  articles  in  the  hole;  some 
of  these  were  taken  from  the  hole  and  put  on  a  tray.  Among  them  there 
was  a  tuft  of  dark  brown  hair  in  a  Hinde's  curler.  Before  it  was  stretched 
out  it  appeared  to  be  3|  inches,  long.  The  natural  colour  of  the  hair 
was  dark  brown ;  the  part  in  the  curler  showed  gradations  of  bleaching.  I 
also  found  a  small  piece  of  fair  hair  lying  in  a  large  handkerchief,  what 
is  called  a  man's  size,  with  no  identification  mark  on  it.  Two  corners 
were  tied  in  a  reef  knot;  it  was  torn  through  opposite  the  knot,  where 
it  was  very  much  decayed.  There  were  also  two  small  pieces  of  cloth  of 
a  reddish  brown  colour  and  a  portion  of  a  woman's  undervest  with  six 
buttons,  one  of  which  was  fastened.  It  had  a  lace  collar  and  armlets. 
These  articles  were  thickly  encrusted  with  cement-like  material.  There 
was  also  a  large  piece  of  flesh,  composed  of  skin,  fat,  and  muscle.  That 
came  from  the  thigh  and  lower  part  of  the  buttock. 

Of  a  human  being? — Oh,  yes.  There  was  also  a  piece  of  coarse 

47 


Hawley   Harvey   Crippen. 


Dr.  Pepper 


string-like  material,  which  is  of  no  importance.  Those  articles  were  placed 
on  a  tray.  I  instructed  the  police  as  to  what  should  be  done  with  the 
remaining  portion  of  the  remains,  and  it  was  done  in  my  presence.  I 
examined  the  contents  of  the  shell  at  the  mortuary  next  day.  I  found  that 
all  the  bones  had  been  removed,  the  head  was  missing,  and  the  limbs 
were  missing,  except  that  piece  of  the  thigh,  and  another  piece  which  very 
likely  came  from  the  thigh,  but  there  was  no  bone  or  part  of  a  bone.  On 
15th  July  I  placed  in  five  jars  some  of  the  organs  that  were  found. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — We  ought  to  have,  and  I  think  I  should 
like  to  have  it  now,  the  organs  which  were  found? — The  viscera  of  the  chest 
and  abdomen,  in  one  piece,  that  is,  the  heart,  the  lungs,  the  lower  2£  inches 
of  the  windpipe,  the  gullet,  the  liver,  the  kidneys,  spleen,  stomach, 
pancreas. 

Then  except  the  organs  of  generation  the  internal  organs  were  prac- 
tically all  the  organs  of  the  body? — Yes. 

Examination  continued — On  the  15th  July  I  found  a  piece  of  skin 
measuring  11  inches  by  9  inches  with  some  fat  attached  to  it.  That  was 
in  addition  to  the  two  pieces  I  have  spoken  of  before.  That  piece  came 
from  the  upper  part  of  the  abdomen  and  lower  part  of  the  chest.  I  found 
another  piece  of  skin,  7  inches  by  6  inches,  which  came  from  the  lower 
part,  the  front  portion  of  the  abdomen.  There  was  a  mark  upon  that 
piece  which  attracted  my  attention,  and  I  afterwards  examined  it  with 
particularity.  I  spent  several  hours  examining  it. 

In  your  opinion,  as  the  result  of  that  examination,  what  was  that 
mark? — It  was  the  mark  of  a  scar,  a  little  over  4  inches  in  length.  That 
scar  would  have  been  visible  upon  the  piece  of  skin.  When  that  piece 
was  in  position  on  the  human  body  in  my  opinion  it  was  in  the  middle 
line  in  front,  it  may  have  been  a  little  to  the  left;  it  began  just  above 
the  pubes  and  extended  for  4  inches  or  a  little  over.  The  whole  scar 
was  complete.  There  was  a  piece  of  flesh  beyond  it.  It  was  quite  an 
old  scar.  There  was  no  trace  of  any  genitals  at  all,  or  any  certain  anatomi- 
cal indication  of  sex.  There  was  hair  on  that  piece  of  flesh — in  my 
opinion  pubic  hair.  I  also  found  a  portion  of  a  woman's  woollen  or 
cotton  combinations.  At  my  casual  examination  I  could  not  tell  whether 
it  was  woollen  or  cotton,  but  I  have  since  examined  it  with  the  microscope, 
and  I  have  found  that  it  was  cotton.  There  was  lace  on  the  armlets  and 
on  the  front.  I  also  found  portions  of  a  pyjama  jacket.  The  jar  which 
is  now  produced  contains  the  portion  of  the  pyjama  jacket  with  the  collar 
on,  and  it  has  a  label,  "  Shirtmakers,  Jones  Brothers,  Holloway,  Limited, 
Holloway,  N."  On  referring  to  the  collars  of  the  jackets  of  the  two  suits 
of  pyjamas  already  produced  I  find  that  the  labels  are  exactly  the  same. 
The  separate  piece  in  the  jar  is  the  front  part  of  the  pyjama  jacket  with 
the  button  on.  On  referring  to  the  buttons  on  the  jacket  which  have 
been  already  produced,  I  find  that  they  are  the  same  make,  and  I  should 
think  they  would  be  the  same  size,  only  this  has  shrunken  somewhat  in 
pressure  and  manipulation.  The  other  jar  which  is  produced  contains  a 
portion  of  a  sleeve  of  the  pyjama  jacket. 

Having  examined  the  manner  in  which  the  viscera  have  been  extracted 
from  that  body,   are  you  able  to  say  whether  it  was  done  by  a  skilled 
person  or  not? — Yes,  it  must  have  been. 
48 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Dp.  Pepper 

You  mean  the  extraction  from  the  body? — The  removal  of  the  viscera 
from  the  body.  It  has  been  done  by  a  person  skilled  in  removing  viscera. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — That  is  dissection,  I  suppose? — Dissection. 

Of  human  beings? — Well,  I  would  not  like  to  go  so  far  as  that,  but 
certainly  in  evisceration  of  animals.  There  is  no  cut  or  tear  in  any  part 
except  where  it  was  necessary  for  the  removal.  It  was  removed  all  in  one 
piece.  All  the  organs  I  have  described  were  connected  together,  and  the 
diaphragm  or  the  septum  between  the  chest  and  abdomen  had  been  cut 
round. 

Examination  continued — In  my  opinion  that  would  certainly  require 
skill.  There  were  no  organs  of  generation  there  at  all.  It  is  quite 
likely  that  some  of  them  may  have  been  removed  in  life.  The  scar  which 
I  saw  would  be  in  that  position  if  an  operation  was  performed  for  the 
purpose  of  removing  some  of  the  organs  of  generation — the  pelvic  organs, 
the  ovaries  or  the  uterus,  or  all  combined. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — The  scar  is  in  a  place  which  corresponds 
with  an  operation  for  the  removal  of  the  ovaries. 

Examination  continued — I  formed  the  opinion  that  those  remains  had 
been  buried  from  four  to  eight  months.  In  forming  that  opinion  I  took 
into  consideration  the  place  where  they  were  buried,  the  surrounding 
materials,  the  lime  and  the  earth,  and  the  depth  at  which  they  were  buried. 
In  my  opinion  they  were  buried  very  shortly  after  death. 

In  your  opinion  is  it  possible  that  those  remains  could  have  been 
buried  there  before  21st  September,  1905 11 — Oh,  no,  absolutely  impossible. 
I  put  the  heart,  stomach,  a  portion  of  liver,  and  one  kidney  into  a  jar. 
The  other  kidney  was  dissected,  but  it  was  left  in  the  body.  In  a  second 
jar  I  put  the  clothes  that  I  have  spoken  of.  In  a  third  jar  I  put  the 
hair  in  the  metal  curler,  the  tuft  of  hair  found  in  the  handkerchief,  the 
handkerchief,  some  portions  of  woody  fibre,  and  a  portion  of  the  undervest 
which  I  have  spoken  to  as  being  a  female  garment.  In  a  fourth  jar  I  put 
the  arm-piece  of  the  broad  striped  flannelette  material  of  the  pyjama.  In 
a  fifth  jar  I  put  the  right  posterior  portion  of  the  pyjama  with  a  label  on, 
and  the  piece  with  the  button.  The  longest  hairs  that  were  found  were 
8  inches,  and  the  shortest  were  2£  inches,  and,  of  course,  there  were 
intermediate  lengths.  Being  of  that  length,  and  being  partly  bleached, 
the  hair  was  that  of  a  woman.  The  dark  brown  part  of  the  hair  was 
the  hair  of  the  root.  The  roots  were  present.  Exhibit  44  is  the  part  of 
hair  that  was  placed  by  me  in  the  third  jar.  It  is  darker  now  than  it  was 
when  I  first  saw  it.  Exhibit  45  is  the  portion  of  the  hair  that  I  found 
in  the  handkerchief.  I  think  it  is  slightly  darker  now  than  it  was  then. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — The  fact  of  its  having  got  darker  is  due, 
I  think,  partly  to  the  drying  and  partly  to  being  more  compressed  together, 
and  then  possibly  the  bleaching  effect  has  gone  off  somewhat. 

Examination  continued — On  5th  August,  at  St.  Mary's  Hospital,  I 
examined  the  hair  in  the  Hinde's  curler,  exhibit  46.  I  found  that  the 
greater  part  was  from  2  inches  to  3  inches  long.  The  longest  part  was 
6  inches  long.  The  colour  was  dark  brown,  shading  off  to  light  brown. 
I  think  it  is  somewhat  darker  than  it  was  when  I  examined  it.  I  ex- 

1  The  date  when  Crippen  became  tenant  of  the  house. — ED. 

49 


Hawley   Harvey  Crippen. 

Dr.  Pepper 

amined  two  loose  hairs  at  the  mortuary  on  8th  August ;  they  were  lying 
loose  on  a  part  of  the  abdominal  wall.  One  was  5£  inches  long,  and  the 
other  was  8  inciies;  they  were  of  the  same  colour  as  the  other  hair  that  I 
had  seen,  dark  brown.  In  my  opinion  these  were  a  woman's  hairs.  On 
27th  August  I  examined  exhibit  47,  which  is  some  more  hair  in  a  Hinde's 
curler.  It  is  from  2  inches  to  4  inches  in  length,  and  in  my  opinion  it 
is  the  same  sort  of  hair  as  the  other  as  to  colour,  and  as  to  being  a 
woman's  hair.  I  examined  twenty  hairs,  which  I  believe  to  be  pubio 
hairs;  some  were  still  fixed  to  the  skin,  while  others  were  free.  They 
were  dark  brown  in  colour,  like  the  dark  part  of  the  hair  of  No.  1  specimen, 
exhibit  44.  They  were  from  J  inch  to  1  inch  in  length;  they  showed  the 
rootsi  at  one  end,  and  the  other  end  tapered  off.  In  all  the  other  speci- 
mens the  hairs,  of  course,  had  been  cut. 

I  found  the  stomach,  the  kidneys,  the  heart,  the  liver,  and  the 
pancreas  all  to  be  healthy,  as  far  as  one  could  tell.  There  was  no  sign 
of  disease  in  any  one  of  those  organs,  or  anything  to  account  for  death, 
so  far  as  looking  at  it  is  concerned.  The  spleen  was  very  soft,  as  one 
would  expect,  from  decomposition,  but  nothing  else  was  detectable  in  it 
as  being  wrong.  The  intestines  were  healthy,  as  were  also  the  lungs, 
which  were  more  advanced  in  decomposition  than  the  other  organs,  except 
the  spleen.  There  was  nothing  to  show  disease  or  to  account  for  death ; 
there  was  no  consolidation  and  no  sign  of  there  having  been  pleurisy — no 
marks  on  the  surface.  From  the  remains  that  I  examined  I  would  say 
that  the  person  was  stout  when  in  life.  I  have  seen  the  photographs, 
exhibits  28  and  29. 

The  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — I  hardly  think  you  need  go  into  all  that. 

Examination  continued — The  kidneys  were  in  an  exceedingly  good  state 
of  preservation.  On  9th  September  I  was  present  at  St.  Mary's  Hospital 
when  a  piece  of  the  skin  bearing  the  mark  which  I  say  is  an  old  scar  was 
removed  for  microscopical  examination,  and  I  was1  present  when  that  piece 
was  microscopically  examined  on  13th  September  by  Dr.  Spilsbury.  I 
also  examined  it  myself;  the  examination  I  made  quite  corroborated  my 
previous  opinion. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — I  had  not  the  slightest  doubt,  without 
examining  it  with  the  microscope,  that  it  was  the  scar  of  an  old  wound, 
and  that  was  confirmed  by  the  microscopical  examination. 

Examination  continued — The  person  in  life  would  be  an  adult,  young 
or  middle-aged.  I  did  not  find  anything  to  account  for  death  in  anything 
that  I  examined  among  those  remains. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  TOBIN — Taking  a  mass1  of  human  remains  by 
themselves — without  anything  else  like  hair  in  Hinde's  curlers,  and  so  on — 
it  is  quite  impossible  to  tell  the  sex,  except  upon  anatomical  grounds.  There 
are  no  anatomical  grounds  in  this  case  to  enable  me  to  say  with  certainty 
the  sex. 

As  to  the  great  dexterity  you  have  already  told  us  that  was  required 
to  remove  these  organs  in  the  way  they  were  removed,  it  would  require  a 
really  practised  hand  and  eye,  would  it  not? — Certainly. 

A  man  frequently  accustomed  to  dissect  bodies  or  to  conduct  post- 
mortem examinations,  or  matters  of  that  kind? — No,  a  person  who  had 
50 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Dp.  Pepper 

previously  done  it,  but  not  necessarily  continuously.  If  a  person  had  once 
learned  how  to  do  it  he  could  do  it. 

Suppose  a  student  in  the  hospitals  learnt  it,  and  then  there  was  a  long 
lapse  of  time  afterwards — fifteen  years  or  so — surely  the  hand  and  eye  have 
to  be  pretty  well  accustomed? — I  think  he  could  do  it  quite  as  well  after 
ten  years  as  he  could  at  the  time.  It  is  not  a  minute  dissection ;  it  is  a 
particular  kind  of  work.  I  cannot  pledge  my  memory  as  to  when  I  was 
first  asked  to  express  an  opinion  as  to  how  long  those  remains  had  been 
in  {he  ground.  On  loth  July  I  formed  the  opinion  as  to  the  length  of  time 
of  burial.  Mr.  Dew  was  at  Hill  drop  Crescent  when  I  went  there  on  14th 
July.  I  am  not  sure  that  he  told  me  that  the  woman  was  said  to  have 
disappeared  about  15th  February  of  that  year;  he  may  have  done  so,  but 
I  do  not  remember.  At  any  rate,  I  would  hear  that  very  soon  after,  if  not 
on  the  14th. 

I  suppose  it  is  quite  beyond  the  reach  of  science  to  determine  with 
accuracy  the  period  of  death  from  the  process  of  putrefaction? — Yes. 

And  is  this  true,  too,  that  two  different  bodies  buried  in  the  same  soil 
and  under  apparently  similar  conditions  frequently  present  such  differences 
as  to  baffle  all  attempts  at  generalisation? — Yes. 

Would  putrefaction  be  retarded  in  the  case  of  human  remains  buried, 
closely  packed  in  clay  and  lime,  5  inches  of  such  stuff  above  them,  and  a 
depth  of  3  inches? 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — Take  the  general  question  first;  would 
lime  or  clay  retard  putrefaction? — It  depends.  There  are  two  kinds  of 
decomposition  taking  place  in  dead  bodies — one  where  it  is  freely  exposed 
to  the  air  and  warmth,  and  the  other  where  it  is  damp  and  largely  excluded 
from  the  air,  and  that  is  what  happened  in  this  case. 

Taking  it  as  it  was  in  the  ground,  would  lime  and  clay  retard  either 
form  of  putrefaction? — It  would  retard  the  common  form  of  putrefaction, 
but  the  presence  of  damp  clay  would  favour  the  change  which  happened  in 
this  case.  It  would  not  be  putrefaction  in  the  ordinary  sense.  It  is  a 
peculiar  change  which  takes  place;  the  tissues1  become  converted  into  a  kind 
of  soap,  the  technical  name  of  which  is  adipocere. 

Cross-examination  continued — Buried  in  clay,  adipocere  would  be 
created  more  quickly  and  ordinary  putrefaction  would  be  retarded.  Taking 
a  person  of  Mrs.  Crippen's  age  and  build,  I  should  say  that  the  normal 
weight  of  the  kidney  of  a  woman  like  that  would  vary  from  3  to  4£  ounces. 
In  point  of  fact,  the  weight  of  the  kidney  in  this  case  was,  I  think,  2f 
ounces. 

The  normal  weight  would  be  4£  ounces,  and  you  think  it  was  2|  ounces. 
What  would  that  be  due  to? — That  would  be  due  largely  to  removal  of 
moisture  from  the  kidney — desiccation. 

Was  there  any  putrefaction  of  the  kidney? — There  wasi  some  change 
in  the  kidney;  I  do  not  want  to  use  the  word  "  putrefaction."  I  do  not 
agree  that  there  was.  ordinary  putrefaction ;  there  was  very  decided  forma- 
tion of  adipocere. 

With  regard  to  the  piece  of  skin  7  inches  by  6  inches,  which  is  now 
shown  to  you  in  the  jar  produced — I  want  two  points  about  that,  whether 
it  came  from  the  abdomen,  as  your  opinion  ie,  and  whether  the  mark  on 

51 


Hawley   Harvey  Crippen. 

Dr.  Pepper 

it  is  a  scar  or  not.  Before  you  formed  an  opinion  even  that  the  mark  on 
that  piece  of  skin  was  a  scar,  had  you  already  heard  that  Mrs.  Crippen  had 
had  an  operation? — Certainly.  I  do  not  remember  when  it  was  that  I  first 
heard  that  Mrs.  Crippen  had  had  an  operation.  I  would  be  quite  ready  to 
admit  that  it  was  within  a  week  after  I  had  first  seen  the  remains,  but  I  do 
not  remember  the  time. 

If  that  scar  came  from  the  lower  part  of  the  abdomen  of  somebody, 
you  are  satisfied  in  your  opinion,  as.  I  understand,  that  the  navel  waa 
once  upon  that  piece  of  skin? — I  believe  it  would  have  been. 

Is  it  not  the  case  that,  running  at  right  angles  to  the  navel,  at  right 
angles  to  the  perpendicular  line  up  the  stomach,  there  are  what  are  called 
tendinous  intersections  1 — Yes. 

Are  those  white  fibres  at  right  angles  to  the  navel? — Yes. 

Are  there  also — I  am  not  talking  now  of  that  piece  of  skin  in  particular 
— ordinary  tendinous  intersections  at  right  angles  to  the  perpendicular  line 
up  the  stomach  on  a  level  with  the  bottom  of  the  breast  bone? — Yes.  There 
are  also  three  tendinous  intersections  at  right  angles  between  those  two 
points,  the  navel  and  the  bottom  of  the  breast  bone.  There  may  also  be 
tendinous  intersections  a  little  below  the  navel,  but  that  varies  very  much. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — What  does  the  word  "  tendinous  "  mean — 
colour,  or  what? — Structure.  A  tendon  is1  what  is  commonly  called  a  leader 
or  guide.  There  are  two  long  muscles  reaching  from  the  chest  to  the  pelvis 
— two  straight  muscles ;  and  to  give  additional  strength  and  support  they 
are  divided  by  these  three  tendinous  intersections.  It  is  the  muscle  inter- 
sected by  transverse  tendons. 

Cross-examination  continued — You  say  that  in  your  opinion,  if  that 
does  come  from  the  lower  part  of  somebody's  abdomen,  the  navel  must 
have  been  on  it? — The  navel,  in  my  opinion,  was  originally  on  this  piece  of 
skin,  but  it  is  possible,  of  course,  that  it  was1  not. 

Therefore  it  must  have  been  removed  from  that  piece  of  skin,  if  your 
opinion  is  Bright? — Yes. 

Is  there  any  trace  whatever  there  of  the  tendinous  intersections  of 
which  I  have  spoken  running  at  right  angles  to  the  navel? — No.  I  point 
out  to  the  jury  where  on  that  piece  of  skin  I  think  the  navel  originally  was — 
at  the  top  of  the  scar.  I  ought  to  say  that  that  scar  isi  not  so  long  as  the 
wound  of  the  operation  would  have  been. 

It  is  at  the  top  of  what  I  may  call  a  horse- shoe  depression? — Yes,  if 
you  can  call  it  so. 

[The  witness  pointed  out  to  the  jury  the  place  where  the  navel  was, 
what  had  been  called  the  top  of  the  horse-shoe  depression.] 

Would  you  not  expect  to  find,  at  right  angles  to  what  you  think  was 
originally  the  site  of  the  navel,  the  tendinous1  intersections? — No;  you 
might  not  find  that  at  all,  because  the  tendinous  intersection  does  not  involve 
the  skin;  it  only  involves  the  muscles  underneath,  and  there  the  muscles 
had  been  cut  away.  I  should  not  see  them,  it  wants  turning  upside  down 
to  answer  this  question. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — Your  answer  is  that  you  would  not  expect 
to  find  it  where  Mr.  Tobin  has1  pointed  out? — That  is  so. 

Now,  turn  it  upside  down  on  the  tray,  and  let  us  know  what  you  say? 
— I  say  that  the  muscle  is  cut  across  lower  than  the  skin,  and  the  tendinous 
52 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Dr.  Pepper 

intersection  is  only  in  the  muscle;  therefore  this  might  have  been  cut  across 
at  the  level,  or  just  immediately  above  the  navel,  without  showing  that 
tendinous  intersection. 

Your  answer  is  that  you  would  not  of  necessity  find  the  tendinoua 
intersections  in  that  piece  of  flesh? — That  is  so. 

Cross-examination  continued — The  linea  alba  (the  white  line)  is  the 
vertical  line  from  the  chest  running  down  to  the  pubic  bone.  The  linea 
alba  is  not  on  the  surface  of  the  skin ;  the  linea  alba  indicates  where  the 
tendons  underneath  are  joined. 

Is  the  linea  alba  a  thing  that,  looking  at  a  man's  chest,  you  see  with 
your  eye? — You  never  see  it  on  the  chest. 

It  is  inside;  it  is  underneath  the  surface? — There  is  a  line  running 
down  the  centre ;  you  always  see  a  slight  line  there. 

But  underneath  the  surface  of  the  skin  that  line  is  white,  and  it  ia 
called  the  linea  alba? — Certainly,  where  the  tendons  join. 

Is  there  not  enough  there  for  the  linea  alba  to  exist,  if  really  that  does 
come  from  the  lower  part  of  the  abdomen? — No,  because  there  is  only 
muscle  on  one  side  there. 

Very  great  dexterity  would  be  required  to  remove  the  peritoneum,  the 
lining  of  the  cavity  right  inside? — I  never  saw  any  one  attempt  to  remove 
it. 

Is  there  any  trace  of  the  peritoneum  there? — No,  certainly  not. 

Then  it  must  have  been  removed? — Certainly,  but  not  removed  by 
itself.  The  body  has  been  cut  up,  and  it  has  been  taken  out  evenly  in  the 
whole  thickness  with  considerable  quantities  left  behind,  as  shown  by  this 
preparation. 

That  would  be  a  good  indication  of  whether  that  piece  of  skin  really 
came  from  the  lower  part  of  somebody's  abdomen? — You  mean  if  it  was 
there? 

Yes? — I  very  much  doubt  if  you  would  recognise  it  clearly  in  this  con- 
dition ;  but,  assuming  that  you  could  see  it,  of  course  it  would  tell  you 
that  it  was  from  the  abdomen. 

I  suppose  you  have  looked  to  see  whether  you  can  see  it  ? — Certainly. 

If  it  is  not  there  it  must  have  been  removed? — It  was  removed  during 
the  cutting  up  of  the  body. 

On  that  piece  of  skin  is  there  some  hair  visible? — Yes. 

In  your  examination-in-chief  you  expressed  the  opinion  that  those 
were  pubic  hairs? — Yes.  They  are  on  the  right  side  only  of  the  piece  of 
•kin,  taking  the  skin  as  on  the  body. 

If  those  are  pubic  hairs,  then  those  on  the  left  side  must  have  fallen 
out? — Yes. 

If  they  have  fallen  out  on  the  left  side  there  may  have  been  hairs 
over  other  portions  of  that  piece  of  skin  that  have  also  fallen  out? — 
Certainly. 

Therefore  it  may  have  been  all  more  or  less  covered  with  hair  at  one 
time;  one  cannot  tell  with  certainty,  can  one? — No;  there  is  only  one 
place  where  pubic  hairs  are  found  in  this  specimen,  and  that  is  at  the 
bottom  in  a  line. 

53 


Hawley  Harvey  Crippen. 

DP.  Pepper 

Is  the  removal  of  the  navel  a  usual  operation? — It  is  very  common 
indeed. 

If  the  navel  had  once  been  removed  from  that  piece  of  skin  it  goes 
without  saying  that  that  mark  is.  a  scar.  How  many  times  did  you  ex- 
amine that  piece  of  skin  before  you  came  to  the  conclusion  that  it  was 
a  scar? — I  came  to  the  conclusion  immediately — at  least  within  quarter 
to  half  an  hour  on  my  first  examination.  I  have  not  the  slightest  doubt 
that  it  was  a  scar. 

Did  you  ever  come  to  that  conclusion  before  you  examined  it  with  Dr. 
Marshall  on  8th  August? — That  is  the  time  I  am  speaking  of. 

The  8th  August  was  the  first  time  you  came  to  the  conclusion  that  it 
was  a  scar? — That  is  so. 

Before  that  you  had  heard  that  Mrs.  Crippen  had  had  an  operation 
there? — Yes. 

How  many  times  had  you  examined  that  piece  of  skin  before  8th 
August? — Once  before,  casually;  I  had  not  completed  my  examination. 

On  14th  July  how  long  were  you  looking  at  the  remains?  Three 
hours? — Oh,  no.  I  spent  two  hours  and  three-quarters  in  the  house,  and 
that  included  the  examination  of  house  and  garden.  I  should  say  that  I 
did  not  spend  more  than  half  an  hour  looking  at  the  remains.  I  com- 
menced the  examination  of  the  remains,  and  found  it  was  impossible  to 
finish  the  examination  there. 

On  15th  July  did  you  and  Dr.  Marshall  at  the  mortuary  examine  the 
remains? — Yes,  I  think  for  two  hours  and  three-quarters  or  three  hours. 

On  that  occasion  you  did  not  come  to  the  conclusion  that  it  was 
a  scar? — I  did  not  see  it;  I  did  not  see  the  mark.  I  have  no  doubt  I 
saw  that  piece  of  skin  with  other  pieces,  but  I  did  not  see  this  mark  on 
it,  and  therefore  the  question  of  scar  did  not  arise  then. 

Was  it  about  18th  July  that  you  heard  of  the  operation? — I  cannot 
remember  when  I  heard  of  it.  I  do  not  agree  that  the  condition  of  that 
piece  of  skin  makes  it  very  difficult  to  say  whether  that  mark  is  a  scar  at 
all.  Looking  at  the  horse-shoe  depression,  as  we  have  called  it,  the  left 
limb  of  that  so-called  horse-shoe  is  undoubtedly  due  to  a  folding  of  the 
skin  after  death.  The  scar  begins  at  the  lower  part  where  it  is  cut 
across,  and  it  ends  quite  definitely  at  that  part  where  I  point  to.  It 
is  practically  straight,  slightly  curving  at  the  upper  part. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — Is  that  as  high  as  the  navel  would  have 
been,  or  not  as  high,  or  above  it? — The  navel  varies  so  exceedingly.  Being 
4£  inches,  one  might  easily  allow  an  inch  for  contraction,  and  that  would 
take  it  to  5 1  inches. 

What  would  be  the  distance  between  the  navel  and  the  pubic  bone? — I 
do  not  know  the  stoutness  of  the  woman  or  the  age  of  the  woman,  and 
it  depends  what  part  you  are  starting  from — whether  you  start  from 
the  surface  or  the  bone.  When  I  was  cross-examined  before  the  magis- 
trate I  was  definitely  asked  with  regard  to  the  starting  point  of  the  bone — 
not  the  skin. 

Cross-examination  continued — As  I  have  already  said,  one  limb  of  the 
so-called  horse-shoe  was  due  to  a  folding  of  the  skin  after  death.  In  my 
54 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

DP.  Pepper 

opinion  it  is  quite  impossible  that  the  other  limb  of  that  horse-shoe  was 
equally  caused  by  a  folding  of  the  skin  after  death. 

The  limb  of  the  horse-shoe  that  you  admit  is  due  to  a  fold  shows  a 
well-defined  depression  or  groove,  does  it  not? — Ye®. 

Showing  that  there  must  have  been  considerable  pressure  or  weight 
above  it  from  the  earth  and  so  on? — There  must  have  been  some — or  even 
the  weight  of  the  exhibit  itself  would  be  sufficient  to  do  it.  You  can  see 
definitely  here  where  the  left  limb  of  the  horse-shoe  forming  the  top  part 
runs — distinctly  into  the  straight  line  of  the  scar.  The  scar  and  what  is 
called  the  depression  are  not  due  to  the  same  cause.  The  left  limb  of  the 
horse-shoe  is  due  to  the  fold,  and  the  right  limb  of  the  horse-shoe  in  my 
opinion  is  due  to  an  operation.  The  left  limb  of  what  is  called  the  horse- 
shoe and  the  curve  of  the  horse-shoe — the  convexity — form  entirely  one 
line.  It  runs  into  this  straight  line  which  I  say  is  a  scar. 

I  am  very  sorry,  but  I  must  ask  you  to  look  at  it  again  ? — It  is  quite 
stereotyped  in  my  mind. 

But  I  want  you  to  look  at  it  with  me.  [The  witness  went  down  into 
the  well  of  the  Court.]  There  is  a  depression  continuously  right  round 
the  area  of  the  depression,  or  'So-called  horse-shoe — a  continuous  depression? 
— Quite  so.  The  scar  is  not  part  of  the  so-called  horse-shoe.  My  con- 
tention is  that  the  scar  runs  on  the  right  side,  nearly  straight,  and  that 
the  left  limb  and  the  curve  of  the  so-called  horse-shoe  are  formed  by  the 
fold. 

You  have  examined  that,  of  course,  under  a  microscope? — I  have 
examined  a  small  piece  that  was  cut  out  of  the  centre  of  what  I  say  is 
the  scar. 

You  have  told  me  that  in  your  opinion  the  right  side  of  the  depression, 
the  straighter  line,  is  not  due  to  pressure.  Now,  I  ask  you  whether  you 
have  examined  the  right  side  with  the  microscope? — Certainly. 

Are  there  on  that  right  side  of  the  so-called  horse  shoe  at  intervals 
little  groups  of  transverse  lines,  four  lines  in  each,  at  regular  intervals? — 
On  the  left  side. 

No,  on  the  right  limb  of  the  so-called  horse-shoe? — I  know,  but  on 
the  left  side  of  the  right  limb. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — On  the  left  side  of  what  you  call  the 
scar? — Yes. 

Cross-examination-  conttmtfd — Are  there  marks  in  the  area  there  of 
what  you  consider  to  be  a  scar? — Yes,  on  the  left  side. 

Little  groups  consisting  of  four  lines  in  each? — That  is  right — on  the 
left  side — not  on  the  right  side. 

But  those  are  in  the  area  of  the  scar? — Yes. 

Do  they  in  part  go  beyond  the  area  of  the  so-called  scar? — A  little. 

There  were  found,  were  there  not,  some  bits  of  a  woman's  combina- 
tions, or  woman's  underclothing,  and  some  bits  of  a  vest  made  of  elastic 
material? — Yes. 

Have  you  ascertained  whether  or  not  those  little  groups  of  four  lines 
in  each,  which  you  admit  are  partly  in  the  area  of  the  so-called  scar  and 
partly  outside  it,  are  exactly  similar  to  the  pattern  of  the  elastic  material  ? 

55 


Hawley   Harvey   Crippen. 

Dr.  Pepper 

— I  think  in  the  vest  the  ribbing  is  wider,  but  if  you  show  me  the  vest  I 
can  tell  you. 

Take  jar  No.  2,  which  contains  the  combinations.  Have  you  com- 
pared the  pattern  of  the  stuff  composing  these  combinations  with  these 
groups  of  four  lines  each  on  the  area  of  the  scar  and  travelling  beyond  it? — 
No,  I  have  not. 

Then  you  cannot  say  whether  or  not  the  patterns  precisely  correspond? 
— No,  I  cannot. 

If  they  do,  that  would  be  a  clear  indication  that  those  marks,  at  any 
rate,  are  caused  by  the  pressure  of  the  materials? — They  might  on  the 
left  side,  but  not  on  the  right.  The  scar  is  not  a  line — it  is  |  inch  wide 
at  the  lower  part.  The  marks  you  are  speaking  of  in  groups  are  on  the 
left  side  of  that. 

I  understood  you  to  say  that  those  marks  were  in  the  area  of  the  so- 
called  scar,  and  travelled  outside  it  on  one  side? — I  should  say  that  they 
do  not  go  beyond  the  area  of  the  scar.  I  have  examined  with  the  micro- 
scope a  piece  which  was  cut,  and  I  say  that  those  groups  of  lines  do  not  go 
outside. 

That  piece  of  skin  has  been  examined  by  a  medical  gentleman  on 
behalf  of  the  defence  for  some  hours,  and  on  several  occasions,  has  it  not? — 
Certainly. 

Are  you  prepared  to  say  whether  or  not  those  groups  of  four  lines 
travel  and  are  within  the  area  of  the  so-called  scar? — Certainly. 

Are  you  prepared  to  say  whether  they  are  outside  it? — I  think  not. 

You  think  not,  but  you  have  never  examined  it  under  the  microscope? — 
I  am  looking  at  it  now,  and  I  see  marks  distinctly,  and  the  end  of  the 
marks  and  the  scar;  the  marks  are  quite  distinct  here  now,  and  I  see  that 
they  end,  or  apparently  end,  at  the  margin  of  the  scar. 

You  are  examining  it  now  with  your  eyes,  not  with  the  microscope? 

The  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — That  we  can  see  for  ourselves,  Mr.  Tobin. 

Cross-examination  continued — Those  groups  of  four  lines  each  may 
have  been  caused  by  the  pressure  of  a  fabric,  but  not  on  the  right  side. 
There  are  hundreds  of  lines  there,  as  it  were,  showing  the  marking  of  the 
scar. 

Can  you  attribute  those  little  groups  of  four  lines  each  to  anything 
else  except  the  pressure  of  the  fabric? — No,  I  should  think  that  is  the 
most  likely  explanation,  but  the  whole  scar  is  fibrillated. 

Supposing,  as  you  think,  one  limb  is  due  to  folding,  and  the  other 
side  of  the  depression  is  due  to  an  operation,  and,  therefore,  a  scar,  as  you 
think,  would  you  not  expect  that  if  a  piece  was  cut  across  the  folded 
depression  and  a  piece  cut  across  the  area  of  the  so-called  scar,  the  cut 
edges  of  the  piece  cut  from  the  so-called  scar  would  be  different  from 
the  cut  edges  of  the  piece  of  the  groove  where  there  never  had  been  a  scar 
at  all? — Not  necessarily,  because  the  folding  over  would  attenuate  the 
skin  at  that  part — the  continued  pressure  of  it. 

As  a  matter  of  fact,  both  limbs  of  the  so-called  horse-shoe  were  cut 
across  on  9th  September? — Yes,  but  I  am  not  quite  certain  of  the  date. 
It  was  under  my  instructions  that  they  were  cut  across.  It  is  quite  likely 
that  the  cut  edges  of  the  skin  so  cut  from  both  limbs  presented  exactly 
the  same  appearance. 
66 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Dp.  Pepper 

Do  you  know  that  on  the  same  date,  9th  September,  a  piece  was  cut 
right  across  the  area  of  the  so-called  scar,  and  extending  beyond  the  so-called 
scar  on  each  side,  and  handed  to  Dr.  Spilsbury? — Yes.  My  instructions 
were  that  it  should  be  done  in  that  way. 

Now,  would  you  not  expect  the  cut  edges  of  that  piece  that  were 
originally  within  the  scar  to  be  different  in  appearance  from  the  cut  edges 
of  the  skin  just  outside  the  area  of  the  so-called  scar  on  each  side? — Not 
necessarily,  because  the  superficial  area  of  the  skin  has  entirely  gone,  and 
this  has  become  hardened  and  horny;  the  whole  skin  on  the  surface  is 
almost  like  leather  now.  I  examined,  both  with  the  naked  eye  and  the 
microscope,  that  bit  of  skin  so  cut  by  my  directions  across  and  beyond  the 
area  of  the  so-called  scar. 

Do  you  agree  that  there  was  no  difference  whatever  in  size,  number, 
or  arrangement  of  the  fibres  in  the  part  immediately  below  the  surface, 
either  within  the  area  of  the  scar  or  outside  it? — Yes,  and  in  the  part  which 
I  say  was  the  scar  the  fibres  are  denser — they  are  more  densely  placed 
than  the  fibres  forming  the  skin.  A  very  important  point  is  that  there 
were  glands  of  the  skin  still  remaining  in  the  skin  on  each  side  of  the  scar ; 
there  were  no  remains  of  glands  in  the  part  which  I  say  is  the  scar. 

Would  not  an  operation  cause  an  alteration  in  the  size,  number,  and 
arrangement  of  the  fibres  in  the  part  immediately  below  the  surface? — 
Not  necessarily.  What  operation  are  you  speaking  of? 

I  am  speaking  of  an  operation  in  the  abdomen  of  a  woman,  a  wound 
going  through  the  entire  wall  of  the  abdomen? — Then  they  might  unite 
very  accurately  indeed,  so  that  afterwards1  you  could  not  tell  really  that 
an  operation  had  been  done  except  from  the  line  of  the  scar. 

It  is  a  very  unusual  thing  for  them  to  unite  very  accurately? — Not 
at  all. 

Is  it  not  generally  the  case  that  after  an  operation  there  is  more  or  less 
apposition  afterwards  of  the  fibres?  There  must  be  almost  invariably  some 
little  growth  of  new  tissoie? — There  must  be  new  tissue  which  unites  the 
two  edges  of  the  wound — you  could  not  get  a  scar  if  there  was  not  new 
tissue;  but  it  may  unite,  and  frequently  does,  so  accurately  that  a  long 
time  after  the  operation  you  cannot  tell  really,  except  by  the  line  on  the 
surface,  that  an  operation  has  been  done. 

Would  you  expect,  as  a  rule,  to  find  on  a  scar  after  an  operation  a 
continuous  white  line? — If  the  scar  is  not  stretched  you  get  a  continuous 
white  line. 

Then  you  would  expect  a  continuous  white  line,  unless  there  had  been 
a  stretching  of  the  scar? — Certainly. 

Next,  if  a  scar  is  stretched,  does  it  not  ordinarily  stretch  in  a  lozenge 
shape — wider  in  the  middle? — Not  necessarily.  A  scar  at  the  lower  part 
of  the  abdomen  very  often  does  not,  because  you  have  the  tendons  frequently 
separated  during  the  operation,  allowing  the  scar  to  be  wider  at  the  top. 
It  would  be  somewhat  triangular  in  shape. 

On  that  point,  what  is  the  measurement  of  this  so-called  scar? — Seven- 
eighths  of  an  inch  at  the  lower  part,  half  an  inch  at  the  middle,  and  a 
quarter  of  an  inch  near  the  top.  It  is  exactly  the  scar  that  I  have  seen 
many  times  after  an  operation  in  this  part. 

57 


Hawley  Harvey   Crippen. 

Dr.  Pepper 

In  the  majority  of  oases,  if  there  has  been  an  operation,  do  you  not 
expect  afterwards  to  see  marks  of  the  stitches? — In  the  majority  of  cases, 
yea;  in  many,  no. 

Are  there  any  marks  that  you  can  clearly  identify  as  stitches  in  this 
case? — No.  There  are  some  marks  which  are  doubtful,  and  therefore  I 
am  not  ready  to  admit  that  they  are  not  marks  of  stitches.  They  suggest 
it,  but  they  do  not  prove  it.  Where  you  have  had  a  scar  which  has 
become  broad  like  that,  very  often  the  stitch  marks  become  merged  in  the 
margin  of  the  scar;  but,  even  apart  from  that,  stitch  marks  frequently 
disappear  altogether. 

Re-examined  by  Mr.  Mum — I  was  cross-examined  at  the  Police  Court 
as1  to  this  piece  of  flesh  having  come  from  the  abdominal  wall.  It  was 
suggested  to  me  then  that  the  aponeurosis  was  absent  from  it.  An 
aponeurosis  is  practically  a  flat  tendon.  The  muscles  of  the  abdomen  are 
flat — where  the  muscular  part  ends  it  is  flat.  To-day  I  have  been  asked 
nothing  at  all  about  the  aponeurosis.  The  presence  of  the  aponeurosis 
proves  absolutely  that  this  comes  from  the  lower  part  of  the  abdomen,  in 
front.  Further,  there  are  upon  that  piece  the  pubic  hairs,  to  which  atten- 
tion has  been  called. 

You  were  asked  whether  Inspector  Dew  told  you  the  date  on  which 
Mrs.  Crippen  disappeared.  Had  your  knowledge,  or  want  of  knowledge, 
of  when  she  disappeared  any  effect  whatever  upon  the  opinion  you  formed 
as  to  the  time  those  remains*  had  been  in  the  ground? — None  whatever. 
That  would  not  have  the  slightest  effect  upon  my  judgment  as  a  scientific 
man. 

You  were  asked  also  whether  or  not  before  you  discovered  that  scar 
you  knew  Mrs1.  Crippen  had  been  operated  upon,  and  you  said  that  you 
did.  Had  that  information  any  effect  upon  your  opinion  as  a  scientific 
man  asi  to  whether  or  not  this  was  a  scar? — No.  I  may  say  that  I  did 
not  discover  the  scar  till  8th  August,  and  if  I  had  wanted  to  find  the  scar 
I  should  have  found  it  before.  The  opinions  that  I  have  expressed  to  the 
jury  are  my  opinions  as  a  scientific  man  upon  the  examination  of  the 
subject  that  I  have  been  speaking  to.  The  small  weight  of  the  kidney  found 
in  the  remains  would  be  due  to  loss  of  moisture,  and  that  in  my  opinion 
would  be  very  largely  due  to  the  presence  of  the  large  quantity  of  lime 
there  which  would  absorb  the  moisture. 

What  id  the  effect  of  quicklime  upon  flesh? — Absolute  quicklime 
destroys  it  by  abstracting  the  moisture,  becoming  converted  into  hydrate. 

If  you  had  a  sufficient  quantity  of  quicklime — really  quicklime,  that 
is,  real  dry  lime — it  would  destroy  the  whole? — Yes. 

Would  the  presence  of  damp  clay  round  quicklime  have  any  effect 
upon  its  action? — The  damp  clay  would  tend,  of  course,  to  convert  the  quick- 
lime, if  it  was  quicklime,  into  slaked  lime.  The  presence  of  the  clay  would 
make  the  action  of  the  lime  less  strong.  If  lime  absorbs  moisture  from 
anything,  from  the  air  or  the  clay,  it  loses  its  power  altogether. 

When  it  becomes  slaked  what  is  its  effect  upon  flesh? — It  does  not 
corrode  it  then;  it  only  becomes  slaked,   but  you  have  a  great  deal  of 
carbonate  of  lime  formed,  and  the  carbonate  of  lime  facilitates  and  hastens 
the  formation  of  adipocere. 
58 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

DP   Pepper 

With  regard  to  the  preservation  or  otherwise  of  the  tissues,  how  does 
the  slaked  lime  act,  if  it  acts  at  all? — I  think  it  would  practically  be  inert 
as  being  a  protection.  Although  I  have  expressed  the  opinion  that  the 
navel  was  upon  that  piece  of  flesh  as  it  originally  existed,  and  that  it  had 
been  removed  by  an  operation,  it  is,  of  course,  quite  possible  that  the  navel 
may  have  been  outside  the  area  of  that  piece  of  flesh.  The  distance  varies 
in  individuals — in  my  experience  it  has  varied  from  4  inches  to  6£  inches. 
The  6£  inches  would  not  be  sufficient  to  take  it  outside  the  area  of  that 
piece;  this  is  7  inches.  I  think  it  is  most  probable  that  it  was  within  the 
area  of  that  piece  of  skin. 

You  were  asked  about  the  tendinous  intersections  being  absent  from 
that  piece  of  flesh.  If  the  entire  wall  of  the  abdomen  had  been  present  in 
that  piece  of  flesh,  would  you  have  found  the  tendinous  intersections? — Yes. 

Is  the  centre  wall  of  the  abdomen  present  there? — No. 

Is  the  part  of  it  which  would  contain  the  tendinous  intersections  there? 
— No.  Their  absence  from  that  piece  of  flesh  does  not  in  any  way  tend  to 
show  that  that  is  not  a  part  of  the  wall  of  the  abdomen.  I  am  confident 
that  it  is  part  of  the  wall  of  the  abdomen,  and  of  the  lower  part  of  the 
front  of  the  abdomen.  That  same  observation  applies  to  the  linea  alba. 
In  the  thirty-five  years  since  I  took  my  fellowship  I  ha,ve  performed  many 
hundreds  of  abdominal  operations.  The  scar  which  I  found  there  is  such 
as  I  have  frequently  found  in  my  actual  practice.  It  is  by  no  means 
uncommon  where  we  perform  that  operation  in  the  middle  line  to  find  the 
white  line  absent.  I  examined  those  remains  in  the  cellar  on  the  14th  and 
in  the  mortuary  on  the  15th  July.  That  was  a  favourable  time  at  which 
to  form  an  opinion  as  to  how  long  the  remains  had  been  in  the  ground. 
If  I  had  examined  the  remains  for  the  first  time  on  9th  September  it  would 
not  have  been  possible  to  form  an  opinion  of  any  value  as  to  how  long  they 
had  been  in  the  ground,  because  then  they  had  been  largely  exposed  to  the 
air  and  the  ordinary  putrefactive  process,  decomposition,  had  attacked 
them.  This  piece  that  I  have  before  me  has  been  preserved  in  a  special 
preparation  since  8th  August.  It  would  not  be  possible  now  to  form  an 
opinion  of  any  value  from  that  piece  which  has  been  preserved  as  to  the 
time  that  the  remains  had  been  in  the  ground,  because  it  is  somewhat 
altered  by  being  in  that  preservative.  On  8th  August  it  was  in  a  very 
different  condition  from  what  it  is  in  now.  The  appearance  of  the  fat  and 
everything  has  altered.  I  examined  the  section  made  for  Dr.  Willcox. 
I  found  no  glands  in  the  part  which  I  say  is  a  scar ;  I  found  glands  on  each 
side  of  it.  Further,  I  found  that  the  fibres  in  the  scar  were  more  densely 
placed  than  outside.  There  are  also  glands  in  the  so-called  left  limb  in 
the  horse-shoe  where  the  fold  was. 

Further  cross  examined  by  Mr.  TOBIN — In  the  area  of  what  you  believe 
to  be  a  scar  you  would  never  expect  to-find  a  sebaceous  gland,  would  you? — 
Not  in  the  scar  itself. 

But  I  say  in  the  area  of  what  you  believe  to  be  a  scar  you  would  not 
expect  to  find  a  sebaceous  gland? — That  is  where  the  scar  is  a  perfect  scar. 
You  have  not  got  it  like  two  bricks  lying  one  by  the  side  of  the  other ;  there 
ie  a  gradation.  Where  there  is  a  perfect  scar  there  can  be  no  glands. 

In  that  mark,  which  in  your  opinion  is  a  scar,  you  would  not  expect 
to  find  a  sebaceous  gland? — Not  in  the  part  which  is  a  perfect  scar,  but 

59 


Hawley   Harvey   Crippen. 

Dr.  Pepper 

you  have  the  normal  parts  graduating  off.  It  graduates  off  to  the  edges, 
so  that  you  do  not  get  a  perfect  soar  there.  There  are  no  sebaceous  glands 
in  the  area  of  the  scar. 

If  the  jury  should  believe  hereafter  that  there  is  a  sebaceous  gland 
in  the  area  of  the  scar — within  the  area  of  the  so-called  perfect  scar — would 
that  not  be  proof  conclusive  that  it  was  not  a  scar? — I  am  afraid  I  cannot 
answer  that. 

A  sebaceous  gland  cannot  exist  in  a  perfect  scar? — Certainly  not  in 
a  perfect  scar. 

Would  the  same  observation  apply  to  the  hair  follicles  of  the  skin? 
If  it  be  established  that  within  the  area  of  what  you  believe  to  be  a  perfect 
scar  there  is  hair,  and  the  hair  follicles  of  the  skin,  that  would  be  proof 
conclusive  that  it  was  not  a  scar? — Well,  you  have  to  be  absolutely  certain 
that  it  ia  an  absolutely  perfect  scar.  If  you  say  that,  then  I  say  you  will 
not  get  hair  follicles  in  it. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — There  are  two  or  three  questions  I  want 
to  ask  you.  First,  I  do  not  quite  understand  what  has  been  put  to  you, 
but  I  wish  to  put  it  on  two  hypotheses.  I  first  want  to  ask  a  question  as 
to  whether  this  is  a  scar;  and,  secondly,  as  to  its  position.  We  will  keep 
the  two  things  separate.  As  to  its  being  a  scar,  I  understand  you  to  say 
that  it  is  nearly  an  inch  wide  at  the  bottom? — Seven-eighths  of  an  inch. 

And  it  tapers  off  to  something  like  a  quarter  of  an  inch  ? — Yes. 

Is  that  in  accordance  with  your  experience  as  to  the  shape  of  a  scar 
when  it  becomes  a  dried  and  old  scar  in  an  abdominal  operation?  You 
find  it  bigger  at  the  bottom  than  at  the  top  ? — Yes,  and  repeatedly  in  this 
situation. 

Do  you  generally  find,  when  it  does  take  place  between  the  navel 
and  the  pubic  region,  that  that  is  the  shape  the  scar  assumes? — Frequently. 

Is  the  navel  ever  removed  in  operations? — Oh,  yes;  I  have  done  it 
many  times  myself. 

Therefore  the  presence  or  absence  of  the  navel  after  the  operation  will 
not  be  conclusive  one  way  or  the  other? — No. 

Now,  I  want  to  ask  you  whether  or  not  you  can  say  that  in  your 
opinion  you  have  no  doubt  that  this  is  a  scar? — I  have  no  doubt. 

With  that  before  you,  will  you  tell  the  jury  the  reasons  why  you  say 
it  was  the  lower  abdominal  region,  that  is  between  the  navel  and  the 
pubes? — In  the  first  place,  the  scar  is  wider  at  the  bottom  than  at  the 
top ;  and,  secondly,  there  ie  this  line  of  hair,  which  in  my  opinion  is  pubic 
hair. 

The  pubic  hair  goes  higher  up  in  some  individuals  than  it  does  in 
others? — Oh,  yes. 

Do  you  see  any  indication  of  hair  on  that  specimen  above  the  region 
which  you  think  is  the  pubic  region? — No. 

Therefore  it  would  confirm  your  view  that  it  has  reached  down  to  the 
pubes,  where  the  hair  grows,  and  has  gone  up  towards  the  navel? — Yes. 

It  is  suggested  that  it  is  a  scar  of  an  operation  between  the  navel 
and  the  breast  bone,  as  I  understood  it.       Can  you  understand  that  at  all? 
— I  say  absolutely  that  that  is  not  a  piece  of  flesh  which  came  from  above 
the  navel. 
60 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Dr.  Pepper 

Mr.  TOBIN — That  impression  is  not  what  I  wanted  to  convey.  It  ia 
not  part  of  my  case,  and  it  was  not  present  to  my  mind,  but  I  quite 
appreciate  how  I  may  have  been  misunderstood. 

The  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — Very  well.  Then  we  may  take  it  that  if  it 
is  a  scar  it  is  not  suggested  to  be  above  the  navel. 

(To  Witness) — What  is  the  common  operation  in  which  the  middle 
line  between  the  navel  and  the  pubes  in  the  seat  of  the  scar,  or  about 
there? — The  most  common  is  an  operation  for  diseases  in  the  pelvis, 
removal  of  the  ovaries,  or  removal  of  the  uterus.  Of  course,  it  ia  very 
frequently  performed  in  male  subjects  as  well  as  on  female. 

What  is  the  operation  in  that  position  which  is  performed  on  a  male 
subject? — Removal  of  stones  from  the  bladder,  taking  tumours  from  the 
bladder. 

Then  the  scar  there  would  be  of  the  same  appearance? — Yes.  It 
would  be  less  likely  to  be  so  wide  in  a  male  subject,  because  as  a  rule 
there  is  not  so  much  distension.  The  width  at  the  bottom  would  point 
more  to  a  female  than  to  a  male  subject. 

I  understood  you  to  say  that  what  Mr.  Tobin  called  the  linea  alba 
and  these  tendinous  depressions  would  be  in  the  part  of  the  abdominal 
wall  behind  that  flesh — further  in? — No,  it  is  in  the  muscle  which  liea 
behind  the  skin. 

But  I  understood  you  to  say  that  the  part  which  contained  the 
tendinous  intersectionsi  was  not  there? — Yes,  there  is  a  part  of  the  muscle 
there,  but  the  upper  part  of  the  muscle  has  been  cut  away  and  removed; 
that  is  to  say,  the  part  of  the  muscle  which  might  have  contained  a 
tendinous  intersection  is  not  present. 

It  would  go  further  into  the  body  ? — It  would  be  higher  up. 

In  what  direction  has  it  been  sliced? — Vertically;  the  upper  part  is 
cut  in  such  a  way  that  the  muscle  is  cut  lower  down  than  the  skin. 

You  saw  those  remains  first  on  14th  July,  and  you  say  they  cannot 
have  been  in  the  ground  longer  than  eight  months  and  less  than  four 
months  before  then? — That  is  my  opinion.  I  should  have  thought  they 
might  have  been  in  the  ground  for  eight  months  if  I  had  paid  attention  to 
some  parts  where  the  decomposition  or  change  was1  made  more  advanced, 
but  looking  at  certain  parts  of  the  skin  and  the  heart,  the  kidneys  and 
the  liver,  I  should  have  said  that  if  anything  they  were  under  four 
months;  they  were  so  exceedingly  well  preserved. 

Looking  at  all  the  organs  together  as  they  were,  though  some  might 
indicate  sufficient  change — I  will  not  use  the  word  "  decomposition  " — to 
indicate  as  much  as  eight  months,  there  are  others  that  indicated  it  could 
not  possibly  be  eight  months? — Yes.  Looking  at  the  general  conditions 
of  the  organs  as  they  were,  I  came  to  the  conclusion  that  they  could  not 
have  been  there  more  than  eight  months.  I  think  I  am  allowing  a  wide 
margin,  four  to  eight  months. 

The  Court  adjourned. 


61 


Hawley   Harvey  Crippen. 


Third  Day— Thursday,  20th  October,   1910. 

Dr.  BERNARD  HENRY  SPILSBURT,  examined  by  Mr.  TRAVERS  HUMPHREYS 
— I  am  a  Bachelor  of  Surgery  of  Oxford  University,  and  I  hold  the 
position  of  pathologist  at  St.  Mary's  Hospital.  I  have  on  several  occasions 
examined  the  piece  of  skin  and  flesh  with  a  mark  on  it  which  was  produced 
in  Court  yesterday,  the  first  occasion  on  which  I  saw  it  being  9th  September. 
I  have  formed  the  opinion  that  it  comes  from  the  lower  part  of  the  wall 
of  the  abdomen,  near  the  middle.  I  base  that  opinion  upon  the  presence 
and  arrangement  of  certain  muscles.  There  is  a  large  mass  of  muscle 
which  is  the  rectus  muscle  of  the  abdomen ;  there  is  a  tendon  on  one  side 
of  that,  an  aponeurosis,  as1  it  has  been  already  called,  and  attached  to  the 
aponeurosis  are  other  pieces  of  muscle.  Besides  that  there  is  a  row  of 
short,  dark  hairs  at  the  lower  margin  of  the  piece,  those  hairs  being  in 
my  opinion  pubic  hairs.  On  9th  September  I  was  asked  by  Mr.  Pepper 
to  make  a  microscopical  examination  of  a  section  taken  from  that  piece  of 
flesh,  and  I  did  so.  The  piece  which  I  examined  was  about  l£  inches  in 
length  and  nearly  half  an  inch  in  width.  The  longer  dimension  was  from 
across.  The  section  that  I  got  included  a  portion  of  the  mark  that  has 
been  called  the  scar;  it  was  the  middle  part  with  a  piece  of  flesh  on  each 
side.  I  did  not  find  any  of  the  outer  layer  of  skin,  the  epidermis,  on  the 
surface  of  the  mark.  I  found  a  small  mass  embedded  deeply  on  the  scar 
at  one  spot,  which  to  my  mind  indicates  the  line  of  incision  of  the  skin 
by  a  previous  operation.  I  took  two  other  pieces  of  skin  from  other  parts 
of  the  same  preparation,  from  another  part  of  the  same  specimen,  and  in 
those  two  pieces  I  found  glands. 

In  the  first  piece  which  you  have  mentioned  did  you  find  glands? — I 
found  glands  at  each  end  of  that  specimen,  on  either  side  of  what  is  called 
the  scar.  That  piece  has  been  cut  up  completely,  but  I  have  the  micro- 
scopical preparations.  I  found  no  glands  in  the  centre  where  there  is 
the  mark  called  a  scar,  proving  in  fact  that  mark  is  a  scar.  There  were 
glands  in  the  part  of  the  skin  where  there  is  a  mark  or  depression  caused  by 
folding.  At  the  place  where  the  mark  or  scar  was  the  skin  was  denser 
than  the  rest  of  the  skin.  As  the  result  of  my  microscopical  examination 
I  say  that  that  mark  is  undoubtedly  an  old  operation  scar. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  TOBIN — I  commenced  my  studies  at  Oxford 
University,  and  from  there  I  went  to  St.  Mary's  Hospital  in  1894.  Mr. 
Pepper  was  a  lecturer  there  then.  For  the  first  five  or  six  years  that  I 
was  at  St.  Mary's  Hospital  I  was  associated  with  Mr.  Pepper,  but  since 
then  my  work  has  been  entirely  independent. 

Dealing  with  the  question  of  the  remains,  must  the  person  who 
removed  the  viscera  have  been  a  person  of  very  considerable  dexterity? — 
He  must  certainly  have  had  considerable  dexterity,  yes. 

And  must   that   removal   have  been  done  by  somebody   with  a  very 
considerable  anatomical  knowledge,   or   somebody  accustomed  to  eviscera- 
tion?— Certainly   some  one  having  considerable  anatomical  knowledge. 
62 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Dr.  Spilsbury 

And  accustomed  to  evisceration  1 — Yes,  one  who  has  done  a  considera- 
able  amount  of  evisceration. 

Mr.  TOBIN — My  lord,  I  do  not  propose  to  repeat  at  any  length  the 
cross-examination  I  made  of  Mr.  Pepper  yesterday. 

The  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — It  is  not  in  the  least  necessary.  I  think 
you  put  your  points  absolutely  plainly  and  clearly,  and  I  am  sure  the 
jury  will  follow  them.  No  observation  will  be  made  because  you  do  not 
repeat  all  that  you  got  from  Mr.  Pepper.  The  important  thing  that  is 
fresh  is  that  this  witness  said  that  on  the  scar  there  were  no  glands,  and 
that  on  either  side  there  were. 

Cross-examination  continued — If  it  should  be  established  that  there 
is  in  the  scar  a  sebaceous  gland  or  a  hair  and  a  hair  follicle,  that  would 
be  conclusive  that  it  was  not  a  scar.  I  first  formed  the  opinion  that  the 
mark  in  that  piece  of  skin  was  a  scar  after  I  had  first  examined  the  piece 
of  skin  on  9th  September.  That  was  before  the  microscopical  examination. 

Before  you  formed  your  opinion,  when  you  examined  it  with  your 
eye,  you  had  heard,  had  you  not,  that  Belle  Elmore  had  had  an  operation 
in  the  lower  part  of  the  abdomen  ? — Yes,  I  believe  I  had  read  that  in  the 
Press. 

Did  the  condition  of  the  skin,  when  you  saw  it  for  the  first  time  on 
9th  September,  make  it  very  difficult  to  form  a  clear  opinion  as  to  whether 
this  was  a  scar? — It  made  it  more  difficult  than  if  it  had  been  fresh. 

Re-examined  by  Mr.  MUIR — I  attended  lectures  by  Mr.  Pepper,  and  I 
also  received  clinical  teaching  from  him.  Otherwise  I  was  associated  with 
him  at  St.  Mary's  only  by  acting  as  a  surgical  dresser — as  a  student.  The 
fact  that  I  acted  with  Mr.  Pepper  has  absolutely  no  influence  upon  the 
opinion  that  I  have  expressed  here.  The  fact  that  I  had  read  in  the 
papers  that  there  had  been  a.n  operation  upon  Belle  Elmore  had  no  effect 
at  all  upon  the  opinion  I  have  expressed.  I  have  no  doubt  that  this 
is  a  scar.  I  have  also  said  that  if  any  gland  or  hair  follicle  exists  in  that 
place  it  will  conclusively  prove  that  it  is  not  a  scar.  I  have  examined 
microscopically  the  section  which  I  took  out  to  see  whether  there  is  any 
gland  or  any  hair  follicle  in  it,  in  the  scar  part  of  it,  and  I  have  failed 
to  find  any  hair  follicle  or  sebaceous  gland  in  that  area.  If  there  had 
been  any  in  that  area  I  certainly  would  have  found  them. 

Is  there  anything  which  might  be  mistaken  for  a  gland  that  you  saw? 
— There  is  one  small  mass,  which  I  have  mentioned  already,  of  included 
epidermis  in  the  scar.  In  a  surgical  operation  when  the  edges  of  the 
skin  are  brought  into  contact  it  is  common  for  at  least  one  side  to  turn 
in  a  little,  and,  as  the  scar  forms,  some  of  the  surface  stuff  covering  the 
skin  may  become  enclosed  in  the  scar  and  embedded  in  it.  I  found  such 
a  piece  of  included  epidermis  in  this  mark  which  I  say  is  a  scar,  and 
having  found  that  I  think  there  is  no  room  for  doubt  as  to  its  being  a  scar. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — I  have  an  independent  position  of  my  own, 
and  I  am  responsible  for  my  own  opinion,  which  has  been  formed  on  my 
own  scientific  knowledge,  and  not  in  any  way  influenced  by  any  supposed 
connection  with  Mr.  Pepper.  This  embedding  of  a  piece  of  edge  of  the 
cut  would  come  about  in  the  process  of  the  healing  of  the  scar.  That 

63 


Hawley  Harvey  Crippen. 

Dr.  Spilsbury 

embedded  flesh  would  really  be  something  that  got  in  after  the  cut,  and  it 
might  contain  both  follicles  and  sebaceous  glands,  so  that  one  would  have 
to  be  careful  in  diagnosing  this  to  see  whether  one  had  got  the  cut  without 
an  embedded  piece  or  an  embedded  piece  in  the  cut.  I  have  absolutely 
no  doubt  in  my  own  mind  as  regards  the  scar.  What  I  saw — the  rectus 
muscle  and  the  aponeurosis — is  not  consistent  with  the  flesh  being  from 
any  other  part  of  the  body  than  that  which  I  have  described.  I  have 
my  microscopic  slides  here,  and  I  shall  send  for  a  microscope  in  case  it 
should  be  wanted. 

Dr.  THOMAS  MARSHALL,  examined  by  Mr.  TRAVBBS  HUMPHREYS — I  am  a 
Bachelor  of  Medicine,  and  I  act  as  divisional  surgeon  of  police  for  the 
Kentish  Town  district.  I  practise  at  25  Caversham  Road,  Kentish  Town. 
On  13th  July  I  was  called  to  39  Hilldrop  Crescent,  and  I  got  there  about 
twenty  minutes  to  six.  I  went  into  the  cellar  where  Inspector  Dew  was, 
and  I  there  saw  what  appeared  to  be  human  remains  lying  in  an  excavation 
in  the  centre  of  the  cellar.  At  that  time  they  were  only  slightly  exposed. 
I  did  not  touch  them  at  all  at  that  time.  I  went  away,  and  came  back 
again  about  nine  o'clock  in  the  evening,  when  I  found  the  remains  much 
more  exposed.  I  did  not  disturb  them,  but  I  touched  them,  and  picked 
up  one  or  two  things.  I  attended  again  at  the  same  address  on  the  next 
day,  and  met  Mr.  Pepper  there.  I  have  been  in  Court,  and  have  heard 
Mr.  Pepper's  evidence  as  to  what  took  place  on  that  day,  and  I  quite 
agree  with  it.  On  15th  July  I  had  the  coroner's  warrant  for  making  a 
post-mortem  examination,  and  I  made  it  in  conjunction  with  Mr.  Pepper. 
I  have  heard  Mr.  Pepper's  evidence  with  regard  to  that  also,  and  I  quite 
agree  with  it.  On  that  day  I  assisted  Mr.  Pepper  in  placing  some  of  the 
remains  and  other  matter  in  some  jars,  and,  having  put  those  matters  in 
the  jars,  I  sealed  the  jars.  The  stoppers  of  the  jars  were  bound  down 
with  tape,  and  then  sealed  with  my  seal,  and  left  in  charge  of  the  mortuary- 
keeper. 

On  25th  July  I  made  a  further  examination  of  the  remains  other  than 
those  which  were  in  the  jars  at  the  mortuary.  On  that  occasion  I  found 
a  second  Hinde's  curler — exhibit  46 — with  some  hair  on  it.  That  was 
among  the  remains  and  the  soil  in  the  coffin.  I  myself  took  that  in  a 
further  jar  to  Dr.  Willcox  at  St.  Mary's  Hospital.  In  that  jar  I  also 
placed  a  portion  of  the  liver  and  some  of  the  intestines.  On  14th  August 
I  made  a  further  examination  of  the  remains  at  the  mortuary,  and  on  that 
occasion  I  found  a  third  Hinde'e  curler — exhibit  47 — which  I  put  in  a  glass 
jar  together  with  the  lungs  and  some  portion  of  the  intestines  and  one 
or  two  other  matters.  I  also  on  that  occasion  put  into  another  jar  some 
of  the  soil  and  lime  which  I  took  from  the  coffin.  I  took  all  those  matters 
to  Dr.  Willcox  on  that  day.  On  the  same  occasion  I  took  to  Dr.  Willcox 
a  box  containing  some  carbolic  powder  which  I  got  from  the  mortuary- 
keeper. 

I  was  with  Mr.  Pepper  on  8th  August  when  he  first  saw  the  scar.     On 

that  day  I  formed  the  opinion  that  that  piece  of  flesh  which  had  the  mark 

upon  it  came  from  the  lower  part  of  the  abdominal  wall.      I  formed  the 

opinion  that  it  was  a  scar  mark,  and  that  is  still  my  opinion.     I  have  heard 

64 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 


Dr.  Marshall 


the  evidence  given  by  Mr.  Pepper  with,  regard  to  the  condition  of  the 
various  viscera.  I  examined  these  with  him,  and  I  agree  with  his  evidence. 
That  applies  not  only  to  the  viscera,  but  to  all  the  remains.  -I  did  not 
find  any  indication  of  disease  or  anything  which  would  cause  death. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  TOBIN — Before  the  magistrate  did  you  say,  in 
cross-examination,  "  Some  bodies  remain  in  an  excellent  state  of  preserva- 
tion for  some  years  if  buried  in  lime  and  in  soil  like  clay,  which  prac- 
tically excludes  all  air  ' '  ? — I  assented  to  that. 

Do  you  agree  that  it  is  impossible  to  give  any  certain  opinion  as  to  the 
length  of  time  that  a  body  has  been  buried  in  the  earth? — Yes,  it  depends 
upon  circumstances. 

Are  the  reasons  that  people  are  unable  to  give  any  certain  opinion 
as  to  the  length  of  time  a  body  has  been  buried  these,  that  many  conditions 
may  modify  the  progress  of  putrefaction  after  burial,  such  as  the  char- 
acter of  the  soil  for  one  thing;  then  the  depth  of  the  grave;  then  the 
time  that  has  elapsed  before  burial,  and  then  the  cause  of  death? — Yes.  I 
agree  that  different  bodies  undergo  putrefactive  changes  with  very  different 
degrees  of  rapidity,  even  when  they  have  been  buried  under  similar  con- 
ditions. It  was  on  8th  August  that  I  formed  the  opinion  that  that  mark 
in  the  piece  of  skin  and  flesh  was  a  scar.  I  first  heard  on  18th  July — 
the  date  of  the  first  inquest — that  Belle  Elmore  had  undergone  an  opera- 
tion, but  it  must  be  remembered  that  the  first  time  I  scrutinised  the  skin 
and  flesh  was  on  8th  August. 

You  had  heard  twenty-five  days  before  that  that  Belle  Elmore  had  had 
an  operation? — Yes. 

Now  I  am  going  to  the  number  of  occasions!  on  which  you  have  seen 
these  remains.  On  13th  July  at  Hilldrop  Crescent  in  the  cellar  you  first 
saw  some  remains? — Yes.  I  only  slightly  touched  the  top  surface;  I  did 
not  separate  one  part  from  another,  so  that  there  was  nothing  that  could 
be  called  an  examination  on  that  day.  I  again  saw  the  remains  in  the 
ground  on  14th  July;  I  saw  them  in  process  of  being  taken  out  and  put 
into  a  shell  to  be  taken  to  the  mortuary.  I  was  in  the  house  at  Hilldrop 
Crescent  for  about  three  hours  on  14th  July,  while  the  remains  were  being 
put  into  the  shell.  I  only  looked  into  the  cellar  once  or  twice  where  there 
were  men  working.  I  made  no  examination  of  the  remains1  then.  I 
examined  the  remains  for  about  three  hours  or  two  hours  and  a  half  on  the 
15th  at  the  mortuary.  Mr.  Pepper  was  along  with  me  examining  them 
during  the  whole  time. 

Did  you  handle  the  remains  on  that  day,  that  piece  of  skin  and 
flesh  with  the  mark  on  it? — I  could  not  possibly  say  that  I  handled  that. 
Mr.  Pepper  was  handling  them,  and  I  was  handling  them ;  I  could  not  say 
whether  I  handled  that  one  specially,  or  whether  Mr.  Pepper  did.  , 

You  have  no  doubt  whatever  that  you  looked  at  that  piece  of  skin, 
whether  you  handled  it  with  your  hands  or  not? — Quite  so. 

And  in  that  sense  you  examined  it  with  the  eye.  Is  that  right? — 
Yes.  Neither  Mr.  Pepper  nor  I  used  any  microscope  that  day.  During 
the  three  and  a  half  hours'  examination  we  looked  at  each  piece  of  the 
remains  for  such  time  as  was  possible.  To  have  microscoped  or  examined 
them  in  a  more  minute  way  would  have  taken  ua  all  night  long. 

65 


Dr.  Marshall 


Hawley   Harvey  Crippen. 


Then  that  piece  with  the  mark  on  it  did  not  attract  your  attention 
in  any  particular  way? — No,  not  specially. 

On  the  18th  you  had  heard  that  Mr®.  Crippen  had  had  an  operation. 
After  the  18th  what  was  the  date  of  your  next  examination  of  the  remains? 
— 25th  July,  at  the  mortuary.  I  examined  them  alone  for  one  definite 
purpose  for  between  two  and  three  hours. 

Did  you  look  for,  that  particular  piece  of  skin  with  the  mark  on  it, 
on  that  day,  the  25th? — I  believe  not.  I  had  a  request  from  Dr.  Willcox 
to  supply  him  with  certain  other  samples  of  the  remains.  These  had  to 
be  carefully  searched  for,  with  considerable  difficulty;  the  remains  had 
greatly  changed;  they  were  marked,  and  it  was  a  considerable  task.  Dr. 
Willcox  had  asked  me  to  get  for  him  if  possible  the  other  kidney  and  the 
remainder  of  the  liver  and  a  different  portion  of  intestine.  The  search 
for  the  kidney  entailed  a  long  time. 

Having  heard  on  18th  July  that  Mrs.  Crippen  had  had  an  operation, 
did  you  inform  Mr.  Pepper  almost  immediately,  within  a  day  or  two,  that 
you  had  heard  that  Mrs.  Crippen  had  had  an  operation?^!  think  I  com- 
municated my  information  the  first  time  I  met  Mr.  Pepper  after  that  day, 
but  what  date  it  might  be  I  do  not  know.  I  did  speak  about  the  subject 
to  him.  I  do  not  think  I  had  seen  Mr.  Pepper  between  the  18th  and  25th 
July;  I  had  no  occasion  to  see  him. 

The  fact  that  you  had  heard  on  the  18th  that  Mrs.  Crippen  had  had 
an  operation  would,  I  suppose,  impress  itself  upon  your  mind?  You 
would  bear  it  in  mind  when  you  next  examined  the  remains? — Certainly. 
The  next  time  I  examined  the  remains — to  use  the  word  strictly — was  on 
8th  August. 

On  18th  July  you  have  told  us  that  you  heard  that  Mrs.  Crippen  had 
had  an  operation.  On  25th  July  you  looked  at  the  remains  at  Dr.  Will- 
cox's  request? — Tea. 

At  that  time  I  suppose  you  realised  in  your  own  mind  that  the  fact 
that  Mrs.  Crippen  had  had  an  operation  had  an  important  bearing  on  the 
case? — I  had  realised  it;  oh,  yes. 

Why,  then,  did"  you  not  look  on  25th  July  to  see  whether  there  was 
any  trace  of  such  an  operation  ? — I  think  you  do  not  realise  the  nature  of 
the  task  we  had  to  do.  I  had  quite  enough  to  do  on  that  day  to  satisfy 
Dr.  Willcox's  request  to  find  what  he  desired,  and  that  is  what  I  devoted 
my  time  to  entirely. 

Re-examined  by  Mr.  MUIR — Did  the  fact  that  you  had  heard  that 
Mrs.  Crippen  had  had  an  operation  have  any  effect  on  the  opinion  that 
you  formed  as  to  this  being  a  scar  or  not? — None  whatever. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICES — In  certain  cases  it  is  very  difficult  to  tell 
how  long  bodies  have  been  in  the  ground.  I  formed  an  opinion  of  my 
own  as  to  how  long  those  remains  had  been  in  the  ground,  and  I  stated 
that  opinion  at  the  first  inquest  before  any  other  witness.  I  formed  the 
opinion  that  they  had  been  in  the  ground  several  months.  I  did  not 
consult  Mr.  Pepper  one  single  word  about  this  matter  before  I  expressed 
that  opinion  before  the  coroner.  I  formed  the  opinion  on  two  grounds, 
these  two  grounds  being  that  on  first  observing  those  remains  buried 
where  we  found  them,  I  was  somewhat  surprised  with  an  appearance 
66 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Dr.  Marshall 

of  freshness — a  redness  and  freshness — not  the  appearance  of  corruption 
that  might  be  imagined ;  but  when  I  came  to  examine  them  in  detail  at 
the  mortuary  I  found  the  presence  of  this  adipocere — certain  parts  where 
there  had  been  masses  of  fat,  a  considerable  amount  of  adipocere,  and  at 
other  parts  much  less.  Forming  an  estimate  to  the  best  of  my  power  of 
the  time  that  would  be  required  for  the  formation  of  that  adipocere,  I 
reckoned  it  as  a  matter  of  several  months — four,  five,  or  six,  I  would  say. 
With  aD  the  knowledge  I  have  got,  the  result  of  all  my  examinations,  I 
could  not  say  precisely  how  long  those  remains  had  been  in  the  ground. 
All  I  say  is  that  they  might  have  been  in  the  ground  several  months,  up 
to  six  or  possibly  up  to  seven  months. 

ARTHUR  ROBINSON,  examined  by  Mr  TRAVERS  HUMPHREYS — I  live  at 
58  Holloway  Road.  I  was  formerly  a  mortuary-keeper  at  the  Islington 
Mortuary  Chapel  in  Holloway  Road.  On  14th  July  last  a  coffin  was  placed 
in  my  charge  at  the  mortuary  by  Mr.  Leverton,  the  undertaker.  On  15th 
July  five  glass  jars,  sealed,  were  placed  in  my  care  by  Dr.  Marshall. 
On  2nd  August  I  handed  those  glass  jars  to  the  coroner's,  officer,  Police 
Constable  Thompson.  On  19th  July  I  put  some  carbolic  powder  upon  the 
remains  in  the  coffin.  Afterwards  I  gave  some  of  that  carbolic  powder  to 
Dr.  Marshall  at  his  request. 

ROBERT  THOMPSON,  examined  by  Mr.  TRAVERS  HUMPHREYS — I  am  a 
police  constable,  No.  520,  "  Y  "  Division.  I  act  as  coroner's  officer  in  the 
Islington  district.  On  22nd  July  the  last  witness  handed  me  five  glass  jars, 
which  I  took  and  handed  to  Dr.  Willcox  at  St.  Mary's  Hospital. 

CHARLES  PITT,  examined  by  Mr.  TRAVERS  HUMPHREYS — I  am  a  police 
constable  of  the  Criminal  Investigation  Department,  New  Scotland  Yard. 
On  13th  July  last,  by  direction  of  Chief  Inspector  Dew,  I  purchased  from 
a  chemist  named  Merrell  a  bottle  of  disinfectant  fluid,  called  Neville's 
disinfectant  fluid.  That  disinfectant  wasi  diluted  with  water,  and  I  poured 
it  round  the  walls  of  the  cellar  at  39  Hilldrop  Crescent.  I  left  the  bottle 
with  a  little  of  the  fluid  in  it  at  the  house.  On  16th  August  I  went  back 
to  39  Hilldrop  Crescent,  and  found  that  bottle  where  I  had  left  it,  and  I 
took  it  to  Dr.  Willcox  at  his  request.  On  15th  August  I  purchased  a  full 
unopened  bottle  of  the  same  disinfectant  fluid  from  the  same  chemist, 
which  I  took  unopened  and  handed  to  Dr.  Willcox,  also  at  his  request. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — The  hole  in  the  floor  was  open  when  I 
poured  the  stuff  round  the  walls.  The  remains  had  not  been  removed. 

Dr.  WILLIAM  HENRY  WILLCOX,  examined  by  Mr.  INOLEBY  ODDIE — I  am 
the  senior  Scientific  Analyst  to  the  Home  Office.  I  am  a  Bachelor  of 
Medicine  of  London,  a  Bachelor  of  Science  of  London,  a  Fellow 
of  the  Royal  College  of  Physicians,  and  Lecturer  on  Forensic 
Medicine  at  St.  Mary's  Hospital.  On  22nd  July  I  received  five 
jars  from  the  coroner's  officer,  Thompson.  These  jars  were 
covered  and  sealed,  and  I  numbered  them.  In  the  first  there  was  a  small 
portion  of  liver  and  one  kidney;  in  the  second,  a  pair  of  combinations; 

67 


Hawley  Harvey  Crippen. 


Dr.  Willcox 


in  the  third,  hair  in  a  hair  curler,  a  handkerchief,  an  undervest,  and  some 
hair  in  a  piece  of  paper;  in  the  fourth,  a  piece  of  pyjama  jacket;  and  in 
the  fifth,  two  other  pieces  of  pyjama  jacket,  one  piece  having  a  button 
on  it,  and  the  other  having  the  neck  piece  on  it  with  a  tab.  I  have  examined 
two  complete  suits  of  pyjamas,  exhibit  76.  They  are  composed  of 
flannelette.  The  portion  which  was  in  the  jars  is  composed  of  flannelette. 
The  buttons  on  the  jackets  of  the  pyjamas,  exhibit  76,  are  exactly  similar 
to  the  button  on  the  piece  in  the  jar  No.  5.  This  one  is  a  little  smaller, 
having  shrunk  a  little.  It  is  a  circular  button  with  a  depression  in  the 
centre,  from  which  are  radiating  threads.  On  25th  July  I  received  another 
jar  from  Dr.  Marshall,  which  I  numbered  6,  containing  some  intestine, 
another  curler  with  hair  in  it,  and  a  portion  of  liver.  I  think  that  that 
portion  with  the  other  portion  which  I  had  already  got  completed  the  whole 
liver.  On  8th  August  I  received  from  Mr.  Pepper  a  piece  of  skin  with  the 
so-called  scar  on  it.  That  is  a  piece  of  skin  from  the  lower  wall  of  the 
abdomen.  In  my  opinion  the  mark  on  it  is  an  old  scar — I  am  of  opinion 
that  one  limb  of  what  has  been  described  as  the  horse-shoe  mark  is  a  scar, 
and  the  other  limb  is  a  fold.  On  14th  August  I  received  from  Dr.  Marshall 
another  jar,  which  I  numbered  7,  containing  some  soil  and  lime,  and  a  jar 
numbered  8  containing  lungs,  a  portion  of  intestines,  a  piece  of  muscle, 
and  another  piece  of  hair.  I  also  got  the  box  of  carbolic  powder  that  has 
been  spoken  about.  The  lungs  were  in  a  condition  of  advanced  putrefaction 
when  I  received  them.  The  kidney  I  had  got  much  earlier,  and  it  was  com- 
paratively fresh,  except  that  it  had  undergone  the  process  of  decay  with 
the  formation  of  adipocere,  but  there  was  very  little  ordinary  putrefaction 
in  it  when  I  received  it. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — I  think  that  the  extra  putrefaction  of  those 
two  parts  was  due  to  the  time  that  had  elapsed  since  they  had  been  taken 
out  of  the  ground. 

Examination  continued — On  loth  August  I  got  an  unopened  bottle  of 
Neville's  sanitary  fluid,  and  on  the  16th  an  open  bottle  containing  a  small 
quantity.  On  23rd  August  I  visited  39  Hilldrop  Crescent,  and  1  procured 
some  specimens  of  the  soils  from  the  excavation,  which  I  put  into  jars  Nos. 
9,  10,  and  11.  On  23rd  July  I  commenced  examining  some  of  the  viscera 
for  poisons.  I  examined  the  stomach,  the  kidney,  and  a  portion  of  the 
liver.  I  first  of  all  searched  for  mineral  and  organic  poisons.  I  found  traces 
of  arsenic  in  the  intestines  and  liver,  and  I  found  traces  of  creosole  (the 
chemical  name  for  commercial  carbonic  acid)  in  the  intestines  and  liver, 
small  traces.  I  attach  no  importance  to  those;  they  are  due  to  the  disin- 
fectants used.  I  then  commenced  examining  for  alkaloidal  poisons.  I 
started  the  proceedings  immediately  I  received  the  organs,  but  it  takes 
some  time,  some  two  or  three  weeks1,  before  one  is  able  to  apply  the  final 
tests.  I  took  weighed  portions  of  the  stomach,  intestines,  kidney,  and 
liver,  and  treated  them  by  the  usual  process  for  extraction  of  alkaloids, 
with  the  result  that  I  found  an  alkaloid  present  in  all  these  extracts, 
then  applied  further  tests  to  see  what  kind  of  alkaloid  was  present.  I 
tested  for  all  the  common  alkaloids — morphia,  strychnine,  cocaine,  and  so 
on — and  I  found  that  a  mydriatic  alkaloid  was  present ;  that  is,  an  alkaloid 
the  solution  of  which,  if  put  into  the  eye  of  an  animal,  causes  the  pupil 
68 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Dr.  Willeox 

to  enlarge  and  dilate.  Having  found  a  mydriatic  alkaloid,  I  applied 
a  further  test,  and  found  that  it  was  a  mydriatic  vegetable  alkaloid,  of 
which  there  are  three — atropine,  hyoscyainin,  and  hyoscin.  I  applied 
further  tests,  and  found  that  the  alkaloid  that  I  had  got  in  the  extracts 
corresponded  to  hyoscin.  I  have  no  doubt  it  was  hyoscin.  I  could  tell 
that  in  two  ways,  one  by  examining  the  residue  with  a  lens  and  micro- 
scope; it  was  gummy,  there  were  no  crystals  there.  Another  way  was  by 
adding  to  a  solution  of  the  residue  some  bromine  solution- — hydrobromio 
acid — and  I  got  round  spheres,  but  no  crystals.  Hyoscin  gives  spheres 
exactly  like  I  have  got.  Atropine  and  hyoscyamin  both  give  needle- 
shaped  crystals.  The  two  things  I  have  described — the  gummy  residue 
and  the  spheres  from  the  bromine  solution — pointed  to  hyoscin  only.  In 
the  stomach  there  was  one- thirtieth  of  a  grain,  and  in  the  kidney  there 
was  one-fortieth  of  a  grain,  in  the  intestines  one-seventh  of  a  grain,  and  in 
the  liver  one-twelfth  of  a  grain. 

That  would  be  in  the  part  you  analysed? — No,  calculated  out  of  the 
whole  organs.  There  was  the  merest  trace  in  the  lungs.  The  total  amount 
of  hyoscin  in  all  the  organs  submitted  to  me  was  two-sevenths  of  a  grain. 
Hyoscin  is  not  used  medicinally  in  the  form  of  hyoscin.  It  is  a  gummy 
syrupy  stuff,  which  it  would  be  impossible  to  handle,  and  so  a  salt  is  used. 
The  salt  which  is  used  is  the  hydrobromide  of  hyoscin ;  that  is  the  prepara- 
tion given  in  the  British  Pharmacopoeia.  In  the  whole  of  the  organs  sub- 
mitted to  me  the  amount  of  the  hydrobromide  of  hyoscin  was  two-fifths  of 
a  grain,  which  would  certainly  correspond  to  more  than  half  a  grain  in  the 
whole  body. 

What  is  a  fatal  dose? — From  a  quarter  of  a  grain  to  half  a  grain. 
Hydrobromide  of  hyoscin  is  a  drug  which  is  a  powerful  narcotic  poison. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — If  the  fatal  dose  were  given  it  would 
perhaps  produce  a  little  delirium  and  excitement  at  first ;  the  pupils  of  the 
eyes  would  be  paralysed ;  the  mouth  and  the  throat  would  be  dry,  and  then 
quickly  the  patient  would  become  drowsy  and  unconscious  and  completely 
paralysed,  and  death  would  result  in  a  few  hours.  The  time  when  the 
drowsy  and  unconscious  state  would  be  reached  would  depend  on  the  amount 
given  and  the  condition  of  the  stomach;  but,  assuming  the  dose  to  be 
given  which,  I  think,  I  can  trace,  I  should  think  that  the  drowsy,  uncon- 
scious state  might  come  on  under  an  hour  probably,  and  paralysis  and 
death  in  something  under  twelve  hours.  The  patient  would  not  recover  at 
all  during  these  twelve  hours  if  the  dose  was  a  fatal  dose. 

Examination,  continued — This  isi  not  a  drug  that  is  commonly  used. 
If  it  is  given  internally  it  is  practically  always  done  by  a  hypodermic 
injection;  it  is  given  with  a  syringe  and  a  solution  is  injected  under  the 
skin.  It  is  used  as  a  powerful  sedative  for  oases  of  delirium,  mania,  and 
meningitis,  and  also  for  delirium  tremens.  Very  occasionally  it  is  used 
as  a  hypnotic  for  insomnia,  and  sometimes  it  is  given  in  combination  with 
morphia  for  sedative  purposes.  In  all  these  cases  it  would  be  given  hypo- 
dermically.  It  is  used  in  tabloid  form  for  hypodermic  administration.  The 
proper  dose  for  a  hypodermic  injection  is  one-hundredth  to  one  two- 
hundredth  of  a  grain.  As  far  as  I  know,  it  is  not  used  as  a  homoeopathic 

09 


Hawley  Harvey  Crippen. 


DP.   Willcox 


remedy.  I  hive  looked  through  the  English  and  the  American  pharma- 
copoeias, and  the  drug  is  not  used.  I  am  of  opinion  that  in  this  particular 
case  this  drug  was  taken  by  the  mouth. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — It  is  rather  salt  and  bitter,  and  it  can  be 
administered  in  something  with  a  pronounced  flavour,  such  as  stout  or  beer 
or  sweetened  tea  or  coffee,  or  it  could  be  given  with  spirits.  The  sweetened 
liquid  would  disguise  the  bitter  taste. 

Examination  continued — What  in  your  opinion  was  the  cause  of  death 
in  this  case? — Poisoning  by  hyoscin.  I  do  not  know  of  any  legitimate 
internal  use  for  hydrobromide  of  hyoscin,  except  in  the  doses  I  have 
mentioned. 

How  long  do  you  think  the  patient  lived  after  this  drug  was  taken  ? — 
Probably  an  hour  or  more. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — But  what  is  the  most  you  think  she  could 
have  lived,  having  regard  to  what  you  found  in  the  body? — I  should  say 
from  one  to  twelve  hours. 

Examination  continued — As  regards  the  remains  which  I  have 
examined,  I  should  think  that  they  had  been  in  the  ground  from  about 
four  to  eight  months. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  TOBIN — I  have  tested  for  hyoscin  before,  but 
I  believe  this  is  the  first  case  where  the  question  of  murder  has  arisen.  I 
have  never  found  hyoscin  in  extracts  from  dead  bodies  before  this  case. 
There  are  several  alkaloids  that  are  mydriatic  in  their  effect.  The  term 
"  mydriatic  "  is  applied  to  any  drug  that  dilates  the  pupil  of  the  eye.  There 
are  two  classes  of  mydriatio  alkaloids,  some  being  vegetable,  produced  by 
plants,  and  others  being  animal  mydriatic  alkaloids,  which  are  produced 
after  death  by  the  action  of  putrefactive  bacteria  without  any  of  the 
elements  having  been  introduced  into  the  body  during  life.  These  bodies 
are  produced  fairly  late  in  the  process  of  putrefaction. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — When  the  organs  are  much  putrefied,  then 
these  bodies  may  be  found.  By  "  fairly  late"  I  mean  in  an  advanced 
stage  of  putrefaction. 

Cross-examination  continued — In  the  remains  I  did  not  discover 
sufficient  of  the  alkaloid  to  apply  what  is  called  the  melting  point  test. 
About  20th  August  I  formed  the  opinion  that  what  I  had  found  was  hyoscin. 

Had  you  on  2nd  August  been  informed  that  Dr.  Crippen  had  bought 
some  hyoscin? — Yes. 

So  that  eighteen  days  before  you  formed  the  opinion  that  it  was  hyoscin 
you  had  been  told  that  Dr.  Crippen  had  bought  some? — Yes,  that  is  so. 
The  process  of  ascertaining  whether  there  is  an  alkaloid  in  a  body  at  all  is  a 
long  and  elaborate  process,  taking  about  a  fortnight.  It  is  necessary  to 
weigh  the  different  parts  of  the  remains  where  it  is  supposed  that  alkaloid 
might  possibly  be.  Those  are  mixed  up  quite  fine,  and  then  placed  in 
rectified  spirits  of  wine.  The  spirits  of  wine  is  drawn  off  after  twenty-four 
hours,  and  then  what  is  left  of  the  mixed  up  flesh  is  placed  in  another  lot 
of  spirits,  which  again  is  drawn  off  after  another  twenty-four  hours,  and 
so  on  as  long  as  the  liquid  which  comes  away  is  coloured — about  five  times. 
When  the  liquid  ceases  to  get  coloured  we  stop.  There  are  several  other 

70 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

DP.  Willeox 

stages  in  the  process  -which  I  can  give  if  desired.  Finally,  I  found  that  there 
was  an  alkaloid  present.  Of  the  substance  which  I  found  in  this  first 
process  to  test  whether  there  was  any  alkaloid  at  all,  I  found  one-twelfth 
of  a  grain  in  the  liver,  one-seventh  of  a  grain  in  the  intestines,  and  one- 
fortieth  of  a  grain  in  the  kidney,  calculating  out  on  the  whole  of  these 
organs.  Having  ascertained  that  there  wasi  an  alkaloid,  I  next  tested  to 
find  out  whether  it  was  mydriatic.  The  physiological  test  would  be  con- 
clusive on  that  point,  pouring  a  drop  into  an  animal's  eye  and  finding  that 
it  dilated  the  pupil.  I  put  a  drop  of  the  solution  into  a  cat's  eye,  and 
then  exposed  the  cat  to  a  very  powerful  light,  and  I  found  that  one  pupil 
was  widely  dilated,  which  was  quite  conclusive. 

The  three  main  vegetable  mydriatics  are  hyoscin,  hyoscyamin,  and 
atropin.  There  is  a  fourth  vegetable  mydriatic,  cocaine,  but  it  is  not  quite 
the  same  as  the  other  three,  because  if  the  eye  is  exposed  to  a  powerful 
light  the  pupil  contracts.  Hyoscin  and  hyoscyamin  are  produced  by  the 
plant  called  henbane,  and  atropin  is  produced  from  belladonna,  which  ia 
called  the  deadly  night-shade.  Up  to  a  few  years  ago  it  waa  thought  that 
these  three  vegetable  mydriatics  had  the  same  chemical  composition,  but 
in  the  last  edition  of  the  British  Pharmacopoeia  different  formula  was 
given  for  hyoscin,  and  all  the  recent  work  on  these  alkaloids  points  to  the 
fact  that  hyoscin  has  a  slightly  different  formula  from  the  other  two. 
Hyoscyamin  and  atropin  are  still  the  same.  I  believe  it  will  be  about  eight 
years  since  they  were  discovered  to  be  different  from  hyoscin.  The  formula 
for  hyoscin  is  C17H21N04,  and  atropin  and  hyoscyamin  C17H23N03.  It 
was  recognised  in  the  profession  for  a  number  of  years  that  the  formulae 
for  all  three  were  exactly  the  same.  Putrefying  bodies  give  off  compounds 
containing  carbon,  hydrogen,  and  nitrogen. 

Therefore,  to  that  extent,  the  constituents  of  a  vegetable  mydriatic 
alkaloid  exist  in  animal  mydriatics? — The  constituents  exist,  but  the  com- 
bination is  different.  In  order  to  find  out  which  mydriatio  the  alkaloid 
was  I  applied  what  is  known  as  the  Vitali  test.  That  is  a  test  by  which 
one  arrives  at  something  which  is  coloured  purple  violet,  which  gradually 
fades  away  to  a  brownish  colour. 

la  the  arrival  at  that  point  (violet  fading  away  to  a  brownish  colour) 
characteristic  of  mydriatic  alkaloids,  both  vegetable  and  animal? — No, 
certainly  not  with  the  animal;  it  is  with  the  vegetable.  I  am  not  sure  that 
I  have  heard  of  Hamilton  and  Bodkin's  "  Legal  Medicine."  I  have  heard 
of  Giotto  and  Spiecke. 

Are  they  recognised  as  high  authorities  ? — I  believe  they  are  well-known 
chemists. 

Have  you  read  that,  according  to  Giotto  and  Spiecke,  certain  homa- 
tropines  do  give  Vitali's  reaction? — I  have  read  that,  but  I  have  looked 
through  the  literature  and  through  the  work  of  these  gentlemen,  and  I  have 
been  unable  to  find  any  record  of  it.  I  do  not  agree  with  that  statement. 
Even  if  that  statement  were  contained  in  the  original  papers,  I  do  not  agree 
with  it,  as  it  does  not  agree  with  my  experience.  I  agree  that  that  reaction 
— the  violet  fading  to  a  brownish  colour — is  a  peculiar  characteristic  of  all 
three  vegetable  mydriatics,  hyoscin,  hyoscyamin,  and  atropin,  and  therefore, 

71 


Hawley   Harvey  Crippen. 


Dr.  Wllleox 


when  I  arrive  at  that  violet  colour  fading  to  a  brown,  I  must  go  a  step 
further  in  order  to  ascertain  which  of  the  three  vegetable  mydriatics  it  is. 

Is  not  the  melting  point  test  the  important  test  in  order  to  ascertain 
which  of  those  three  vegetable  mydriatics  you  are  dealing  with? — It  is  an 
important  test,  but  not  the  important  test.  It  is  a  test  which  can  only  be 
applied  when  one  has  a  considerable  quantity  of  the  alkaloids  to  deal 
with. 

Which  do  you  consider  the  most  important  test? — The  careful  observa- 
tion, with  a  lens  and  a  microscope,  of  the  alkaloid  itself,  as  to  whether  it 
is  crystalline  or  gummy;  also  the  bromine  test,  which  has  already  been 
mentioned — the  obtaining  of  crystals.  From  a  careful  observation  of  the 
alkaloid  I  found  it  to  be  gummy,  which  is  characteristic  of  hyoscin.  Gummi- 
nees  is  not  characteristic  of  hyoscyamin  and  atropin;  they  are  crystalline. 
I  arrived  at  the  gumminess  when  I  had  found  out  that  it  was  an  alkaloid, 
but  before  I  had  applied  any  test  to  find  out  whether  the  alkaloid  was 
mydriatic;  in  other  words,  before  I  applied  the  physiological  test  to  the 
cat's  eye. 

Then  gumminess,  I  gather  from  you  now,  was  the  result  of  these 
extracts  which  resulted  in  your  ascertaining  that  it  was  an  alkaloid? — Yes. 

Supposing  that  the  alkaloid  had,  in  fact,  been  hyoscyamin  or  atropin, 
might  not  gumminess  have  been  the  result,  too,  at  that  stage? — Most 
probably  there  would  have  been  some  crystals  there. 

But  might  there  not,  in  fact,  have  only  been  gumminess? — There  might 
possibly,  but  on  re-crystallisation  crystals  would  have  appeared. 

Might  not  the  gumminess  have  possibly  been  hyoscyamin  or  atropin  ? — 
Not  if  the  extracts  were  fairly  pure.  If  the  extracts  were  impure  and  had 
other  materials  in,  then  a  gummy  residue  might  have  been  obtained  with 
atropin  and  hyoscyamin.  I  applied  the  bromine  test  after  I  had  applied 
Vitali's  test.  The  bromine  test  is  only  of  value  in  discriminating  between 
those  three  vegetable  alkaloids.  Other  things  besides  hyoscin  give  those 
spheres  which  I  have  spoken  of. 

Would  I  be  right  in  suggesting  that,  though  the  brown  spheres  enable 
you,  as  you  say,  to  discriminate  between  which  of  the  three  vegetable 
mydriatics  it  may  be,  it  does  not  enable  you  to  say  whether  it  may  not 
be  in  fact  animal? — You  are  quite  right. 

I  suggest  to  you  that  the  melting  point  test  is  really  the  most  im- 
portant, the  clearest  test  of  all  in  results,  for  this  reason,  that  the  melting 
points  of  the  different  mydriatic  alkaloids  are  very  widewly  different? — The 
melting  points  is  a  test  which  it  is  quite  impossible  to  apply  in  any  toxico- 
logical  investigation.  If  you  have  a  sufficient  quantity  of  alkaloid — several 
grains  of  it — then  the  melting  point  test  is  a  very  valuable  one,  but  you 
can  never  get  enough  in  a  toxicological  case  to  apply  the  test. 

But  if  you  could  get  enough  it  would  be  a  very  valuable  one? — If  you 
could  get  enough,  but  there  would  have  to  be  an  enormous  amount  taken 
as  poison. 

Will  you  agree  that  if  you  could  get  enough  it  would  be  the  most 
valuable  test  of  all? — No,  I  would  not  agree  with  that.     I  agree  that  the 
different  mydriatic  alkaloids  have  a  melting  point  of  widely  different  degrees, 
provided  that  they  are  in  a  very  pure  condition. 
72 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

DP.  Willeox 

Do  you  agree  that  the  melting  point  of  hyoscin  is  65  degrees  centi- 
grade, of  hyoscyamin  105  degrees,  and  of  atropin  115  degrees? — Yes,  those 
figures  are  right,  except  -with  regard  to  hyoscin,  which  is  a  gummy  syrup, 
and  it  is  very  difficult  to  say  what  the  melting  point  is.  I  agree  that  the 
melting  point  for  hyoscin  is  lower,  but  it  is  very  difficult  to  fix  the  point, 
because  with  the  gummy  substance  one  cannot  tell  when  the  point  is  reached. 
Another  very  important  test  to  ascertain  which  mydriatic  it  is  is  a  test 
called  the  conversion  of  alkaloid  into  a  gold  chloride  compound.  That 
conversion  is  effected  by  dissolving  the  alkaloid  in  diluted  hydrochloric 
acid,  adding  a  solution  of  chloride  of  gold,  and  allowing  the  product  to 
crystallise.  In  that  conversion  process,  when  the  different  mydriatic 
alkaloids  are  converted  into  gold  chloride  compounds,  the  melting  point  of 
each  is  enormously  different. 

So  that  is,  I  think  you  will  agree,  the  most  valuable  test? — It  is  a 
very  valuable  test  if  you  have  sufficient,  but  I  had  not  sufficient.  I  con- 
templated the  application  of  that  test  very  seriously.  If  one  has  a  sufficient 
quantity  it  is  perhaps  the  most  valuable  test  for  discriminating  between  the 
three  alkaloids.  In  that  test  the  melting  points  are  atropin,  148  degrees ; 
hyoscyamin,  160  degrees;  and  hyoscin,  199  degrees. 

Re-examined  by  Mr.  Mum — The  chloride  of  gold  conversion  process 
was  the  first  process  that  I  contemplated  applying  in  the  present  case, 
but  I  found  that.  I  had  not  strong  enough  solutions,  and  that  if  I  had  applied 
it  I  should  have  wasted  all  the  material  unsuccessfully.  The  melting  point 
test  is  one  in  which  in  my  experience  one  would  never  receive  a  sufficient 
quantity  to  apply  in  a  poisoning  case  where  the  poison  was  an  alkaloid. 
For  the  purpose  of  a  poisoning  investigation  one  must  by  necessity  use 
tests  which  apply  to  very  small  quantities. 

Are  the  tests  which  you  have  applied  in  this  case  real  tests? — Oh,  yes. 
I  tried  all  these  tests  on  the  pure  alkaloids  themselves  before  I  applied 
them  to  extracts  from  the  viscera,  and  I  found  them  reliable,  and  corre- 
sponding exactly.  As  the  result  of  my  tests  I  am  able  to  say  to  my 
own  satisfaction  that  this  substance  was  not  an  animal  alkaloid.  Animal 
mydriatic  alkaloids  are  produced  in  decaying  bodies  at  an  advanced  state 
of  putrefaction.  In  this  case  the  lungs  were  much  the  most  putrefied 
of  the  organs ;  and  I  tested  them  most  carefully,  and  I  found  the  least  trace 
of  mydriatic  alkaloid — not  enough  to  paralyse  the  pupil,  but  just  to 
weaken  it.  There  was  not  enough  to  distinguish  whether  it  was  animal 
or  vegetable  in  the  lungs. 

You  were  asked  about  this  process  of  extraction  being  long  and 
elaborate,  and  you  said  it  took  about  a  fortnight.  Have  you  been  in 
the  habit  of  applying  this  test? — Oh,  yes,  a  very  great  many  times.  In 
the  last  ten  years  I  have  done  it  considerably  over  a  hundred  times.  It 
does  not  present  any  difficulties  which  I  am  not  accustomed  to  deal  with.  I 
produce  some  specimens  of  the  three  vegetable  alkaloids,  marked  No.  81. 
When  you  have  extracted  this  alkaloid  it  is  not  possible  to  confuse  in 
appearance  the  gummy  residue  with  the  crystalline  residue  of  the  other 
if  you  have  a  pure  residue.  I  had  a  pure  residue.  I  have  never  found 
in  all  my  investigations  an  animal  alkaloid  which  gave  purple  colour  with 
the  Vitali  test.  I  have  tested  several  hundreds  of  times,  and  recently  on 

73 


Hawley   Harvey  Crippen. 


DP.  Willcox 


some  viscera  several  years  old,  and  I  have  been  unable  to  obtain  it  in  any 
single  case.  I  have  never  found  one  animal  alkaloid  to  correspond  to 
Vitali's  test,  and  I  have  tested  specially  for  that  hundreds  of  times. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — A  considerable  portion  of  my  time  is 
occupied  in  this  kind  of  investigation ;  it  is  by  no  means  a  novelty  to  me. 

You  have  told  Mr.  Tobin,  very  fairly,  that  animal  alkaloids  are  pro- 
duced in  what  you  call  the  advanced  stages  or  late  stages  of  putrefaction. 
Apart  from  your  examination,  were  there  any  organs  in  such  a  stage  of 
putrefaction  that  you  would  expect  to  have  alkaloids  produced? — No,  not 
those  that  I  examined  for  alkaloids  first.  The  lung,  which  I  examined 
two  or  three  weeks  later,  was  in  such  a  state  that  there  might  have  been 
some  animal  alkaloid  there.  I  have  no  doubt  in  my  own  mind  that  it  was 
vegetable  alkaloid  that  I  discovered,  and  also  that  it  was  hyoscin. 

There  is  a  question  which  I  am  asked  by  the  jury  to  put  which  seems 
to  be  important.  You  have  mentioned  that  hyoscin  in  the  form  of 
hyoscin  hydrobromide  is  in  the  Pharmacopoeia? — Yes. 

Do  you  know  of  any  medicines  which  could  be  compounded  by  a  pre- 
scription in  which  hyoscin  hydrobromide  would  be  given  as  medicine  by 
the  mouth  ? — No,  I  have  never  heard  of  it  being  given  by  the  mouth.  So 
far  as  I  know  hyoscin  is  not  used  by  doctors  to  make  up  medicines  which 
are  to  be  taken  by  the  mouth.  The  medical  internal  use  of  it  is  limited 
to  hypodermic  use,  and  then  in  doses  such  as  I  have  described  in  my 
evidence-in-chief.  I  do  not  know  of  any  medicine  existing  in  which  such 
a  quantity  as  two-sevenths  of  a  grain  could  have  been  used  internally.  If 
intended  to  be  taken  through  the  mouth,  I  know  of  no  medicine  in  which 
hyoscin  is  used. 

Dr.  ARTHUR  PEARSON  LUFF,  examined  by  Mr.  MUIR — I  am  a 
Doctor  of  Medicine,  a  Bachelor  of  Science  of  the  University  of  London,  a 
Fellow  of  the  Royal  College  of  Physicians,  physician  to  St.  Mary's  Hospital, 
Honorary  Scientific  Adviser  to  the  Home  Office,  and  for  seventeen  years  I 
was  the  late  Sir  James  Stevenson's  colleague  as  Scientific  Adviser  to  the 
Home  Office,  which  post  I  resigned  six  years  ago.  I  have  followed  up  Dr. 
Willcox's  tests  for  hyoscin  as  given  in  evidence,  and  I  agree  that  they 
are  absolutely  the  right  test.  I  have  repeated  all  the  tests  recently  with 
specimens  of  the  pure  drug,  and  I  quite  agree  with  Dr.  Willcox  that  the 
poison  that  was  present  was  undoubtedly  hyoscin,  judging  by  those  tests.  I 
have  in  a  large  number  of  cases  tested  for  animal  mydriatic  alkaloids,  but 
only  on  one  occasion  did  I  ever  come  across  an  animal  mydriatic  alkaloid, 
and  that  was  from  some  excessively  putrefied  meat.  I  have  for  seventeen 
years  always  tested  for  these  animal  alkaloids  in  toxicological  cases,  and 
before  that  I  conducted  a  long  series  of  investigations  upon  animal  alkaloids, 
but  I  have  never  found  a  mydriatic  animal  alkaloid  in  the  human  body.  I 
once  found  it  in  some  meat  that  I  put  to  putrefy  under  circumstances  very 
favourable  to  putrefaction.  In  that  case  I  applied  first  of  all  the 
physiological  test  to  the  eye  of  a  cat,  and  it  produced  dilation.  I  then 
applied  Vitali's  test,  but  it  did  not  give  the  colour  that  the  mydriatic 
vegetable  alkaloids  give.  I  think  it  is  quite  impossible  for  hyoscin  to  be 
mistaken  for  animal  mydriatic  alkaloid  under  the  Vitali's  test.  And 
74 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Dr.  Luff 

animal  alkaloid  could  not  be  mistaken  for  hyosoin  if  the  Vitali's  test  is 
used.  One  can  distinguish  absolutely  between  the  animal  and  vegetable. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  TOBIN — I  wrote  a  book  on  "  Forensic  Medicine 
and  Toxicology,"  which  was  published  in  1895.  I  have  been  in  Court 
all  morning,  and  have  heard  the  questions  that  were  put  to  Dr.  Marshall. 

I  will  read  from  your  book  at  page  61.  "  It  is  impossible  to  give 
any  certain  opinion  as  to  the  length  of  time  a  body  has  been  buried  in 
the  earth ;  the  reason  is  that  many  conditions  may  modify  the  progress 
of  putrefaction  after  burial,  such  as  the  character  of  the  coffin  and  soil,  the 
depth  of  the  grave,  the  time  that  hasi  elapsed  before  burial,  and  the  cause 
of  death.  In  addition,  different  bodies  undergo  putrefactive  changes  with 
very  different  degrees)  of  rapidity,  even  when  they  have  been  buried  under 
similar  conditions.  For  instance,  three  bodies  were  buried  at  the  same 
time,  side  by  side,  wrapped  in  cloth  of  the  same  texture,  and  in  coffins 
of  the  same  kind  of  wood.  In  connection  with  one  of  these  bodies  it  was 
found  at  the  end  of  nine  months  that  the  abdominal  walls  had  quite  dis- 
appeared; in  another  the  disappearance  of  the  abdominal  walls  did  not 
take  place  until  an  interval  of  thirteen  months  from  the  period  of  burial ; 
in  the  third  one,  at  the  end  of  twenty-three  months  the  abdominal  walla 
were  almost  entire."  That  is  your  experience? — Yes,  I  wrote  those  lines, 
and  I  absolutely  agree  with  them. 

If  a  mydriatic  alkaloid  is  produced  in  putrefying  meat  is  there  any 
scientific  reason  why  it  should  not  be  produced  in  putrefying  human  re- 
mains?— I  know  of  no  reason,  except  that  putrefying  human  remains  are 
not  exposed  to  the  conditions,  asi  a  rule,  in  which  I  exposed  that  meat  in 
order  to  get  this  mydriatic  alkaloid.  That  is  the  only  reason  I  can  give. 
I  can  only  say  that  I  have  never  met  it  in  human  corpses. 

Re-examined  by  Mr.  Mum — The  remains  in  connection  with  thia  oase 
were  not  shown  to  me. 

You  did  not  ask  to  have  them  shown  to  you? — Oh,  no,  for  a  very 
good  reason. 

What  was  the  reason? — That  I  should  never  attempt  to  express  an. 
opinion  as  to  the  time  that  those  remains  had  been  buried  after  they  had 
been  exhumed  some  days;  they  change  so  rapidly.  I  could  have  given 
an  opinion  at  the  time  the  remains  were  moved,  but  not  a  week  or  ten 
days  after.  I  could  have  formed  an  opinion  at  the  time  if  I  had  seen 
them  as  Mr.  Pepper  did.  There  is  nothing  in  that  passage  from  my 
book  to  detract  from  what  I  now  say,  that  I  could  give  an  opinion. 

CHARLES  HBTHERINGTON,  examined  by  Mr.  TRAVERS  HUMPHREYS — I  am 
a  qualified  chemist  employed  by  Messrs.  Lewis  &  Burrows,  chemists,  108 
New  Oxford  Street.  I  know  the  prisoner  Crippen  through  hisi  coming 
into  the  shop  as  a  customer.  About  17th  or  18th  of  January  last  he 
called  and  ordered  five  grains4  of  hyo'scin  hydrobromide  from  me.  I 
asked  him  what  it  was  for,  and  &s  far  as  I  remember  he  stated  it  was 
for  homoeopathic  purposes.  We  did  not  have  any  of  it  in  stock  in 
the  form  he  ordered ;  we  only  had  it  mixed  with  another  substance,  in 
this  case,  sugar  of  milk.  I  told  him  so,  and  he  asked  me  to  order  it  for 
him,  which  I  did  from  a  wholesale  house  called  the  British  Drugs  House, 

75 


Hawley  Harvey  Crippen. 

Charles  Hetherington 

Limited.  I  have  been  in  the  employ  of  Messrs.  Lewis  &  Burrows  for 
over  four  years,  and  I  have  never  known  as  much  as  five  grains  of  hyoscia 
hydrobromide  to  have  been  kept  in  stock  there. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  HUNTLT  JENKINS — I  know  Dr.  Crippen  quite 
well  as  a  customer.  I  have  known  him  since  I  have  been  at  this  branch, 
three  years.  He  has,  from  time  to  time,  purchased  a  number  of  drugs 
from  me,  sometimes  cocaine,  sometimes  morphia,  sometimes  mercury  and 
other  drugs.  His  name  and  address  were  quite  well  known  to  me.  He 
signed  the  poisons  register  book  quite  willingly.  I  am  aware  that  hyoscin 
is  generally  used  as  a  sedative  in  nervous  cases.  ^ 

Re-examined  by  Mr.  MUIR — Have  you  heard  the  medical  men  in  thia 
case  say  what  it  is  used  for? — Only  through  the  papers. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — I  know  from  my  own  experience  what  it 
is  used  for.  It  is  a  narcotic  and  a  mydriatic. 

By  Mr.  MUIR — It  is  used  as  a  sedative  to  produce  sleep,  and  it  is 
generally  supplied  in  tabloid  form.  I  cannot  remember  whether  I  have 
sold  it  in  tabloids!.  Tnat  is  not  the  form  in  which  I  sold  it  to  Dr.  Crippen. 
When  sold  in  tabloid  form  for  hypnotic  purposes,  I  should  think  that  the 
doctor  would  administer  it  to  the  patient. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — Do  you  know? — No.  Dr.  Crippen  could 
not  get  any  poison  of  this  kind  without  signing  the  poisons  register  book. 

One  of  the  jurymen  requests  me  to  ask  this  question.  Do  you  know 
of  Dr.  Crippen  having  purchased  hyoscin  on  any  other  occasion  from 
you? — No.  The  order  of  17th  January  was  the  only  one  that  I  know  of. 

HAROLD  KIRBY,  examined  by  Mr.  TRAVERS  HUMPHREYS — I  am 
an  assistant  to  Messrs.  Lewis  &  Burrows,  chemists,  108  New  Oxford  Street. 
I  wa«8  not  in  the  shop  on  the  occasion  of  17th  or  18th  January  when  Dr. 
Crippen  ordered  some  hyoscin,  but  I  was  in  the  shop  on  19th  January 
when  he  came  to  have  the  drug  delivered  to  him.  On  that  day  I  handed 
him  five  grains  of  Kyoscin  hydrobromide  in  the  form  of  small  crystals  in 
either  a  tube  or  a  box.  Dr.  Crippen  signed  the  sale  of  poisons  register, 
exhibit  38.  The  entry  is  dated  19th  January,  1910,  and  is  as  follows:  — 
"  Name  of  purchaser,  Munyons,  per  H.  H.  Crippen.  Address  of  pur- 
chaser, 57-61  Albion  House.  Name  and  quantity  of  poison  sold,  five 
grains  of  hyoecin  hydrobromide.  Purposes  for  which  it  is  required, 
homoeopathic  preparation.  Signature  of  purchaser,  H.  H.  Crippen."  I 
entered  the  date  and  the  name  and  quantity  of  the  drug,  and  the  rest  of 
the  entry  was  written  by  Dr.  Crippen  in  my  presence.  Exhibit  49  is 
a  list  of  drugs,  of  which  we  have  kept  a  record,  which  have  been  purchased 
from  us  by  Dr.  Crippen — chiefly  poisons. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE. — It  is  not  usual  for  a  doctor  to  sign  the 
poisons  book  for  every  quantity  of  poison  that  he  buys. 

Examination  continued — That  list  contains  several  quantities  of 
cocaine,  some  of  morphia,  but  no  hyoscin.  The  list  is  as  follows:  — 
"  llth  February — Cocaine  hydrochlor.  19th  March — Hydrogen  peroxide; 
acid  hydrochlor;  cocaine  hydrochlor;  morphia  acetae.  17th  March — 
Cocaine  hydrochlor;  morphia  acetas.  19th  April — Cocaine  hydrochlor 
and  acid  hydrochlor.  16th  May — Cocaine  hydrochlor.  13th  May — 
76 


Evidence  for  Prosecution. 

Harold  KIrby 

Cocaine  hydrochlor.  2nd  September — Iodine,  resub.  28th  September — • 
Cocaine  hydrochlor." 

Do  you  know  whether  cocaine  is  used  in  dentistry? — It  is  used  in 
preparing  an  anaesthetic. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  HUNTLT  JENKINS — I  have  known  Dr.  Crippen 
since  about  October  of  last  year.  He  has  bought  large  quantities  of 
poison  from  our  shop.  As  a  rule  he  did  not  sign  the  poisons  book.  We 
did  not  require  him  to  do  so,  because  we  knew  him,  and  knew  him  as 
a  medical  man.  When  he  signed  the  book  for  the  hyoscin  he  did  not 
raise  the  slightest  objection. 

WILLIAM.  HATMAN,  examined  by  Mr.  MUIR — I  am  a  detective  sergeant 
of  the  Metropolitan  Police  at  New  Scotland  Yard.  On  18th  August  I 
went  to  St.  Mary's  Hospital  and  got  exhibits  44,  45,  46,  and  47  from 
Dr.  Willcox.  I  showed  those  exhibits  on  the  same  day  to  the  witness 
Mrs.  Harrison  at  the  hospital,  and  then  I  returned  them  to  Dr.  Willcox. 
I  showed  Mrs.  Harrison  also  a  woman's  undervest  that  I  got  from  Dr. 
Willcox.  It  was  in  a  very  dirty  state. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  HUNTLT  JENKINS — Before  I  took  Mrs.  Harrison 
to  see  those  things  I  told  her  that  she  was  going  to  see  something  which 
was  found  with  the  remains  at  Hilldrop  Crescent. 

Mrs.  ADELINE  HARRISON,  examined  by  Mr.  Mum — I  ain  a  married 
woman  living  at  11  Ashmere  House,  Acre  Lane,  Brixton.  I  knew  Cora 
Crippen,  whose  stage  name  was  Belle  Elmore,  for  some  twelve  or  thirteen 
years.  When,  I  first  knew  her  her  hair  was  dark  brown.  The  colour 
afterwards  altered,  as  it  was  bleached.  I  was  shown  exhibits  44,  45,  46, 
and  47  at  St.  Mary's  Hospital  on  18th  August.  The  hair  in  those  exhibits 
resembles  Mrs.  Cri,ppen's  hair  as  I  have  seen  it  in  the  morning  before 
she  was  dressed,  before  her  hair  was  curled.  I  was  also  shown  at  the 
hospital  an  undervest  or  camisole.  I  have  seen  Mrs.  Crippen  dressing 
on  several  occasions.  She  wore  an  undervest  similar  to  the  one  that  was 
shown  to  me.  It  was  the  kind  of  undervest  that  I  have  seen  other  people 
wear  besides  Mrs.  Crippen. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  HUNTLT  JENKINS — I  have  known  the  Crippens 
for  a  number  of  years. 

Do  you  agree  with  the  other  witnesses  who  spoke  to  the  same  effect, 
that  Dr.  Crippen  was  always  very  amiable  with  his  wife? — Very  kind, 
very  amiable,  and  a  very  good  husband. 

When  you  looked  at  those  jars  in  front  of  you,  you  knew  perfectly 
well  where  they  had  come  from? — Yes.  They  were  the  only  jars  that  were 
put  in  front  of  me  for  identification.  Mrs.  Crippen  was  a,  woman  who 
was  very  particular  about  the  appearance  of  her  hair.  There  is  nothing 
to  identify  the  Hinde's  hairpin  by,  as  such  pins  are  very  common. 

With  regard  to  the  camisole,  do  you  agree  that  there  are  a  great 
number  like  that  worn? — Yes,  but  Mrs.  Crippen  always  wore  those 
camisoles. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — I  think  Mrs.  Crippen  dyed  her  hair 
about  six  or  seven  years  after  I  knew  her,  and  after  that  she  always  had 
H  77 


Hawley   Harvey  Crippen. 

Adeline  Harrison 

her  hair  bleached.  She  used  to  wear  golden  curls.  She  told  me  that  Dr. 
Crippen  bleached  her  hair  in  the  first  instance.  When  her  hair  was  down 
in  the  morning  one  could  see  the  original  colour  on  the  part  nearest  the 
roots. 

Mr.  Mure — That,  my  lord,  is  the  case  for  the  Crown. 


Opening  Speech  for  the  Defence. 

Mr.  TOBIN  opened  the  case  for  the  defence  by  saying  that  the  moment 
he  sat  down  Dr.  Crippen  would  go  into  the  witnessi-box  and  tell  his  tale. 
He  would  be  followed  by  medical  men  of  good  positions  and  the  highest 
qualifications,  who  would  speak  on  the  length  of  time  the  remains  might 
have  been  buried.  They  would  criticise  the  evidence  for  the  Crown  and 
discuss  whether  the  piece  of  skin  came  from  the  abdomen  of  any  person 
at  all.  One  of  them  was  a  man  of  the  highest  reputation  as  a  microscopic 
expert  in  the  medical  profession,  and  he  and  others  would  give  conclusive 
reasons  why  the  mark  on  the  piece  of  skin  was  not  a  scar  at  all.  If  there 
were  doubt  as  to  whether  the  piece  of  skin  came  from  any  one's  abdomen, 
and  if  there  were  doubt  as  to  whether  it  were  a  scar  or  no,  then  it  afforded 
no  evidence  whatever  that  the  remains  were  those  of  Belle  Elmore.  They 
would  be  followed  by  an  expert  in  poisons  of  high  reputation,  who  would 
give  them  his  reasons  why  the  alkaloid  found  in  the  remains  might  not 
have  been  a  vegetable  alkaloid  introduced  into  the  body  during  life,  but 
an  animal  alkaloid  produced  by  the  ordinary  process  of  putrefaction  in  a 
dead  body.  He  had  carefully  considered  what  was  best  in  the  interests 
of  his  client  to  do,  and  he  had  come  to  the  conclusion  that  at  this  stage 
he  should  deal  at  length  with  the  evidence  which  had  been  given  for  the 
Crown,  and  that  he  should  outline  quite  shortly  afterwards  the  evidence 
that  he  would  lay  before  the  jury.  He  promised  that  at  the  end  of  the 
case,  when  the  evidence  had  all  been  given,  he  would  not  occupy  their 
time  by  any  lengthy  speech,  because  he  meant  to  deal  with  the  matter 
once  and  for  all. 

Anxious,  indeed,  as  must  be  the  task  of  any  man  engaged  in  the 
defence  of  a  fellow-man  upon  his  trial  for  life,  it  must  be  rendered  a 
thousand  times  more  anxious  when  for  weeks  and  months  the  columns 
of  the  Press  had  been  filled  by  discussions  of  the  case  and  gossipy  details, 
some  of  which  might  be  true  and  some  false.  Every  man  and  woman  in 
the  land  had  discussed  this  case,  and  the  danger  of  it  was  that  they 
only  partially  knew  the  facts.  All  that  publicity  to  gratify  the  public 
taste  must  be  fraught  with  a  grave  danger  to  the  administration  of 
justice,  because  it  was  human  nature  that  the  man  who  read  these  columns 
should  inevitably  take  a  view  regarding  Dr.  Crippen  before  his  trial.  They 
knew  how  difficult  it  was  to  wipe  the  slate  clean,  and  to  approach  the  case 
with  an  absolutely  open  mind.  He  knew,  however,  that  the  jury  were 
determined,  so  far  as  their  will  power  would  enable  them,  to  do  their  best 
to  try  this  case  in  an  unbiassed  and  absolutely  unprejudiced  way.  Had 
78 


Opening  Speech  for  the  Defence. 

Mr.  Tobin 

the  Crown  proved  beyond  all  reasonable  doubt  that  the  remains  found  in 
the  cellar  were  the  remains  of  a  woman  at  all?  Had  the  Crown  proved 
that  they  were  the  remains  of  Belle  Elmore?  Never  mind  what  their 
suspicions  might  be;  they  must  prove  beyond  all  doubt  that  those  remains 
were  the  remains  of  a  woman,  and  those  of  Belle  Elmore,  or  else  the 
prisoner  was  entitled  as  a  right  to  be  acquitted. 

The  first  outstanding  feature  in  the  evidence  was  Dr.  Crippen's  repu- 
tation amongst  those  who  knew  him  best  and  had  known  him  for  long 
years.  From  every  witness  who  had  known  him  came  the  same  tale; 
these  were  the  characteristics  in  the  very  words  the  witnesses  had  used — 
"amiable,"  "kind-hearted,"  "good-hearted,"  "good-tempered," 
"one  of  the  nicest  men  I  ever  met."  The  people  who  gave  him  that 
character  were  people  of  different  ages,  of  different  interests,  and  of  both 
sexes.  Could  the  jury  say  that  that  reputation  was  not  deservedly  earned  1 
Yet  it  was  openly  suggested  that  a  man  with  those  characteristics  suddenly 
became  a  fiend  incarnate.  And  for  what  motive  Did  they  believe,  if  he 
deserved  that  reputation,  that  he  would  have  killed  his  wife  and  hacked 
the  body  to  pieces  for  the  suggested  money  motive?  Crippen  was  not  in 
debt,  and  he  could  not  draw  a  single  farthing  from  the  deposit  account  in 
the  Charing  Cross  Bank  until  after  twelve  months'  notice.  Notice  had 
been  given  by  Belle  Elmore  in  December  of  last  year,  but  were  they  to  be 
told  that,  in  order  to  get  money  in  December,  1910,  he  murdered  his 
wife  eleven  months  before?  He  did  not  forget  that  the  death  of  his  wife, 
if  brought  about  by  Dr.  Crippen,  would  perhaps  have  rendered  the  house- 
hold less  expensive;  but  was  that  an  adequate  motive  for  a  crime  like  this? 
The  Crown  would  not  suggest  any  other  motive,  but  he  must  deal  with 
all  possible  ones.  Could  it  be  said  that  he  murdered  his  wife  in  order 
to  marry  his  mistress?  He  did  not  fly  from  the  country  with  his 
mistress  until  the  month  of  July.  He  had  never  married  her,  and  surely 
that  could  not  be  a  motive.  It  was  suggested  that  this  man  criminally 
abused  the  skill  and  dexterity  of  a  surgeon  and  a  man  well  versed  in 
anatomy,  and  removed  all  trace  of  sex,  the  head,  the  hands,  the  feet, 
and  the  bones.  Had  he  that  dexterity?  He  did  not  practice  in  anatomy; 
he  had  never  conducted  a  postrmortem  in  his  life;  he  knew  nothing  of 
anatomy  or  operations  except  what  he  had  learned  in  his  student  days 
long  years  ago. 

His  manner  at  the  time  of  the  alleged  murder,  and  for  months  after- 
wards, could  not  be  wiped  aside.  Just  before  the  wife's  disappearance, 
and  for  months  afterwards,  he  showed  no  sign  of  agitation,  no  sign  of 
fright,  no  seeking  to  avoid  his  friends  and  his  wife's  friends.  Dr. 
Crippen  showed  no  signs  of  constraint  at  the  dinner  party  on  31st  January, 
and  yet  it  was  suggested  that  he  was  shortly  to  give  the  poison  he  had 
bought  some  twelve  days  before  to  the  woman  who  was  sitting  at  the 
other  end  of  the  table.  The  next  day  he  went  to  work  as  usual,  having, 
it  was  suggested  by  the  Crown,  murdered  his  wife  and  left  her  body  in 
the  house  alone.  He  could  not  have  got  rid  of  the  bones,  the  head,  the 
hands,  and  the  feet,  and  buried  the  flesh  in  the  few  short  hours  between 
1.30  a.m.  and  his  going  to  his  work  next  morning.  What  murderer 

79 


Hawley  Harvey  Crippen. 


Mr.  Tobin 


would  run  the  risk  of  leaving  the  body  behind  like  that?  On  the  same 
day  he  called  upon  Mrs.  Martinetti  and  told  her  that  his  wife  was  all 
right;  and  so  he  believed  her  to  be,  because  he  had  left  her  at  home  all 
right.  At  the  very  time  that  he  was  going  about  his  busines^  and  calling 
on  his  friends  as  usual,  showing  no  sign  of  terror,  if  he  was  the  murderer, 
he  was  cutting  up  the  body  in  his  house,  and  carrying  away  the  remains 
piecemeal.  It  was  said  that  he  had  the  night-time  to  do  these  things  in. 
Was  it  conceivable  that  he  could  have  done  that  without  somebody  noticing 
something?  Could  he  have  spent  the  long  hours  through  the  night  at 
home  after  his  work  doing  things  like  that,  without  any  trace  being  visible 
on  his  face  when  he  went  to  his  work  at  the  usual  hours  day  by  day?  It 
was  suggested  that  he  took  Le  Neve  to  live  over  the  remains  of  the  wife 
ho  had  murdered.  Did  they  believe  that  if  he  had  murdered  his  wife, 
and  recently  buried  her  remains  in  his  cellar,  he  would  have  left  his  house 
for  those  days  when  he  took  Le  Neve  to  Dieppe?  There  was  no  proof 
whatever  that  he  had  ever  had  a  surgical  knife ;  there  was  no  trace  of  blood 
found  anywhere  in  the  house;  aa  regards  the  suggestion  that  he  buried 
the  remains,  no  pickaxe  to  get  out  the  bricks  had  been  traced;  and  there 
was  no  proof  of  the  purchase  of  any  lime  by  him. 

Belle  Elmore  disappeared  after  1.30  in  the  early  morning  of  1st  February 
— disappeared  as  far  as  the  world  knew,  except,  of  course,  her  husband, 
who  said  that  he  saw  her  in  the  house  after  breakfast  when  he  left  her  on 
1st  February.  Since  then  Belle  Elmore  had  gone  out  of  his  life,  as  she 
had  threatened  many  times  that  she  would.  It  was  a  strange  thing,  but 
strange  things  happened  at  all  times,  and  would  happen  again  to  the  end 
of  time. 

The  jury  had  to  consider  and  say  to  themselves,  had  the  Crown  dis- 
charged the  burden  cast  upon  it  in  every  criminal  case,  and  all  the  more 
serious  a  burden  in  a  case  of  life  and  death?  They  had  to  consider,  in 
connection  with  the  disappearance  of  Belle  Elmore,  who  she  was,  what  she 
had  been,  her  characteristics,  what  was  her  life  at  home  with  Crippen. 
Belle  Elmore  was  the  daughter  of  a  Pole.  Eighteen  years  ago,  in  1892, 
ehe  married  Dr.  Crippen  in  America.  She  was  nineteen  then;  he  was 
thirty,  roughly  speaking.  The  jury  would  believe  him  that  he  did  not 
wish  to  cast  a  stone  at  Belle  Elmore.  But  it  was  a  thing  they  could  not 
and  ought  not  to  forget  that  she  had  been  living  under  the  protection  of 
some  one  in  New  York  at  the  time  she  married  him,  and  he  knew  it. 
After  their  marriage  they  came  to  London  and  lived  in  London.  Then, 
as  they  knew,  there  came  a  time  when  Belle  Elmore  remained  behind,  and 
Dr.  Crippen  went  to  America  to  become  manager  of  Munyons.  When 
Dr.  Crippen  returned  to  England  and  joined  his  wife  again  he  found  her 
manner  wholly  changed.  Her  temper  was  quite  ungovernable,  her  love 
had  gone.  He  found  what  they  now  knew  to  be  a  fact,  that  Bruce 
Miller,  then  a  music  hall  artist,  had  been  repeatedly  visiting  his  wife.  He 
eaw  and  read  letters  from  Bruce  Miller  to  his  wife  written  to  her  while 
Dr.  Crippen  was  in  America,  and  of  which  at  that  time  he  knew  nothing. 
Those  letters  enabled  counsel  to  put  the  question  to  Bruce  Miller,  "  Did 
you  not  write  affectionate  letters  with  the  words  '  Love  and  kisses  to 
Brown  Eyes'  "?  Bruce  Miller  admitted  that  he  wrote  such  letters.  He 
80 


Opening  Speech  for  the  Defence. 

Mr.  Tobin 

further  admitted  that  he  had  often  kissed  Mrs.  Crippen.  "  Under  the 
circumstances,"  Bruce  Miller  said,  "  I  thought  there  was  no  impropriety 
in  writing  those  letters  and  kissing  her."  Under  the  circumstances! 
The  husband  was  away  and  knew  nothing  of  it.  What  inference  did  they 
draw  from  those  admissions  of  Bruce  Miller?  Love  letters,  kisses,  husband 
absent,  and  after  the  husband  came  back  to  England  frequent  visits  by 
Bruce  Miller  to  Belle  Elmore.  He  never  went  there  to  her  whilst  Crippen 
was  present.  Since  then  the  relations  of  husband  and  wife  between 
Dr.  Crippen  and  his  wife  did  not  continue.  They  did  not  sleep  together. 
Then  there  came,  perhaps  not  unnaturally,  an  intimacy  on  the  part  of 
Crippen  with  somebody  else,  and  Le  Neve  became  his  mistress.  They 
had  to  take  all  these  things  into  consideration.  Before  their  friends,  it 
was  true,  Crippen  and  his  wife  appeared  to  be  cordial  in  their  relations. 
There  was,  however,  one  little  matter  bearing  on  those  relations.  Dr. 
Burroughs  told  them  he  had  noticed  that  Belle  Elmore  was  hasty  in 
temper  towards  her  husband.  She  had  threatened  over  and  over  again 
after  the  intimacy  with  Bruce  Miller  had  been  found  out  by  Dr.  Crippen, 
and  after  the  quarrels  she  had  had  with  him,  that  she  would  leave  him 
and  go  out  of  his  life.  Time  after  time  the  thing  blew  over.  It  was 
simply  a  cry  of  "  wolf,"  and  nothing  came  of  it.  At  last,  however,  the 
threats  which  she  had  so  often  made  were  carried  out,  and  at  last  she  did 
go  out  of  his  life. 

The  position,  therefore,  was  this.  There  was  an  illicit  intimacy 
between  Mrs.  Crippen  and  Bruce  Miller,  and  an  illicit  intimacy  between 
Crippen  and  Le  Neve — the  latter  might  be  another  reason  for  Mrs.  Crippen's 
departure.  Where  was  she  now?  Why  did  she  go?  She  went  because 
she  had  long  disliked  Crippen,  and  her  dislike  had  turned  to  hate.  Who 
knew  where  Belle  Elmore  was?  Who  knew  whether  it  was  Belle  Elmore's 
flesh  that  was  buried  in  the  cellar?  Who  knew  for  a  certainty  whether 
Belle  Elmore  was  alive  to-day  or  not?  Who  knew  for  certain  whether 
she  was  abroad,  whether  she  was  ill  or  well,  alive  or  dead?  In  a  case 
of  life  and  death,  and  in  a  charge  of  murder,  they  had  to  know,  to  know 
beyond  all  reasonable  doubt,  before  they  could  find  a  verdict  that  would 
send  a  fellow-man  to  death.  It  was  not  enough  that  they  should  suspect. 
The  law  said  that  beyond  all  reasonable  doubt  they  had  to  know. 

Mr.  Tobin,  continuing  the  narrative  of  events,  said,  after  the  Mar- 
tinettis  had  left  the  house  at  1.30  a.m.  on  31st  January  the  fault-finding 
wife,  Mrs.  Crippen,  for  the  paltry  cause  that  Mr.  Martinetti  had  been 
under  the  doctor's  orders,  and  the  window  had  been  left  open,  worked 
herself  up,  with  an  ungovernable  temper,  as  women  did,  and  men,  he 
supposed,  did  likewise.  It  was  the  old  story  again,  "  I  will  stand  this 
no  longer ;  this  is  the  finish.  I  will  leave  you  to-morrow.  You  will 
never  see  me  again."  But  she  added  on  this  occasion,  with  meaning  in 
her  voice,  "  This  time  I  mean  to  go.  Cover  up  the  scandal  in  the  best 
way  you  can."  It  was  a  small  cause,  but  a  small  spark  caused,  they 
knew,  a  forest  fire.  The  result  might  well  be  tremendous,  and  so  he 
suggested  it  was  in  this  case.  The  cause  was  obvious — the  quarrel  after 
the  Martinettis  had  left  in  the  early  morning.  There  had  been  many 
such  quarrels.  Crippen  got  up  in  the  morning,  thinking  no  more  of  it. 

81 


Hawley  Harvey  Crippen. 


Mr.  Tobin 


He  went  off,  leaving  his  wife  at  home,  expecting  to  find  her  at  home  on 
his  return.  He  went  to  work  in  the  usual  way.  There  was  the  natural 
call  on  the  Martinettis  during  lunch  time;  he  did  not  attach  sufficient 
importance  to  the  incident  of  the  quarrel  to  refer  to  it.  He  did  not 
see  any  reason  for  washing  dirty  linen,  and  to  Mrs.  Martinetti's  inquiry  he 
said  his  wife  was  well. 

Then  he  went  home  in  the  evening,  only  to  find  that  she  was  gone, 
and  he  recalled  the  words  which  she  had  added  for  the  first  time  to  her 
old  and  oft-repeated  quarrels,  "  This  time  I  mean  it.  Cover  up  the 
scandal  in  the  best  way  you  can."  Thereupon  he  foolishly  embarked  upon 
(as  Mr.  Muir  aptly  described  it)  a  campaign  of  lies  to  cover  up  the  scandal 
— to  carry  out  his  wife's  wishes.  "  Avert  the  scandal  among  our  friends 
in  the  best  way  you  can."  And  so  on  the  evening  of  1st  February  Crippen 
invented  the  lie,  to  explain  her  absence,  that  she  had  been  called  away  to 
America  on  business  and  to  see  her  friends.  So  he  wrote  two  letters, 
one  to  the  committee  and  the  other  to  the  secretary  of  the  Music  Hall 
Ladies'  Guild.  If  the  Lord  Chief  Justice  thought  proper  they  should  see 
those  letters.  Both  were  written  in  an  undisguised  hand.  The  one 
signed  "Belle  Elmore,  p.p.  H.H.C.,"  showed,  of  course,  that  the  hand 
which  wrote  it  was  "H.H.C.,"  not  Belle  Elmore.  There  was  no  dis- 
guise whatever  about  the  writing  in  the  letters  tendering  excuses.  Of 
course,  the  lies  had  to  go  on.  He  need  not  deal  with  that  part  of  the 
case.  A  cable  came  on  Tuesday  night,  1st  February,  saying  she  had 
gone  to  California  to  see  a  relation  who  was  ill.  To  cover  up  the  scandal 
and  in  order  to  account  for  her  absence,  when  she  did  not  return  as  the 
days  passed,  the  lies  that  he  had  told  had  necessarily  to  be  developed  to 
account  for  her  non-return.  Therefore  there  came  the  lie  that  she  was 
ill  with  pneumonia,  then  that  she  had  become  worse.  And  when  he 
realised  that  she  would  not  return — that  she  had  carried  out  the  threat 
she  had  made — in  order  effectively  to  stop  any  talk  among  neighbours 
and  friends  and  intimates,  the  lie  was  invented  that  she  was  dead.  Then, 
of  course,  in  pursuance  of  the  policy  he  had  adopted,  he  had  to  say  to 
friends  who  asked  for  the  address  where  she  died,  "  I  can't  and  won't 
give  you  the  address.  Her  ashes  are  to  be  cremated  and  sent  over  here." 
The  whole  story  was  invented  to  cover  up  the  scandal. 

It  was  said  he  pawned  her  jewellery  and  gave  away  her  clothes,  and 
therefore  must  have  known  she  was  dead.  It  would  be  idle  to 
pretend  that  when  she  went  Crippen  was  overwhelmed  with  grief.  Not 
at  all.  They  had  not  been  on  good  terms  at  home.  Under  those  cir- 
cumstances he  was  not  in  the  least  keen  or  anxious  to  find  out  where  she 
had  gone.  He  was  not  grieved — he  was  not  concerned  to  advertise  in  the 
papers  to  inquire  from  any  of  her  relatives  in  America  or  elsewhere  where 
she  had  gone.  He  had  his  mistress,  Miss  Le  Neve — who  had  been  his 
mistress  for  some  few  years — and  in  those  circumstances  Dr.  Crippen  saw 
no  impropriety  whatever  in  giving  to  hia  mistress  his  wife's  jewels  and 
furs,  and  in  pawning  others.  He  had  earned  the  money;  he  had  paid 
for  the  things.  No  inference  adverse  to  the  prisoner  was  to  be  drawn 
from  that.  It  was  all  done  openly.  The  jewellery  was  worn  by  Miss 
Le  Neve  at  the  ball  which  people  who  knew  his  wife  were  sure  to  attend. 
82 


Opening  Speech  for  the  Defence. 

Mr.  Tobin 

Such  things  as  he  pawned  he  pawned  openly  at  a  pawnbroker's  where  he 
had  been  before,  and  where  his  name  and  address  were  known.  He 
did  not  go  to  a  pawnbroker  who  did  not  know  him,  where  he  might  hare 
given  a  false  address.  He  pawned  them  in  his  own  true  name.  There 
was  no  secrecy  about  it.  He  saw  no  harm  in  it  at  all. 

He  passed  on  to  8th  July  and  the  arrival  of  Mr.  Dew  and  Miss  Le 
Neve  at  Albion  House.  Mr.  Dew  said  he  was  not  at  all  satisfied  about  the 
matter,  and  there  was  instant  readiness  on  the  part  of  Dr.  Crippen  to 
answer  any  question,  and  he  made  a  long  statement  giving  the  details  of 
the  quarrel,  much  the  same  as  he  had  described  it  just  now,  guessing 
that  she  had  gone  away  with  Bruce  Miller,  but  not  knowing  with  whom 
she  had  gone,  in  fact.  It  was  not  suggested  now,  of  course,  that  she 
had  gone  with  Bruce  Miller.  He  was  going  to  suggest  that  before  he  put 
the  question  to  Bruce  Miller.  But  it  did  suggest  itself  at  the  time 
that  she  had  gone  off  with  Bruce  Miller,  with  whom  she  had  been  on  very 
affectionate  terms.  To  say  that  he  pawned  all  his  wife's:  things  was  untrue. 
It  was  an  inaccurate  thing  to  say,  but  he  did  it  to  cover  up  a  scandal. 
They  would  remember  the  words  in  the  statement,  "  I  invite  you  to  look 
round  my  house  in  Hilldrop  Crescent,  and  to  do  whatever  you  like  in  it." 
Here  was  a  supposed  murderer  readily  and  willingly  going  with  the  chief 
inspector  to  the  house  where,  if  he  were  the  murderer,  he  knew  that 
part  of  his  wife's  remains  were  buried.  He  went  into  all  the  rooms  with 
Dew,  and  they  went  into  the  cellar  together.  If  he  were  a  murderer,  if  he 
had  buried  those  remains  in  the  cellar,  he  knew  the  spot  in  the  middle 
of  the  cellar,  there  under  his  very  eye  as  he  stood  there !  Yet  he  never 
turned  a  hair,  never  showed  the  slightest  sign  of  agitation,  or  fear,  or 
terror.  Was  it  possible  that  he  was  the  murderer  and  was  standing 
within  three  feet  of  the  hole  where  his  own  hand  must  have  put  the  remains 
if  he  was  the  murderer?  Was  it  not  beyond  all  powers  of  belief?  Let 
the  jury  remember  that  on  8th  July,  at  Albion  House,  a  representative 
of  the  law  had  said  to  him  at  Hilldrop  Crescent  the  same  evening,  "  Crippen, 
I  must  find  your  wife."  With  those  words  ringing  in  his  ears  picture 
what  Crippen 's  thoughts  must  have  been.  Crippen  must  have  realised 
that  the  lies  he  had  told  to  cover  up  the  scandal,  the  lies  he  had  in  his  folly 
told,  must  have  raised  a  mountain  of  prejudice,  and  formed  clouds  of 
suspicion  which  it  would  be  for  him  to  dispel.  During  the  night  he 
wondered  how  he  could  remove  that  mountain  of  prejudice  and  dispel  those 
clouds. 

So  he  resolved  to  do  what  hundreds  of  men  had  done  before.  Feel- 
ing there  was  that  high  mountain  of  prejudice  which  he  had  erected  by 
his  lies  against  himself,  he  did  what  innocent  men,  threatened  with  a 
charge,  have  done  before.  He  resolved  in  his  folly  to  fly.  Experience 
taught  that  the  very  threat  of  any  criminal  charge  often  made  good,  strong 
men  take  their  own  lives.  He  did  not  do  that,  or  attempt  it,  but  in 
his  folly  he  resolved  to  fly.  What  more  natural  than  that  he  should  take 
with  him  his  mistress?  The  rest  followed  as  a  matter  of  course — the 
disguise,  the  shaving  of  his  moustache,  the  dressing  of  Le  Neve  in  boy's 
clothes.  He  went  away  from  the  inquiries  of  the  officer  as  innocent  men 
had  fled  before.  For  the  reason  that  he  had  decided  to  fly,  the  adver- 

83 


Hawley  Harvey  Crippen. 


Mr.  Tobin 


tisement  drafted  by  him  in  the  presence  of  Inspector  Dew  was  not  inserted 
in  the  papers  at  all,  because  he  ran  away  the  next  day,  9th  July. 

He  came  now  to  what  happened  in  the  "  Montrose"  on  the  day  of  the 
arrests,  31st  July.  Was  the  statement,  "I  am  sorry;  the  anxiety 
has  been  too  much  for  me,"  which  he  then  made,  to  weigh  with  the  jury 
for  a  single  instant  when  they  considered  their  verdict?  That,  he  ven- 
tured to  submit,  ought  not  to  be  a  factor  which  they  would  weigh  at  all. 
What  under  the  circumstances  did  the  expression  mean  ?  Only  this : 
"  Anxious,  indeed,  have  I  been,  because  ever  since  8th  July  Chief  Inspector 
Dew  has  had  his  suspicions,  and  I  realise  what  suspicions  have  been  aroused 
by  the  lies  I  have  told,  and  that  I  cannot  point  out  where  Belle  Elmore 

is." 

Here  counsel  read  the  two  cards  which  were  found  upon  Crippen  at 
the  time  of  his  arrest,  which  were  in  Crippen's  handwriting.  Referring 
to  one  of  the  cards  upon  Crippen,  "  I  have  made  up  my  mind  to  jump 
overboard  to-night,"  counsel  said  the  Crown  suggested  that  the  wording 
on  the  card  indicated  the  remorse  of  a  guilty  man  and  his  determination  to 
jump  overboard  and  commit  suicide.  Hitherto  they  had  been  asked  to 
say  these  cards  implied  guilt.  The  long  one,  on  the  face  of  it,  was 
apparently  intended  for  Miss  Le  Neve,  because  it  ended,  "  I  have  spoilt 
your  life,  and  with  last  words  of  love. — H."  So  that  up  till  now  the 
idea  not  unnaturally  would  be  in  the  minds  of  the  jury  about  these  cards, 
"The  guilty  man  resolves  to  take  .away  his  life."  But  these  cards  were 
not  written  for  the  eye  of  Miss  Le  Neve  at  all.  They  were  not  written 
to  convey  to  Miss  Le  Neve  his  intention  to  commit  suicide.  There  would 
be  no  necessity  to  write  those  cards  to  Miss  Le  Neve,  because  they  were 
together,  occupying  the  same  cabin.  There  must  be  some  other  reason. 

It  was  clear  from  Chief  Inspector  Dew's  evidence  that  these  two  cards 
were  written  before  Dew's  arrival  on  board,  and  the  explanation  why  they 
were  written  was  this.  They  were  both  written  in  pursuance  of  a  plot  to 
•enable  Crippen  to  get  hidden  and  smuggled  ashore  to  escape  up  country, 
and  there  be  afterwards  joined  by  Le  Neve  when  everything  had  blown 
over.  Two  days  before  the  arrest  Crippen  had  learned  from  the  quarter- 
master that  he  (Dr.  Crippen)  was  to  be  arrested  on  landing  at  Quebec. 
There  was  then  no  question  of  Miss  Le  Neve's  arrest  at  all.  He  expected 
that  he  (Crippen)  was  alone  to  be  arrested  on  landing  at  Quebec,  and  the 
quartermaster  was  persuaded,  or  pretended  to  be  persuaded,  to  believe  that 
Crippen  was  entirely  innocent.  The  quartermaster  at  any  rate  pretended 
to  be  satisfied.  That  quartermaster  would  be  the  man  who  would  be  in 
charge  of  the  unloading  of  the  cargo  at  Quebec,  where  passengers  would 
disembark  and  cargo  be  landed;  and  it  was  arranged  that  just  before  the 
vessel  reached  Quebec  Crippen  was  to  be  concealed  amongst  the  cargo  in 
the  ship,  and  that  the  longer  card  was  to  be  found  in  his  cabin  indicating 
to  those  who  found  it  that  Crippen  had  jumped  overboard  from  this  vessel, 
the  object  being  that  there  should  be  no  strenuous  search  on  board  the  ship 
while  Crippen  was  hidden  in  the  cargo;  because  one  could  well  believe  in 
the  circumstances  that  the  police  might  readily  think  and  suspect  what 
was  wrong.  Whether  the  quartermaster  was  a  guilty  participator,  or  only 
pretended  to  be,  did  not  matter.  The  quartermaster,  while  supervising 
84 


Opening  Speech  for  the  Defence. 

Mr.  Tobin 

the  landing  of  the  cargo  at  Quebec,  could  readily  smuggle  Crippen  through, 
and  by  that  time  it  was  hoped  by  Crippen  that  if  the  police  had  found  the 
card  indicating  that  he  had  jumped  overboard  they  would  have  gone  off 
and  have  ceased  to  maintain  a  watch  upon  the  river.  He  then  hoped  to 
go  up  country,  where  Mi&s  Le  Neve,  after  all  trouble  had  blown  over,  was 
to  reach  him.  And  was  not  that  borne  out  by  the  shorter  card,  "  Shall 
we  wait  until  to-night  about  ten  or  eleven  o'clock  "?  That  shorter  card 
was  meant  to  be  given  to  the  quartermaster  some  few  hours  before  the 
police  came  on  board,  and  "  ten  or  eleven  o'clock  "  meant  that  he  intended 
to  be  smuggled  ashore  about  that  time.  Why,  then,  was  it  not  handed  to 
the  quartermaster  ?  He  (counsel)  had  elicited  from  Chief  Inspector  Dew  that 
the  boat  was  not  intended  to  land  cargo  or  passengers  at  Father  Point. 
She  passed  Father  Point  about  sixteen  hours  before  she  should  arrive  at 
Quebec.  At  some  time  or  other  during  those  sixteen  hours  it  was  intended 
that  that  card  should  be  handed  to  the  quartermaster,  and  it  was  not  given 
to  him  because  the  arrest  took  place  long  before  Crippen  imagined  there 
was  any  danger.  The  jury  had  to  ask  whether  that  explanation  was  true. 
If  it  was  not,  where  was  the  need  of  writing  those  two  cards  for  Miss  Le 
Neve  to  read,  when  at  any  moment,  whenever  he  chose,  he  was  able  to 
speak  to  her  in  the  cabin  alone  without  anybody  overhearing  ? 

He  had  dealt  now  with  the  general  aspect  of  the  case,  and  had  only 
got  to  say  a  few  words  more  upon  the  facts  bearing  on  the  medical  aspect. 
The  jury  had  to  be  satisfied  as  to  the  sex  of  the  remains.  Could  the  jury 
on  the  evidence — he  cared  not  what  they  suspected,  because  suspicion  was 
not  enough — be  satisfied,  first  of  all,  beyond  all  reasonable  doubt  whether 
those  remains  were  the  remains  of  a  man  or  a  woman  1  If  they  had  any 
doubt  about  that,  Crippen  by  law  was  entitled  to  a  verdict  of  not  guilty. 
Taking  those  remains  by  themselves,  the  witnesses  for  the  Crown  had 
admitted  that  it  was  impossible  to  say  on  anatomical  grounds  whether  they 
were  the  remains  of  a  man  or  a  woman.  Those  grounds  did  not  exist. 
Taking  it  by  itself,  the  piece  of  skin  might  be  that  of  a  man.  Who  could 
tell?  And  it  was  a  matter  of  life  and  death.  If  that  mark  on  that  piece 
of  skin  were  the  mark  of  an  operation — and  that  he  disputed — why  should 
it  not  be  the  result  of  an  operation  on  a  man  1  Taking  those  remains  by 
themselves,  was  he  wrong  in  pressing  strongly  the  claim  that  there  ought  to 
be  the  gravest  doubt  as  to  whether  those  were  the  remains  of  a  man  or 
woman  1  If  there  was  that  doubt,  the  Crown  had  not  discharged  the  burden 
cast  upon  it.  The  clothing  found  with  the  remains  formed  no  evidence 
whatever  as  to  the  sex  of  those  remains,  and  as  to  whether  they  were  those 
of  a  male  or  a  female.  The  clothing,  then,  left  the  matter  absolutely  open. 

Passing  to  the  question  of  Crippen' s  anatomical  knowledge;  counsel 
reminded  the  jury  that  Crippen,  as  a  doctor,  took  his  degree  in  the  States, 
and  admitted  to  Dew  on  8th  July  that  in  his  early  student  days  he  attended 
operations  at  London  hospitals.  But  during  those  years  he  lived  in  London 
what  was  his  practice?  If  Crippen  had  gone  in  for  anatomical  work  or 
had  practised  surgery,  the  Crown,  with  their  resources,  would  have  found  it 
out  and  given  evidence  of  the  fact.  They  found  that,  far  from  that,  he  was 
connected  with  Munyons  for  many  years.  This  was  not  the  kind  of  position 
that  afforded  a  man  the  opportunity  of  practising  anatomical  work.  The 

85 


Hawley  Harvey  Crippen. 


Mr.  Tobin 


prisoner  would  tell  them  that  he  never  performed  an  operation  in  his  life, 
never  dissected  a  body.  It  was  clear  from  the  evidence  of  Mr.  Pepper  and 
Mr.  Spilsbury  that  the  hand  -which  dissected  the  body,  whoever  it  was,  the 
remains  of  which  were  found  in  the  hole  in  the  cellar,  must  have  been 
accustomed  to  evisceration.  The  man  whose  hands  did  this  gruesome  work 
must  have  been  possessed  of  considerable  anatomical  knowledge.  The  jury 
were  entitled  to  apply  their  knowledge  of  the  world  as  to  what  kind  of  man 
it  must  have  been  who  cut  up  those  remains.  Was  it  possible  that  the  work 
could  have  been  done  with  so  much  skill  by  a  man  who  had  never  done 
that  work  aa  part  of  his  practice  during  the  whole  of  his  professional  work  ? 
On  the  question  of  identification,  the  jury  had  to  be  satisfied  that  those 
remains  were  put  into  that  hole  in  the  cellar  after  31st  January;  otherwise 
there  was  no  case  against  the  prisoner  at  the  bar.  In  this  most  difficult, 
anxious  case,  trying  it  with  all  the  ability  and  fairness  which  the  jury 
were  showing,  could  they  say  honestly,  bearing  in  mind  the  result  of  an 
adverse  verdict,  were  they  able  to  say  in  their  souls  anything  beyond  this : 
we  suspect,  we  guess?  If  they  could  not  say  with  certainty  that  those 
remains  were  put  into  the  hole  after  31st  of  January,  there  was  no  case 
against  the  prisoner.  He  reminded  them  of  what  Mr.  Pepper  said,  that 
it  was  not  "  within  the  reach  of  science  to  determine  from  its  putrefaction 
the  date  of  death."  How,  then,  in  this  matter  of  doubt  could  they  do  more 
than  suspect?  Better  a  hundred  guilty  men  should  go  free  than  one 
innocent  man  should  suffer.  If  the  remains  had  been  there  for  years  there 
was  nothing  to  induce  suspicion  in  the  tenant  of  the  house. 

He  submitted  there  was  the  gravest  doubt  as  to  what  part  of  the  body 
the  marked  piece  of  skin  and  flesh  came  from,  and  whether  any  part  of  the 
depression  upon  it  could  be  a  scar.  If  there  was  no  scar,  it  would  not  be 
from  Belle  Elmore's  body.  He  did  not  forget  the  reasons  that  the  witnesses 
for  the  Crown  gave  for  saying  that  the  flesh  came  from  the  lower  part  of  the 
abdomen ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  there  were  characteristics  admittedly 
absent  whose  presence  would  have  made  the  matter  absolutely  clear.  There 
were  not  the  tendinous  intersections  crossing  from  the  navel  and  those 
which  generally  existed  below  the  navel;  and  there  was  not  the  white 
vertical  line  from  the  chest  downwards*  where  the  tendons  united. 

But  if  they  were  satisfied  that  the  piece  came  from  the  lower  part  of 
the  abdomen,  they  had  still  to  decide  whether  any  part  of  the  depression 
was  the  scar  of  an  operation.  Mr.  Pepper  agreed  that  one  side  of  the 
depression  was  due  to  a  folding  of  the  piece  of  skin.  The  other  side  was 
a  scar.  His  case  was  that  both  sides  were  the  result  of  folding  and  pressure. 
That  there  was  considerable  pressure  must  be  clear,  as  there  was  imprinted 
on  the  skin  the  pattern  of  some  material  placed  in  the  hole  with  the  remains. 
If  the  depression  was  admittedly  caused  by  such  pressure  on  one  side,  why 
not  upon  the  other?  Was  this  not  far  too  doubtful  a  matter  for  them  to 
say  that  they  were  clear  beyond  doubt  that  this  depression  was  a  scar?  He 
had  no  desire  to  dwell  on  the  number  of  opportunities  the  doctors  for  the 
Crown  had  of  seeing  these  remains,  but  it  was  perhaps  unfortunate — and 
he  conveyed  no  imputation  in  what  he  was  saying — that  long  before  they 
found  that  so-called  scar  on  8th  August  they  had  heard  that  Belle  Elmore 
had  had  an  operation.  Might  not  an  opinion  as  to  whether  there  was  a 
86 


Opening  Speech  for  the   Defence. 

Mr.  Tobln 

scar  or  not  quite  unwittingly  be  influenced  by  the  information  that  Belle 
Elm  ore  had  in  fact  undergone  an  operation?  In  Mr.  Pepper's  opinion,  the 
navel  was  originally  upon  that  /piece  of  skin,  and  was  removed  by  operation. 
Well,  so  far  from  there  having  been  a  removal  of  the  navel  of  Mrs.  Crippen, 
Mrs.  Martinetti  said  that  once,  when  she  was  visiting  them  in  the  bungalow, 
she  saw  the  mark  on  the  lower  part  of  the  abdomen  going  up  as  far  as  the 
navel.  He  put  it  clearly  to  Mrs.  Martinetti,  "  Are  you  sure  that  you  saw 
the  navel  itself? — Yes,  quite  sure."  The  jury  must  not  let  that  fact 
escape  them.  If  Mrs.  Martinetti  saw  the  navel,  the  operation  Mrs.  Crippen 
underwent  was  not  one  which  involved  the  removal  of  the  navel,  and  this 
piece  of  skin  was  not  Belle  Elmore's. 

He  came  now  to  the  last  point,  the  poison.  On  17th  January  Dr. 
Crippen  ordered,  and  on  19th  January  he  obtained,  five  grains  of  hyoscin 
hydrobromide.  He  need  not  have  signed  the  poisons  book  at  all,  but  openly 
he  left  the  record  of  his  purchase  and  his  name  at  a  shop  where  he  was 
known.  He  bought  it  to  reduce  it  to  a  liquid,  and  to  use  it  in  the  tiny 
tabloids  he  prepared  for  patients.  Doctors  did  not  seem  to  use  hyoscin  in 
England,  but  he  supposed  that  American  ways  were  different  from  ours. 
Dr.  Crippen  did  use  it.  He  had  little  bottles,  each  containing  about  three 
hundred  of  these  tabloids,  all  ready  for  being  impregnated  with  different 
kinds  of  drugs.  Three  hundred  tabloids  sounded  a  good  deal,  but  as  the 
dose  was  sixteen  tabloids  a  day,  the  bottle  would  just  last  twenty  days. 
That  was  the  way  he  used  the  drug  after  he  had  bought  it,  and  that  was 
the  way  he  continued  to  use  it  after  Belle  Elmore  disappeared.  Was  the 
alkaloid  found  in  the  remains  hyoscin?  Dr.  Willcox  said  there  was  not 
enough  of  it  to  use  what  he  said  would  be  the  most  certain  test  of  all  to 
ascertain  which  mydriatic  vegetable  alkaloid  it  was.  As  he  did  not  apply 
this  test,  he  asked  the  jury  to  say  that  the  matter  remained  in  far  too  much 
doubt  whether,  even  if  this  was  a  vegetable  alkaloid  at  all,  it  was  hyoscin 
rather  than  hyoscyamin  or  atropine.  He  would  go  further  and  ask  the 
jury  to  say  that  there  was  not  enough  to  enable  a  man  to  determine  whether 
the  alkaloid  found  in  the  body  was  vegetable,  introduced  during  life,  or 
animal,  produced  after  death  by  the  natural  process  of  putrefaction. 

He  had  attempted  no  eloquent  appeal  on  behalf  of  the  prisoner.  It 
was  better  to  confine  oneself  simply  and  solely  to  the  facts,  and  on  those 
facts  he  asked  them  to  say  they  were  not  satisfied  that  the  Crown  had 
beyond  all  reasonable  doubt  demonstrated  that  these  remains  were  the 
remains  of  a  woman  at  all,  and  still  less  had  identified  these  remains  as 
I>art  of  the  body  of  Belle  Elmore. 


Evidence  for  the  Defence. 

HAWLET  HARVEY  CRIPPEN  (prisoner,  on  oath),  examined  by  Mr. 
HUNTLT  JENKINS — I  am  forty-eight  years  old.  I  am  an  American  by 
birth.  I  am  a  doctor  of  medicine  of  the  Cleveland  Homoeopathic  Hospital 
in  the  United  States  of  America.  I  went  through  a  theoretical  course  of 
surgery.  I  have  never  gone  through  a  practical  course  of  surgery,  and 

87 


Hawley  Harvey  Crippen. 


Hawley  Harvey  Crippen 

I  have  never  performed  a  post-mortem  examination  in  my  life.  I  have 
made  the  eye  my  special  subject,  and  also  the  ear,  nose,  and  throat.  I 
have  been  twice  married.  My  second  wife  gave  me  Cora  Turner  as 
her  name  when  I  first  met  her  in  Brooklyn.  I  afterwards  found  that  her 
real  name  was  Mackaniotzki.  When  I  first  met  her  she  was  living  under 
the  protection  of  a  man  by  the  name  of  C.  C.  Lincoln.  She  had  never  had 
any  children  to  my  knowledge.  I  believe  she  had  had  some  miscarriage, 
or  something  of  that  kind,  because  she  wast  being  attended  to  by  the  man 
I  was  assistant  to  for  some  trouble.  She  never  had  any  children  by  me. 
I  cannot  give  the  exact  date  when  I  married  her,  but  it  was  about  1892, 
about  seventeen  years  ago.  After  our  marriage  we  lived  first  of  all  in 
St.  Louis.  I  came  to  this  country  for  the  first  time  after  I  married  her 
in  April,  about  twelve  years  ago,  and  she  followed  me  in  August.  Our 
first  apartments  were  in  South  Crescent,  which  is  now  pulled  down  and 
turned  into  a  big  boarding-house  for  the  people  that  Rollings  worths' 
employ,  I  believe,  just  off  Tottenham  Court  Road.  I  think  we  lived  there 
for  about  close  on  a  year.  We  went  to  live  in  Hilldrop  Crescent  about 
1905,  about  five  years  ago.  We  had  moved  from  South  Crescent  to 
Guildford  Street,  and  from  there  to  Store  Street,  and  from  there  to 
Hilldrop  Crescent.  While  we  were  living  in  Guildford  Street  I  paid  a 
visit  to  America.  I  think  I  was  away  from  November,  1899,  to  April, 
1900.  I  left  my  wife  in  a  boarding-house  in  Guildford  Street. 

Up  to  the  time  you  paid  that  visit  to  America,  had  you  lived  on 
friendly  terms  with  your  wife? — Yes,  except  that  she  was  always  rather 
hasty  in  her  temper. 

I  mean,  you  lived  in  strict  relationship  as  husband  and  wife? — Yes. 
The  time  I  referred  to  in  my  statement  that  I  made  to  Inspector  Dew — 
the  time  that  I  referred  to  her  coming  over  from  America  and  saying 
that  she  had  met  some  fine  men  on  board — was  the  first  time  she  came 
over ;  that  was  previous  to  this.  Until  I  returned  from  my  visit  to 
America  we  had  always  lived  on  friendly  terms.  Coming  back  from 
America  I  joined  my  wife  at  Guildford  Street.  I  did  not  notice  any 
change  in  her  manner  at  first.  Soon  after  that  we  moved  to  Store  Street, 
and  then  I  began  to  notice  a  change.  She  was>  always  finding  fault  with 
me,  and  every  night  she  took  some  opportunity  of  quarrelling  with  me, 
so  that  we  went  to  bed  in  rather  a  temper  with  each  other.  A  little  later 
on,  after  I  found  that  this  continued  and  she  apparently  did  not  wish  to 
be  familiar  with  me,  I  asked  her  what  the  matter  was.  She  told  me 
then  that  she  had  met  Bruce  Miller,  and  that  he  had  been  taking  her 
out  while;  I  was  away,  and  that  she  had  got  very  fond  of  him,  and  that 
she  did  not  care  for  me  any  more. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — This  is  1900,  is  it? — No,  I  think  that 
would  be  1904. 

Examination  continued — It  was  before  we  moved  to  Hilldrop  Crescent ; 
it  was  between  1903  and  1904.  I  should  say  it  would  be,  say,  six  months 
after  my  return  from  America,  but  I  do  not  like  to  be  certain  about  these 
dates,  because  it  is  such  a  long  time  ago.  I  think  we  lived  in  Store 
Street  about  a  couple  of  years,  and  then,  in  1905,  we  went  to  Hilldrop 
88 


Evidence  for  Defence. 

Hawley  Harvey  Crippen 

Crescent.  It  would  be  between  1902  and  1903  that  we  moved  from 
Guildford  Street  to  Store  Street. 

I  just  want  to  get  this  clear  before  the  jury.  How  long  after  your 
return  from  America  did  you  notice  this  change  in  your  wife's  manner? — 
About  six  or  seven  months.  I  noticed  the  change  beginning  right  away, 
but  it  was  about  six  or  seven  months  afterwards  that  I  found  out  what 
the  trouble  was.  She  told  me  that  Bruce  Miller  was  a  music-hall  artist, 
that  he  had  some  sort  of  automatic  orchestra.  She  told  me  that  he  was 
still  in  town,  and  he  £ame  to  visit  her  at  times.  I  never  met  Mr.  Bruce 
Miller.  I  told  my  wife  I  thought  it  was  very  strange,  although  I  had 
seen  this  coming  for  a  long  time,  for  a  previous  trouble  we  had  had  before 
I  moved  away  from  South  Crescent.  I  still  lived  with  her — not  as  my 
wife,  but  I  still  lived  with  her.  We  occupied  the  same  bed  until  we 
moved  to  Hilldrop  Crescent.  That  was  one  of  the  reasons  why  we  moved 
there,  because  when  we  lived  in  Store  Street  we  could  only  have  the 
one  sleeping  room.  At  Hilldrop  Crescent  we  had  separate  rooms. 

Before  your  friends,  and  before  strangers  as  well,  what  was  your 
demeanour  towards  your  wife  and  hers  towards  you? — It  was  always 
agreed  that  we  should  treat  each  other  as  if  there  had  never  been  any 
trouble.  Of  course,  I  hoped  that  she  would  give  up  this  idea  of  hers  at 
some  time.  I  first  became  connected  with  Munyons  about  sixteen  years 
ago.  I  was  first  in  a  position  in  their  employ,  and  afterwards  I  became 
the  general  manager.  When  I  was  general  manager  I  acted  as  advisory 
physician,  and  had  charge  of  the  chemical  laboratory  besides.  I  should 
say  that  I  was  in  that  capacity  for  about  five  or  six  years.  I  came  over 
to  this  country  for  Munyons,  then  I  went  back  to  America  and  stayed 
there  until  the  time  I  have  mentioned,  and  my  services  then  ceased. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — The  last  time  I  was  in  America  was 
about  1901  or  1902.  That  is  the  time  I  am  speaking  of  when  I  say  that 
I  was  there  from  November  to  April  or  May. 

Examination  continued — I  have  been  in  the  habit  of  purchasing  drugs. 
I  always  made  up  their  prescription  for  them  when  I  was  in  America.  I 
have  been  in  the  habit  of  purchasing  drugs  in  this  country — not  for  them, 
but  for  myself,  and  also  for  the  other  firms  that  I  have  been  with.  Among- 
drugs  that  I  have  purchased  I  have  purchased  considerable  amounts  of 
different  poisons — aconite,  belladonna,  rhus  tox.,  gelsemium,  and  also 
those  on  the  list  that  I  got  from  Lewis  &  Burrows.  The  homoeopathic 
drugs  I  have  already  mentioned  I  purchased  from  Ashtons.  Those 
are  the  only  two  chemists  from  whom  I  have  been  in  the  habit  of  purchas- 
ing drugs.  I  have  for  years  been  familiar  with  the  drug  hyoscin.  I 
first  heard  of  it  when  I  caJne  over  to  England  in  1885 ;  I  learned  the  use 
of  it  in  the  Royal  Bethlem  Hospital  for  the  Insane.  It  is  used  a  very 
great  deal  in  America,  especially  in  insane  asylums ;  it  is  also  used  in 
ophthalmic  clinics.  I  have  used  it  as  a  nerve  remedy  in  a  homoeopathic 
preparation,  that  is,  reduced  to  extremely  minute  doses.  I  remember 
purchasing  some  hyoscin  on  19th  January. 

Had  you  ever  used  hyoscin  before? — Yes. 

I  mean  in  this  country? — No,  not  in  this  country.  I  purchased  it  for 
treating  nervous  diseases,  nerve  cases.  It  was  sold  to  me  in  the  form  of 

89 


Hawley  Harvey  Crippen. 

Hawley  Harvey  Crippen 

crystals.  I  then  dissolved  it  in  alcohol,  and  then  I  dissolved  5  grains  in 
an  ounce  of  -water,  that  is,  in  480  drops,  giving  to  one  drop  5/480ths  of  a 
grain.  I  used  four  drops  of  this,  which  would  equal  20/480ths  or  0'041 
of  a  grain,  in  conjunction  with  another  mixture  consisting  of  gelsemium, 
assafoetida,  and  some  other  homoeopathic  preparation.  This,  with  a 
drachm  of  the  other  mixture,  I  used  for  medicating  300  small  discs  to 
make  one  bottle  of  a  preparation  sent  to  each  patient ;  that  would  be  about 
150  doses;  two  tablets  a  dose  would  equal  l/3600ths  of  a  grain  as  a  dose. 
The  bottles  would  be  labelled  with  the  dose,  and  packed  in  a  little  heavy 
pasteboard  case.  The  dose  would  be  in  the  form  of  small  sugared  discs. 
A  dose  would  consist  of  two  discs,  and  the  actual  dose  would  be  approxi- 
mately l/3600ths  of  a  grain,  extremely  minute.  That  is  what  I  did  with 
this  hyoscin  that  I  purchased.  I  think  I  dispensed  about  two- thirds  of  the 
hyoscin  that  I  purchased  on  19th  January.  I  might  mention  that,  besides 
using  it  for  nerve  cases1,  I  also  found  it  useful  for  spasmodic  coughs  and 
spasmodic  asthma. 

At  the  time  you  purchased  it  can  you  recollect  any  particular  person 
that  you  required  it  for? — Well,  besides  my  business  of  Munyons,  I  had 
also  another  business  in  which  I  handled  about  two  hundred  letters — it  is 
extremely  difficult  to  remember  names.  I  think  I  can  remember  one. 
Sweeney — no,  M 'Sweeney.  I  remember  the  dinner  party  of  31st  January. 
My  wife  had  very  frequently  threatened  to  leave  me  before  that  time. 

At  the  time  she  threatened  to  leave  you,  would  she  be  in  a  calm 
temper  or  in  a  rage? — In  a  rage. 

Generally  speaking,  were  the  tempers  that  she  got  in  for  trivial 
matters  or  something  serious? — Very  trivial  matters ;  she  was  always  finding 
fault  about  trivial  things.  On  31st  January  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Martinetti  came 
to  dinner  with  us,  arriving  somewhere  between  six  and  seven  o'clock.  I  had 
taken  them  an  invitation  on  behalf  of  my  wife. 

While  they  were  with  you  did  anything  take  place  which  upset  your 
wife? — Yes,  Mr.  Martinetti  wanted  to  go  upstairs,  and,  as  I  thought  he 
knew  the  house  perfectly  well,  having  been  there  many  times  during 
eighteen  months,  I  thought  it  was  quite  all  right  that  he  should  go  up 
liimself.  When  he  came  down  he  seemed  to  have  caught  a  chill,  and  after 
they  went  away  I  was  blamed  for  not  going  up  with  him.  They  left  some- 
where between  one  and  two  o'clock,  I  think;  I  know  I  had  a  lot  of  trouble  to 
iind  a  carriage  for  them.  Immediately  after  they  had  left  my  wife  got  into 
a  very  great  rage  with  me,  and  blamed  me  for  not  having  gone  upstairs 
with  Mr.  Martinetti.  She  said  a  great  many  things — I  do  not  recollect 
them  all — she  abused  me,  and  said  some  pretty  strong  words  to  me;  she 
said  she  had  had  about  enough  of  this — that  if  I  could  not  be  a  gentleman 
she  would  not  stand  it  any  longer,  and  she  was  going  to  leave  me.  She 
also  said  something  that  she  had  not  said  before — that  after  she  had  gone 
it  would  be  necessary  to  cover  up  any  scandal  that  there  might  be  by  her 
leaving  me,  and  I  might  do  it  the  very  best  way  I  could. 

As  a  matter  of  fact,  did  you  find  that  she  had  gone? — When  I  came 
home  the  next  day — I  came  home  about  half -past  seven,  my  usual  time  for 
coming  home 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — This  is  very  important.  I  understand 
90 


Evidence  for  Defence. 

Hawley  Harvey  Crippen 

you  have  told  us  all  that  took  place  on  the  night  of  the  31st? — That  is  as 
near  as  I  recollect. 

Examination  continued — Then  you  know  nothing  more  until  you  came 
home  on  the  evening  of  the  1st  and  found  she  had  gone,  is  that  right? — 
That  is  right.  I  did  not  even  see  her  the  next  morning.  We  retired  very 
late,  and  it  was  the  usual  thing  that  I  was  the  first  one  up  and  out  of  the 
house  before  she  was  ever  up  at  all.  On  1st  February  I  went  to  business 
as  usual,  and  I  returned  to  the  house  about  half -past  seven.  I  went  to  see 
Mrs.  Martinetti  some  time  during  that  day,  as  I  was  anxious  about  the 
.  chill  that  Mr.  Martinetti  had  caught.  The  conversation  that  Mrs.  Martinetti 
has  related  took  place  between  her  and  me.  I  asked  how  Paul  was,  and 
she  asked  how  Belle  was.  On  returning  home  about  half-past  seven  that 
night  I  found  that  the  house  was  vacant.  I  have  heard  the  evidence  of 
Mrs.  Martinetti,  Miss  May,  Mrs.  Smythson,  Miss  Curnow,  my  landlord, 
and  Dr.  Burroughs,  to  the  effect  that  I  said  that  my  wife  had  left  me, 
that  she  afterwards  became  ill,  and  that  subsequently  her  death  took  place. 
I  admit  all  that. 

Were  those  statements  true  or  false? — The  statements  that  I  made 
were  false. 

Why  did  you  make  those  statements1? — She  told  me  I  must  do  the  best 
I  could  to  cover  up  the  scandal,  and  I  made  those  statements  for  that 
reason ;  I  wanted  to  hide  anything  regarding  her  departure  from  me  the 
best  I  could,  both  for  my  sake  and  for  hers.  I  recollect  Inspector  Dew 
coming  to  my  office  and  my  making  a  statement  to  him. 

Was  the  statement  that  you  made  to  Inspector  Dew  a  false  or  a  true 
statement? — It  waa  quite  true.  Inspector  Dew  was  very  imperative  in 
pressing  upon  me  that  I  must  produce  my  wife,  or  otherwise  I  would  be 
in  serious  trouble.  He  also  said  that  if  I  did  not  produce  her  very  quickly 
the  statements  I  had  made  would  be  in  the  newspapers  the  first  thing  I 
knew.  I  made  up  my  mind  next  morning  to  go  to  Quebec,  and,  in  fact, 
I  did  go.  On  the  boat  I  made  the  acquaintance  of  a  quartermaster  there. 
On  the  second  day  before  we  arrived  at  Quebec,  as  I  was  sitting  by  the 
wheel-house,  the  quartermaster  came  and  said  he  had  a  letter  he  wanted 
to  give  me — about  three  o'clock  in  the  afternoon. 

The  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — Is  the  quartermaster  coming  or  not? 
Mr.  HUNTLY  JENKINS — No,  my  lord,  we  have  not  got  him. 
The  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — Then  I  do  not  know  that  we  can  have  this» 
conversation. 

Mr.  HUNTLT  JENKINS — If  I  may  say  so,  I  respectfully  agree  that  we 
cannot  have  the  conversation.  Perhaps  I  might  put  it  in  this  way. 

(To  Witness) — Did  you  enter  into  an  arrangement  with  the  quarter- 
master?— Yes,  I  entered  into  an  arrangement  with  the  quartermaster  to 

hide  me,  as  he  told  me 

We  cannot  have  the  conversation 

The  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — You  had  better  have  the  whole  of  it  if  you 
have  part  of  it. 

(To  Witness} — He  told  you  what? — He  told  me  that  the  captain  knew 
who  I  was  and  also  who  Miss  Le  Neve  was,  and  that  I  was  to  be  arrested 
by  the  police  at  Quebec.  He  also  told  me  that  I  must  leave  a  note  behind 

91 


Hawley   Harvey   Crippen . 

Hawley  Harvey  Crippen 

me  saying  that  I  had  jumped  overboard,  and  that  in  the  middle 
night  he  would  make  a  splash  in  the  water  and  tell  the  captain  that  1  i. 
gone. 

Examination  continued — As  a  matter  of  fact,  I  wrote  one  card  that 
same  day,  and  that  night  he  took  me  downstairs,  but  somebody  came 
along  and  prevented  usi  from  going  down — they  saw  us,  so  I  kept  that  card, 
and  he  said  he  would  put  me  down  the  next  day.  I  then  wrote  the  short 
card  next  morning,  just  a  short  time  before  Inspector  Dew  cam©  on  board. 
The  long  card  was  to  be  put  on  my  pillow  in  the  berth  in  the  cabin .  I  had 
arranged  with  Missi  Le  Neve,  as  the  quartermaster  said  that  there  was  no 
charge  against  her — that  they  did  not  want  her  at  all — I  had  arranged  with 
her  that  when  I  got  ashore  safely  I  gave  her  an  address  in  the  States  where 
she  was  to  write  to  me  and  let  me  know  when  everything  was  all  right 
and  she  could  join  me. 

What  does  this  mean,  "  Shall  we  wait  until  to-night  about  ten  or 
eleven  o'clock,  if  not,  what  time  "  1 — The  night  before  I  had  arranged  that, 
as  he  had  failed  to  get  me  hidden  away  that  same  night,  he  would  hide 
me  the  next  night,  just  when  we  got  to  Quebec  or  a  short  time  before  we 
got  to  Quebec.  As  he  had  settled  no  time  I  wrote  this  little  card  to  give 
to  him  to  find  out  what  time.  I  understood  we  should  arrive  at  Quebec  at 
twelve  or  one  o'clock  at  night;  that  was  what  the  steward  on  the  boat  told 
me. 

Was  Inspector  Dew's  coming  on  board  at  Father  Point  a  surprise  to 
you? — It  was  at  Father  Point — well,  I  did  not  expect  him  at  all.  I  thought 
there  had  been  a  cable  to  the  Quebec  police;  I  did  not  expect  Inspector 
Dew;  that  was  a  surprise  to  me. 

Inspector  Dew  says  that  you  said  on  arrest,  "  I  am  not  sorry;  the 
anxiety  has  been  too  much."  What  were  you  referring  to  then? — I  was 
referring  to  this,  that  I  expected  to  be  arrested  from  all  these  lies  I  had  told ; 
I  thought  probably  it  would  cast  such  a  suspicion  upon  me,  and  perhaps 
they  would  keep  me  in  prison — I  do  not  know  how  long,  perhaps  for  a  year 
— until  they  found  the  missing  woman.  I  said  to  Inspector  Dew,  "  It  is 
only  fair  to  say  that  she  knows  nothing  about  it — I  never  told  her 
anything." 

What  were  you  referring  to  when  you  made  use  of  that  observation  ? — 
I  had  never  told  Miss  Le  Neve  anything  about  my  talking  to  my  wife  before 
she  went  away  about  this  scandal;  I  had  told  her  that  my  wife  had  gone 
away,  and  I  told  her  afterwards  that  she  was  dead.  These  were  the  only 
two  things  that  I  told  Miss  Le  Neve.  Consequently  she  never  knew  anything 
about  all  these  letters  and  lies  that  I  had  disseminated.  I  did  not  give  any 
explanation  to  Inspector  Dew  regarding  the  two  cards,  because,  while 
Inspector  Dew  went  down  to  see  Miss  Le  Neve,  the  chief  inspector,  or  the 
man  who  was  with  him,  told  me,  "  We  deal  very  differently  with  people 
in  Canada  when  we  arrest  them  to  what  they  do  in  England;  we  tell  them 
that  they  must  not  say  anything."  He  added,  "  Now  don't  you  say  a  word 
on  anything — cut  your  tongue  out — have  nothing  to  say." 

With  regard  to  the  money  that  was  put  into  the  Charing  Cro§s  Bank, 
my  wife  had  no  money  of  her  own ;  all  the  money  that  ever  went  into  the 
bank  was  what  I  put  in.        The  jewellery  which  she  was  possessed  of  I 
92 


Evidence  for  Defence. 

Hawley  Harvey  Crippen 

bought  as  an  investment  when  I  was  in  America.  Besides  that  jewellery 
I  think  she  had  a  watch,  and  I  think  she  had  one  or  two  rings  that  she  had 
before  we  were  married — probably  given  to  her  by  the  other  man.  I  bought 
in  New  York  the  jewellery  that  has  been  produced  in  the  course  of  this  case. 
I  supplied  the  money  for  all  my  wife's  clothes  and  all  her  furs.  I  never 
knew  what  she  did  have,  because  I  gave  her  money  with  a  free  hand,  and 
she  bought  as  she  liked;  in  fact,  after  she  went  away  I  was  surprised  to 
find  what  she  did  have.  I  was  not  short  of  money  at  all  in  January  of  this 
year;  I  had  plenty  of  money  coming  in.  I  always  paid  my  rent  regularly, 
and  I  never  ran  any  bills  of  any  kind  in  the  way  of  tradesmen's  bills.  I 
do  not  think  my  wife  knew  of  my  relations  with  Miss  Le  Neve,  because  she 
always  treated  Miss  Le  Neve  with  the  greatest  courtesy  when  she  came 
into  my  office.  There  was  no  obstacle  ever  put  in  my  way  if  I  wanted  to 
go  and  see  Miss  Le  Neve.  My  time  was  my  own;  I  went  as  I  liked,  and  I 
often  stayed  away  from  business  whole  days  at  a  time.  I  told  Miss  Le 
Neve  that  if  ever  my  wife  went  away  and  got  a  divorce  I  should  marry  her 
certainly. 

Was  she  perfectly  satisfied  with  the  position  she  occupied  ? — She  seemed 
to  be  very  happy. 

Now,  I  just  want  to  put  this  to  you,  did  your  wife  as  a  fact  have  a 
scar? — She  did. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — It  was  in  the  lower  part  of  the  abdomen, 
from  the  pubic  bone  upwards  towards  the  navel,  in  the  middle  line. 

Examination  continued — That  scar  was  caused  by  an  operation  for 
ovariotomy.  My  wife  had  a  navel. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — I  believe  that  operation  was  done  about 
twelve  years  ago;  it  was  shortly  before  we  came  to  England  the  first 
time.  The  scar  was  about  4£  inches  long,  I  believe.  It  was  a  small  scar, 
because  only  the  ovaries  were  removed.  It  came  very  close  to  the  navel. 

Examination  continued — My  wife  bleached  her  hair,  and  I  sometimes 
helped  her.  She  was  very  particular  with  it,  and  she  applied  the  bleach- 
ing fluid  probably  every  four  or  five  days.  She  was  very  anxious  that 
nobody  should  ever  know  that  she  had  any  dark  hair  at  all.  She  was  a 
woman  who  was  very  particular  about  her  hair.  Only  the  tiniest  portions 
of  the  hairs  at  the  roots  after  they  began  to  grow  could  be  seen  to  be  dark. 

Did  you  ever  at  any  time  administer  any  hyoscin  to  your  wife? — 
Never. 

Those  remains  that  were  found  at  your  house  in  Hilldrop  Crescent — 
have  you  any  idea  whose  they  were? — I  beg  your  pardon. 

The  remains  that  were  found  in  the  cellar  at  Hilldrop  Crescent 1 

I  had  no  idea.  I  knew  nothing  about  them  till  I  came  back  to  England. 

The  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — That  concludes  the  evidence-in-chief ,  I  under- 
stand ? 

Mr.  HUNTLT  JENKINS — Yes,  my  lord. 

The  Court  adjourned. 


93 


Hawley  Harvey  Crippen. 

Fourth  Day— Friday,  21st  October,   1910. 

HAWLEY  HARVEY  CRIPPEN  (recalled),  cross-examined  by  Mr.  Mum — 
On  the  early  morning  of  the  1st  February  you  were  left  alone  in  your 
house  with  your  wife? — Yes. 

She  was  alive? — She  was. 

And  well? — She  was. 

Do  you  know  of  any  person  in  the  world  who  has  seen  her  alive 
since? — I  do  not. 

Do  you  know  of  any  person  in  the  world  who  has  ever  had  a  letter 
from  her  since? — I  do  not. 

Do  you  know  of  any  person  in  the  world  who  can  prove  any  fact 
snowing  that  she  ever  left  that  house  alive? — Absolutely  not;  I  have  told 
Mr.  Dew  exactly  all  the  facts. 

At  what  hour  did  you  last  see  her  on  the  1st  February? — I  think  it 
would  be  about  between  two  and  three  some  time  that  we  retired;  that 
would  be  the  last  I  saw  her. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — You  mean  on  the  1st  February? — Yes. 

After  the  party? — After  the  party. 

Between  2  and  3  a.m.  on  the  1st  February? — Between  then;  I  cannot 
say  exactly  what  time  it  was. 

The  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — That  is  near  enough. 

By  Mr.  Mum — Did  you  breakfast  at  home? — I  did. 

Who  prepared  your  breakfast  ? — I  prepared  my  own  breakfast ;  I  nearly 
always  did. 

Who  usually  prepared  the  breakfast? — I  did  myself. 

Did  your  wife  as  a  rule  come  down  to  breakfast? — Very  seldom.  We 
were  usually  very  late  in  retiring,  and  I  was  off  probably  at  half-past 
eight  in  the  morning. 

We  have  heard  that  you  were  a  kind  and  attentive  husband? — I  was. 

Preparing  the  breakfast  in  the  morning,  did  you  usually  take  her  a 
cup  of  tea? — Not  often;  once  in  a  great  while  I  took  her  a  cup  of  coffee, 
but  very  seldom. 

That  she  would  take  upon  an  empty  stomach? — Yes. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — Coffee,  you  say;  not  cocoa? — Yes,  coffee. 
We  never  had  tea  in  the  morning. 

By  Mr.  Mum — When  did  you  come  home? — I  cannot  say  to  the  exact 
hour  that  night,  but  I  generally  came  home  at  7,30;  that  is  my  general 
home  hour. 

What  time  did  you  come  home  on  that  night  when  you  say  you  did 
not  find  your  wife  there? — The  nearest  I  should  say  is,  it  would  be  my 
usual  time,  about  7.30. 

Do  you  not  recollect  on  that  momentous  night  what  time  it  was  you 
came  home? — I  would  not  like  to  say.  It  was  somewhere  near  7.30,  it 
might  have  been  7.25;  it  might  have  been  7.35;  but  it  was  close  on 
to  7.30. 

Would  you  kindly  attend  closely  to  my  question  and  see  if  you  can 
94 


Evidence  for  Defence. 

Hawley  Harvey  Crippen 

answer  it.       On  that  important  night  in  your  life,  do  you  not  recollect 
what  time  it  was  that  you  got  home  1 

The  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE-^-!  think  he  has  answered  that.  He  says, 
"  As  near  as  I  can  say,  7.30.  It  might  be  7.25,  or  7.35."  He  has  answered 
you.  Of  course,  you  can  press  it  further,  but  he  has  answered  the 
question. 

Mr.  MUIR — If  your  lordship  pleases. 

(To  Witness) — Did  you  tell  Inspector  Dew  that  you  got  home  between 
five  and  six? — I  do  not  remember  telling  him  that  hour. 

Listen,    "  I  came  to  business  the   next  morning,    and  when  I  went 
home  between  5  and  6  p.m.  I  found  she  had  gone."       Is  that  right? — If  I 
said  that  to  him,  that  was  probably  right.     I  cannot  trace  it  back. 
That  was  a  Tuesday  ? — A  Tuesday,  yes. 
The  1st  February?— Yes. 

Where  did  you  think  your  wife  had  gone? — I  supposed,   as  she  had 
always  been  talking  about  Bruce  Miller  to  me,  that  she  had  gone  there. 
That  was  the  only  thing  I  could  make. 
That  is  to  America? — To  America. 

Have  you  made  inquiries ? — No. 

As  to  what  steamers  were  going  to  America  on  or  about  that  date? — 
No,  I  have  not. 

At  no  time? — At  no  time. 
Not  since  your  arrest? — Not  at  all. 
What? — Not  at  any  time. 

Not  to  find  out  whether  there  was  some  steamer  sailing  for  America 
on  which  there  was  a  woman  answering  the  description  of  your  wife? — I 
have  not. 

Nobody  has  made  those  inquiries? — No. 

Was  there  any  steamer  leaving  on  that  Tuesday? — That  I  do  not 
know. 

Or  on  the  Wednesday? — There  usually  are  steamers  on  Wednesdays 
and  Saturdays,  and  at  one  time  there  was  a  Friday  steamer;  whenever 
I  have  gone  over  to  America  it  has  either  been  on  Wednesday,  Saturday,  or 
Friday. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — You  were  asked  about  this  period ;  you 
say  you  know  of  steamers  on  Wednesdays  and  Saturdays.  Do  you  know 
of  any  others? — I  believe  there  is  a  steamer  on  Friday.  I  am  not  speaking 
from  my  late  inquiries;  I  am  only  speaking  from  what  I  know  from  my 
previous  inquiries  and  voyages. 

By  Mr.  Mura — You  have  made  no  inquiries  at  all? — I  have  made  no 
inquiries  at  all. 

Going  to  America  on  the  1st  February,  did  your  wife  take  any  of 
her  fura  with  her? — That  I  could  not  say.  She  had  any  quantity  of  furs 
— any  quantity  of  dresses. 

Did  she  take  any  of  her  boxes  with  her? — I  believe  there  is  one  missing. 
There  were  a  lot  of  trunks  and  boxes  in  the  house;  I  did  not  know  how 
many,  because  she  bought  several  lately — well,  not  lately,  but  early  last 
fall.  I  believe  she  bought  two  or  three  boxes. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — You  must  kindly  listen  to  the  question; 

95 


Hawley   Harvey  Crippen. 

Hawley  Harvey  Crippen 

it  is  a  very  important  one.  You  are  not  asked  whether  she  bought  them. 
Are  you  able  to  say  whether  she  took  any  boxes  with  her? — I  am  not  able 
to  say  definitely. 

By  Mr.  Mura — Is  there  a  cabstand  near  your  house? — There  is  one 
round  the  corner  somewhere — round  in  York  Road  there  is  a  cabstand. 

The  cabstand,  I  suppose,  where  you  went  to  get  a  cab  for  Mr.  Martin- 
etti? — Well,  I  picked  that  up  on  the  street. 

But  you  went  there  first  to  see  whether  there  was  one? — Yes,  I  went 
down  there  first. 

That  is  the  place  where  you  are  usually  in  the  habit  of  going  for  a 
cab? — Yes;  there  are  seldom  any  there  at  that  time  of  night.  That  is 
the  reason  I  picked  up  one  on  the  street. 

But  in  the  day  time  is  that  where  you  get  a  cab  from? — Yes.  There 
are  usually  cabs  there  in  the  day  time 

You  have  been  living  there  for  5 £  years  ? — Yes. 

Did  you  goto  the  cabstand  to  inquire? — I  made  no  inquiries  whatever. 

Please  listen  to  the  question.  Did  you  go  to  the  cabstand  to  inquire 
whether  any  cabman  had  come  to  take  away  a  box  for  your  wife? — I  did 
not. 

At  any  time? — At  no  time. 

Not  since  your  arrest? — No. 

Had  you  got  neighbours  at  39  Hilldrop  Crescent  on  either  side? — 
Yes,  we  had  neighbours  on  either  side. 

Have  inquiries  been  made  of  the  neighbours  to  know  whether  a  cab 
or  a  box  was  seen  to  leave  your  house  on  the  1st  February? — I  have  made 
none. 

And,  so  far  as  you  know,  none  have  been  made? — Not  so  far  as  I 
know. 

You  do  not  suggest  that  your  wife,  on  a  voyage  to  America  in 
February,  would  walk  away  from  the  house? — I  am  sure  I  do  not  know 
what  she  would  do.  She  was  a  very  impulsive  woman. 

But  you  have  made  no  inquiries  ? — I  have  made  no  inquiries. 

I  suppose  the  usual  tradesmen  came  to  your  house  ? — We  had  no  trades- 
men calling,  except  the  milkman  on  Sundays. 

How  did  the  milk  that  you  used  in  the  household  get  into  the  house? — 
We  did  not  use  the  ordinary  milk ;  we  used  condensed  milk. 

The  baker — how  did  the  bread  get  into  the  house? — Well,  we  did  have 
a  baker.  Oh,  the  milkman  brought  the  bread  probably  about  two  or 
three  times  a  week. 

Have  you  inquired  of  the  milkman  whether  he  saw  your  wife  alive 
after  you  had  left  the  house  on  that  morning  of  the  1st  February? — I  have 
already  said  that  I  have  made  no  inquiries. 

The  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — That  answer  covers  everything;  you  can 
make  any  comment  on  it  you  like,  Mr.  Muir.  The  specific  matter  is,  of 
course,  most  important.  He  has  said  definitely  that  never  at  any  time 
has  he  made  or  caused  to  be  made  any  inquiries  whatever. 

By  Mr.  Mum — It  would  be  most  important  for  your  defence  in  this  case 
on  the  charge  of  murder  if  any  person  could  be  found  who  saw  your  wife 
alive  after  the  Martinettis  saw  her  alive;  you  realise  that? — I  do. 
96 


Evidence  for  Defence. 

Hawley  Harvey  Crippcn 

And  you  have  made  no  inquiries  at  all? — I  have  not  conducted  my 
own  defence. 

Of  tradesmen,  or  neighbours,  or  cabmen.  You  say  you  have  not 
conducted  your  own  defence? — I  have  not. 

You  have  been  consulted  about  it,  I  suppose? — Certainly. 

Did  you  suggest  inquiries  of  that  kind? — I  did  not. 

Mr.  TOBIN — My  lord,  can  my  friend  ask  about  what  passes  between 
him  and  his  solicitors? 

The  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — I  think  he  is  entitled  to  that  general  question. 
In  reply  to  Mr.  Muir  he  has1  said,  "I  have  made  no  inquiries,  and  as 
far  as  I  know  no  one  has  made  any."  I  think  Mr.  Muir  is  entitled  to 
ask  anything  that  is  not  confidential  between  him  and  his  solicitor. 

By  Mr.  MUIR — You  did  not  suggest  it? — I  did  not  suggest  it. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — You  need  not  answer  any  question  as  to 
what  you  told  your  solicitor,  but  you  must  answer  this  question  which 
Mr.  Muir  puts  to  you.  Have  you  made  any  suggestion  as  to  inquiries  being 
made  anywhere  ? — I  have  always  replied  that  there  have  been  no  inquiries 
so  far  as  I  know. 

No,  no.  Have  you  made  any  suggestion  to  Mr.  Newton  or  any  one 
as  to  inquiries  being  made  anywhere  ? — That  is  a  point  that  did  not  occur 
to  me,  so  I  have  not  made  any  such  suggestions. 

By  Mr.  Mum — Did  you  know  that  any  such  inquiry  would  be  fruit- 
less?— I  know  nothing  of  the  kind. 

Supposing  your  wife  had  written  for  her  furs  and  jewels,  what  would 
have  happened? — I  would  have  kept  them.  I  paid  for  them,  and  I  should 
not  have  given  them  up — after  leaving  me. 

Did  you  know  that  she  would  not  write  for  them? — I  did  not. 

What  money  did  you  allow  your  wife,  or  give  her? — I  did  not  allow 
her  any  special  money;  I  gave  her  with  a  free  hand  whatever  she  seemed 
to  want  at  any  time;  if  she  asked  me  for  money  she  always  had  it — £2, 
£3,  and  £4. 

Sums  like  that? — Sums  like  that,  yes;  I  have  even  given  her  as  high 
as  £35  to  buy  some  special  things  with. 

Up  to  March  of  1909  you  had  been  putting  by  money — you  and  she? 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — How  long  ago  was  it  that  you  gave  her 
£35  to  buy  something  special? — When  she  bought  that  ermine  cape. 

When  was  that? — It  was  back  in  about  four  years  ago — three  years 
ago,  I  think. 

Then,  just  to  take  Mr.  Muir's  question — £2,  £3,  and  £4  is  the  sort 
of  money  that  you  would  be  giving  her  before  she  disappeared? — Yes. 

By  Mr.  Mum — Had  you  ceased  putting  by  money  by  way  of  deposit 
in  March,  1909;  that  is  the  last  deposit? — Yes. 

December,  1909,  notice  of  withdrawal  was  given? — So  I  am  told. 

You  knew  of  it,  did  you  not? — I  did  not  know  of  it. 

Yo,u  did  not? — I  did  not;  the  first  I  knew  of  it  was  when  Mr.  Newton 
applied  to  the  bank. 

November,  1909,  your  £3  a  week  from  Munyons  stopped? — Yes. 

January,  1910,  you  were  not  quite  so  well  off  as  you  had  been? — Well, 
I  think  my  commissions  amounted  to  pretty  nearly  the  same  thing,  if  not 
possibly  more ;  I  would  not  be  sure  about  it. 

97 


Hawley   Harvey  Crippen. 

Hawley  Harvey  Crippen 

Did  you  tell  Inspector  Dew  that  the  commission  business  did  not 
pay? — It  did  not  pay  me,  because  it  was  too  much  trouble  to  me  for  what 
I  got  out  of  it. 

Where  do  you  suppose  your  wife  was  going  to  get  the  money  to  pay 
her  passage  to  America? — She  always  had  plenty  of  money  apparently. 

Did  you  give  her  any? — I  did  not  give  her  any,  no;  I  asked  her  if 
she  was  provided  with  money,  if  she  wished  any,  and  sihe  said,  "No,  she 
wanted  nothing  off  me." 

You  asked  her  if  she  wanted  any  money? — Yes. 

When  did  you  ask  her  that? — I  asked  her  at  the  time  she  said  she 
was  going  to  leave  me. 

How  many  times  had  she  said  that  she  was  going  to  leave  you  ? — Quite 
a  number  of  times — numerous1  times. 

A  great  number  of  times  ? — A  great  number  of  times. 

Did  you  always  on  those  occasions  ask  her  whether  she  wanted  money 
to  go  away  with? — I  never  paid  any  attention,  because  she  had  never 
carried  it  to  such  an  extent. 

She  said  she  did  not  want  any  money  from  you? — Yes. 

Were  you  in  want  of  money? — I  was  not. 

What  did  you  do  with  the  money  that  you  got  from  pawning  your 
wife's  jewels? — I  used  it  in  paying  for  advertising  a  new  scheme  I  was 
starting — a  new  preparation  I  was  putting  on  the  market. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — Do  you  mean  the  whole  £200 — the  <£80 
and  the  £115? — Yes,  I  probably  used  most  of  it. 

You  are  not  asked  "  probably  " ;  you  were  asked  what  you  used  the 
money  for? — For  paying  for  the  advertising. 

By  Mr.  MUIR — Anything  else? — Well,  I  also  bought  some  new  dental 
instruments  with  it. 

Were  any  of  those  matters1  urgent  matters'? — Not  at  all,  no. 

You  are  quite  sure  about  that? — Quite  so,  because  I  only  contracted 
for  the  advertising  after  I  had  pawned  the  diamonds ;  the  first  advertising 
did  not  appear  until  a  couple  of  weeks  after. 

There  wasi  no  urgency  about  it  at  all? — Not  at  all. 

Why  were  you  in  such  a  hurry  to  pawn  your  wife's  earrings  and 
marquise  rings? — Because  when  I  contracted  for  the  advertising  I  would 
have  to  pay  cash. 

When  did  you  contract? — About  a  few  days1  after  that. 

A  few  days  after  the  2nd  February? — Yes. 

Why,  then,  were  you  in  such  a  hurry  to  pawn  your  wife's  jewellery? — 
I  think  I  have  already  answered  that. 

What?  Why  were  you  in  such  a  hurry  to  pawn  your  wife's  jewels? — 
Because  I  had  already  this  scheme  in  my  mind,  and  as  soon  as  I  made  my 
final  arrangements  I  put  the  money  in  hand. 

You  already  had  this  scheme  in  your  mind,  had  you? — Yes. 

For  how  long? — For  at  least  two  months.  I  had  been  preparing  my 
advertising  and  getting  my  bottles  together  and  my  solutions. 

Before  the  19th  January  you  had  this  scheme  in  your  mind? — Yes. 

And  you  wanted  money  for  it? — Before  the  19th — long  before  that. 

You  wanted  money  for  it? — Oh,  I  could  have  got  the  money  without 
doing  that. 


Evidence  for  Defence. 

Hawley  Harvey  Crlppen 

You  wanted  money  for  it  1 — I  could  have  got  the  money  without  doing 
that ;  I  could  have  raised  it  at  the  bank,  and  I  also  had  another  business 
from  which  I  could  have  drawn  money  for  it  if  I  had  wanted  it. 

And  on  the  2nd  February  you  began  to  raise  money  for  it  on  your 
wife's  jewels? — Quite  so. 

Had  you  never  pawned  jewellery  of  your  wife's  before? — I  never  pawned 
my  wife' si  jewellery  before. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — Had  you  ever  pawned  jewellery  before? — 
I  had  pawned  jewellery  before,  yes. 

By  Mr.   MUIR — Of  your  wife's? — No,  of  my  own. 

Were  those  two  occasions,  the  2nd  and  9th  February  of  this  year, 
the  only  two  occasions  on  which  you  had  ever  pawned  jewellery  of  your 
wife's? — I  refuse  to  accept  the  idea  that  it  was  my  wife's. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — Jewellery  that  your  wife  had  been  in  the 
habit  of  wearing? — That  she  had  been  in  the  habit  of  wearing,  yes ;  I  have 
pawned  jewellery  before. 

By  Mr.  MUIR — Of  hers  ? — No,  it  was  some  that  I  wore  myself. 

Those  were  the  only  two  occasions? — Those  were  the  only  two  occa- 
sions. 

Had  you  forgotten  that  you  had  pawned  that  jewellery  on  the  8th 
July?— No. 

You  remember  it  quite  well? — Quite  well. 

Did  you  say  this  to  Inspector  Dew,  "  I  have  never  pawned  or  sold 
anything  belonging  to  her  before  or  after  she  left  "? — I  did,  but  I  did  not 
consider  it  was  her  property;  I  considered  myself  justified  in  answering 
in  that  way. 

You  got  bank  notes  for  those  jewels? — Yes. 

You  changed  those  bank  notes  through  Miss  Curnow? — Yes. 

Of  your  offices  in  Albion  House? — Yes,  Miss  Curnow  always  went 
to  the  bank  for  me. 

Did  you  say  this  to  Inspector  Dew,  "  Any  notes  that  I  have  changed 
through  any  one  in  this  building  were  in  connection  with  my  business  "? — 
It  was  done  in  connection  with  my  business!. 

What  was  your  business  that  you  changed  these  notes  in  connection 
with? — The  dental  business. 

You  had  in  your  mind,  had  you,  that  the  notes  you  were  speaking  of 
were  notes  that  were  the  proceeds  of  that  jewellery  ? — Quite  so. 

And  when  the  inspector  asked  you  whether  you  had  changed  any  notes 
through  any  one  in  that  building,  that  is  how  you  answered  it? — Because 
the  money  was  used  in  connection  with  the  dental  business. 

Then  you  told  the  truth,  according  to  your  view,  about  the  jewellery? 
—Yes. 

Did  you  proceed  to  account  for  your  wife's  jewellery  by  producing 
those  exhibits  which  you  showed  to  Inspector  Dew  at  the  house? — I  showed 
him  some  that  she  left. 

That  she  left  behind?— Yes. 

And  did  you  tell  the  inspector  that  she  had  other  jewellery,  and  must 
have  taken  that  with  her? — She  did  have  some,  as  I  have  already  said ;  she 
had  some  rings  and  a  watch  that  belonged  to  her  before  she  was  married. 

99 


Hawley  Harvey  Crippen. 

Hawley  Harvey  Crippen 

Did  you  intend  the  inspector  to  believe  that  you  were  accounting  for 
the  -whole  of  your  wife's  jewellery? — Certainly. 

And  said  not  a  word  about  those  two  pieces  of  jewellery  that  you  had 
pawned? 

The  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — This  is  comment,  Mr.  Muir. 

Mr.  Mum — If  your  lordship  pleases. 

(To  Witness) — The  complaint  that  your  wife  made  on  the  night  of  the 
dinner  party  with  the  Martinettis  was  a  most  unreasonable  complaint? — 
Well,  I  considered  it  so. 

No  reason  at  all  why  you  should  go  to  show  Mr.  Martinetti  to  the 
lavatory  ? — No. 

He  knew  his  way  quite  well? — Quite  well. 

And  that  was  the  sole  cause  of  your  wife  resolving  to  leave  you? — Well, 
it  was  a  thing  that  had  been  pending  evidently  for  a  long  time. 

Had  she  any  other  cause'  for  leaving  you? — That  is  the  only  cause  I 
know. 

When  you  found  she  had  gone,  you  say  you  eat  down  to  think  how 
you  could  cover  up  the  scandal? — Yes. 

With  her  friends? — With   her   friends. 

And  the  members  of  the  Guild? — Yes. 

She  had  a  great  many  friends? — Well,  not  a  large  circle  of  friends; 
there  were  only  a  few  who  were  really  the  intimate  friends. 

By  the  LOED  CHIEF  JUSTICE — She  had  a  few  very  intimate  friends? — 
Yes. 

By  Mr.  MUIR — Those  we  have  seen? — Yes. 

And  Mrs.  Nash,  another? — Yes. 

Whom  we  have  not  seen? — Yes. 

Mrs.   Ginette,  in  America? — Yes. 

Mrs.  Eugene  Stratton? — Yes. 

Those  were  all  intimate  friends  of  hers? — All  intimate  friends. 

You  did  your  best  to  cover  up  the  scandal? — I  did. 

It  involved  you  in  a  great  deal  of  trouble? — Well,  that  has  already 
been  acknowledged. 

But  that  is  the  fact? — That  is  the  fact. 

I  want  to  clear  up  one  or  two  incidents.  Just  look  at  that.  (Handing 
exhibit  32.)  Is  that  your  letter  written  on  Sunday,  20th  March,  at  39 
Hilldrop  Crescent? — It  is. 

At  that  time  was  Ethel  Le  Neve  living  with  you  at  that  address? — I 
would  not  be  sure  whether  she  came  permanently  to  live  with  me  at  that 
time  or  not,  but  she  had  been  off  and  on  there. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — About  what  date  do  you  put  it  that  Miss 
Le  Neve  came  to  live  with  you ;  it  will  be  a  very  important  date  ? — It  was 
shortly  before  Easter. 

Easter,  we  are  told,  was  somewhere  about  the  end  of  March? — The 
27th,  I  think. 

We  shall  have  to  have  it  asked  presently,  and  I  should  like  to  have 

it  fixed  now,  when  she  came,  so  that  we  may  have  it  in  our  minds.     When 

do  you  say  Miss  Le  Neve  came  to  live  at  Hilldrop  Crescent? — The  first  time 

that  she  came  there  was   2nd  February,   the  Wednesday  night,   on    2nd 

100 


Evidence  for  Defence. 

Hawley  Harvey  Crip  pen 

February.  From  that  time  on  she  was  with  me  probably  two  or  three  nights 
or  perhaps  more  out  of  the  week,  but  when  she  came  to  stay  permanently 
I  would  not  like  to  say,  except  that  I  know  it  was  shortly  before  Easter; 
because,  when  she  had  her  clothes  removed  from  Mrs.  Jackson's  to  my 
house  I  am  sure  it  was  some  time  before  Easter,  but  what  the  day  was  I 
would  not  like  to  say. 

By  Mr.  Mum — Mrs.  Jackson  has  said  that  on  12th  March  Ethel  Le 
Neve  ceased  to  live  at  her  house  altogether.  Is  that  the  date  on  which 
she  came  to  you? — I  will  not  dispute  that  date,  because  I  know  it  was  some 
time  before  Easter;  but  she  had  been  there  at  least  two  or  three  or  four 
nights  out  of  the  week  regularly  before  that. 

Just  let  me  interpose  this,  in  consequence  of  what  you  have  just  said. 
On  the  night  of  2nd  February  did  Ethel  Le  Neve  sleep  at  Hilldrop  Crescent  ? 
—She  did. 

The  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — You  must  press  him  upon  that,  for  a  par- 
ticular reason. 

Mr.  MUIR — You  are  sure  of  that? — I  am  sure  of  that. 

Now,  I  want  to  come  to  the  letter  which  is  in  your  hand.  Was  it 
written  by  you  ? — It  was. 

At  Hilldrop  Crescent,  on  Sunday,  the  20th  March? — Yes. 

Was  Ethel  Le  Neve  living  with  you  at  that  time  ? — She  was ;  at  least, 
I  am  sure  she  was  there  that  Sunday;  well,  I  have  already  acknowledged 
that  I  would  accept  that  date  that  she  came  to  live  with  me. 

The  12th  March? — The  12th  March;  so  she  must  have  been  there  on 
that  Sunday. 

"  Dear  Clara  and  Paul — Please  forgive  me  not  running  in  during  the 
week,  but  I  have  really  been  so  u,pset  by  very  bad  news  from  Belle  that  I 
did  not  feel  equal  to  talking  with  any  one.  And  now  I  have  just  had  a 
cable  saying  she  is  so  dangerously  ill  with  double  pleuro-pneumonia  that 
I  am  considering  if  I  had  not  better  go  at  once  "  ? — "  Go  over  at  once." 

"  I  don't  want  to  worry  you  with  my  troubles,  but  I  felt  I  must  explain 
why  I  had  not  been  to  see  you.  Will  you  try  and  run  in  during  the  week 
and  have  a  chat.  Hope  you  are  both  well.  With  love  and  best  wishes." 
Had  you,  when  you  wriie  that  letter,  arranged  to  go  to  Dieppe  with  Ethel 
Le  Neve  for  Easter? — Yes,  I  believe  I  had. 

And  did  you  want  to  wipe  your  wife  off  the  slate  before  you  went? — It 
was  not  a  question  of  that  kind.  It  was  a  question,  as  I  have  already 
explained  in  my  statement,  that  I  felt  something  was  necessary  to  stop  all 
the  worry  that  I  was  having  with  the  inquiries. 

Did  you  want  to  announce  your  wife's  death  before  you  started  for 
your  holiday  with  Ethel  Le  Neve  on  the  following  Thursday? — I  do  not 
think  that  follows  as  a  logical  sequence. 

That  is  what  you  intended  to  do  at  the  time  you  wrote  that  letter? — 
I  do  not  know  whether  I  had  at  that  time  fixed  the  time  when  I  would  say 
that  the  other  cable  had  arrived  or  not ;  I  would  not  say  that. 

Now,  Mrs.  Martinetti  was  one  of  your  wife's  dearest  friends? — She 
was  a  very  intimate  friend;  they  were  probably  with  us  once  a  week — 
either  we  were  at  their  house  or  they  were  at  our  house. 

101 


Hawley  Harvey   Crippen. 

Hawley  Harvey  Crippen 

And  Mrs.  Martinetti  had  a  great  affection  for  your  wife? — I  believe  so. 

There  is  no  doubt  about  that? — I  should  say  so,  yes. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — You  think  that  Mrs.  Crippen  saw  Mrs. 
Martinetti,  or  that  they  were  visiting  the  one  or  the  other  at  least  once  a 
week? — Once  a  week. 

Is  that  independent  of  the  meetings  at  the  Guild? — Yes,  independent 
of  them ;  although  sometimes  we  took  our  dinner  with  them  on  the  Wednes- 
day night ;  so  that  would  be  the  Wednesday  in  that  week ;  sometimes  there 
was  an  extra  night. 

By  Mr.  Mum — Did  you  consider  at  all,  in  this  plan  of  yours,  the  pain 
that  the  announcement  of  your  wife's  death  would  give  to  Mrs.  Martinetti? 
— I  did  not  think  they  were  so  closely  attached  as  has  been  made  out. 

You  had  an  interview  with  her  on  the  23rd,  had  you  not? — Yes. 

Was  she  much  distressed  to  hear  of  your  wife's  illness? — She  did  not 
eeem  distressed  to  me. 

You  prepared  an  advertisement  of  your  wife's  death  for  the  Era? — 
Yes. 

When  did  you  do  that? — I  cannot  tell  you. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — How  long  before  it  appeared? — Oh,  it 
would  be  two  or  three  days  before. 

By  Mr.  Mum — Did  you  think  of  the  pain  that  that  would  give  to  your 
wife's  friends? — I  was  not  considering  them  at  all. 

On  24th  March  you  sent  a  telegram  to  Mrs.  Martinetti,  saying  that 
you  had  had  a  cable  that  your  wife  had  died  the  previous  night? — Yes. 

Did  you  consider  Mrs.  Martinetti's  feelings  at  all? — I  never  realised 
that  there  was  that  amount  of  affection  as  there  has  been  apparently, 
or  that  they  try  to  make  apparent. 

You  sent  that  from  Victoria  station  on  the  eve  of  your  departure  with 
Ethel  Le  Neve?— Yes. 

Then  you  went  off  and  took  your  holiday  with  her  ? — Yes. 

And  you  came  back? — Yes. 

The  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — Mr.  Muir,  there  is  one  question  about  that 
telegram  that  I  want  to  ask ;  it  says,  "  Please  'phone  Annie." 

By  Mr.  Mum — Who  is  Annie? — Tha+.  is  Mrs.  Stratton. 

Mrs.  Eugene  Stratton,  another  close  friend? — Yes. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — Why  did  you  want  her  told? — Because  she 
was  also  an  intimate  friend. 

By  Mr.  Mum — On  30th  March,  when  you  had  returned,  Mrs.  Martinetti 
and  Mrs.  Smythson  came  to  see  you  about  your  wife's  death? — Yes. 

Were  you  in  mourning? — I  could  not  say. 

Think;  were  you  in  mourning? — I  did  ,put  mourning  on  afterwards, 
but  I  could  not  say  whether  that  day  I  had.  mourning  clothes  on  then  or  not. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — You  did  put  mourning  clothes  on  at  some 
time? — Yes,  at  some  time. 

How,  with  reference  to  your  announcement  of  your  wife's  death;  was 
it  contemporaneously  or  after  or  before  ? — Only  temporarily. 

I  did  not  ask  you  about  temporarily,  I  asked  when  you  put  them  on  ? — 
Very  soon. 
102 


Evidence  for  Defence. 

Hawley  Harvey  Crippen 

By  Mr.  Mum — As  soon  as  you  returned  from  Dieppe  1 — I  think  so.  I 
would  not  say  if  I  had  mourning  on  on  that  day,  or  whether  it  was  the 
next  day  or  the  next  day  after  that. 

Very  soon  anyhow? — Very  soon,  yes. 

Was  Mrs.  Smythson  an  intimate  friend  of  your  wife? — I  would  not 
call  her  an  intimate  friend. 

Mrs.  Martinetti? — Certainly,  yes. 

Were  they  much  distressed? — Yes. 

And  had  you  to  play  the  role  of  the  bereaved  husband? — Yes. 

Did  you  do  it  well  ? — I  am  sure  I  could  not  tell  you  that. 

Your  wife's  friends  were  with  you,  condoling  with  you  upon  the 
loss  of  your  wife;  did  you  play  the  part  well? — That  is  a  question  you 
should  ask  them ;  I  cannot  say. 

You  got  a  letter  from  Dr.  Burroughs  and  his  wife — two  of  your  wife's 
oldest  friends? — Yes. 

And  you  wrote  to  him? — I  did. 

Take  exhibit  31.  (Letter  handed  to  witness.)  It  is  on  black-edged 
paper? — Yes. 

In  keeping  with  your  mourning? — Yes. 

And  the  letter  in  keeping  with  your  role  of  bereaved  husband? — Yes. 

"  Albion  House,  5th  April. — My  Dear  Doctor,  I  feel  sure  you  will 
forgive  me  for  my  apparent  neglect,  but  really  I  have  been  nearly  out  of 
my  mind  with  poor  Belle's  death,  so  far  away  from  me."  Sheer 
hypocrisy? — It  is  already  admitted,  sir. 

Sheer  hypocrisy? — I  am  not  denying  any  of  this. 

"  She  was  not  with  her  sister  " — which  sister  were  you  speaking  of? — 
The  one  in  New  York. 

Which  of  them — the  half-sister  or  the  whole  sister? — The  half-sister. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — What  name? — Mrs.  Mills. 

Not  the  lady  who  has  been  called? — No. 

By  Mr.  Mum — Was  she  very  fond  of  that  half-sister? — Well,  she 
seemed  to  be,  but  when  the  half-sister  was  over  here  they  did  not  agree 
at  all. 

And  Tessa,  the  whole  sister,  who  has  been  here,  was  she  very  fond 
of  her  ? — I  do  not  think  she  had  written  to  her  for  an  immensely  long  time. 

One  of  the  witnesses,  Dr.  Burroughs,  told  us  that  there  was  a  sister, 
Tessa,  whom  she  was  very  fond  of.  That  was  the  sister  that  Dr. 
Burroughs  says  he  thought  you  were  referring  to  in  this  letter? — Yes. 

That  is  the  lady  who  has  been  here? — Yes;  she  could  not  have  been 
so  very  fond  of  her,  because  she  wrote  more  often  to  Mrs.  Mills. 

"  She  was  not  with  her  sister.  She  was  out  in  California  on  business 
for  me,  and,  quite  like  her  disposition,  would  keep  up,  although  she  should 
have  been  in  bed."  Is  that  a  true  description  of  the  disposition  of  your 
wife? — She  would  never  give  in  to  anything. 

She  was  a  cheerful,   bright  person? — Yes. 

This  wife  of  yours  whom  you  were  pretending  to  mourn? — Yes. 

"  She  would  keep  up  when  she  should  have  been  in  bed,  with  the 
consequence  that  pleuro-pneumonia  terminated  fatally.  Almost  to  the 

103 


Hawley   Harvey   Crippen. 

Hawley  Harvey  Crippen 

last  she  refused  to  let  me  know  there  was  any  danger,  so  the  cable  that 
she  had  gone  came  as  a  most  awful  shook  to  me."  Your  imagination 
was  equal  to  the  shock? — I  do  not  see  why  you  keep  on  with  these  ques- 
tions, because  I  am  willing  to  admit  and  tell  you  that  they  were  all  lies 
right  through. 

By  the  LOED  CHIEF  JUSTICE — That  may  be  quite  true,  Dr.  Crippen,  but 
it  is  a  very  serious  part  of  the  case,  and  you  must  really  answer  the 
questions,  lies  or  no  lies. — I  beg  your  pardon,  my  lord. 

By  Mr.  MUIR — That  was  pure  imagination — this  awful  shock? — All 
imagination  entirely. 

"  I  fear  I  have  sadly  neglected  my  friends,  but  pray  forgive  me, 
and  believe  me  most  truly  appreciative  of  your  sympathy.  Even  now  I  am 
not  fit  to  talk  to  my  friends,  but  as  soon  as  I  feel  I  can  control  myself 
I  will  run  in  on  you  and  Maud  one  evening.  I  am,  of  course,  giving  up 
the  house,  and  every  night  packing  things  away.  Love  to  both,  and 
again  thanking  you  for  your  kindness  to  me.  As  ever,  yours  Peter." 
That  was  to  your  wife's  friends? — Yes. 

How  did  you  know  that  your  wife  would  not  write  to  Maud  Burroughs? 

— I  did  not  believe  she  would  write  to  anybody,  the  way  she  was  going  on. 

How  did  you  know  she  would  not? — Because  she  told  me  to  cover  up 

any  scandal  there  was ;  if  she  had  not  said  that  she  would  have  intended 

to  write  herself. 

How  did  you  know  that  your  wife  would  not  write  to  Maud  Burroughs, 
her  friend? — Well,  I  did  not  know  it  positively,  of  course;  I  only  inferred 
it  from  what  she  said. 

You  did  not  know  it? — I  did  not  know  it  positively. 
How   did  you  know  that  she  would  not  write  to  her  friend,   Mrs. 
Martinetti? — The  same  answer  applies. 
You  did  not  know? — I  did  not  know. 

Do  you  ask  the  jury  to  believe  that  not  knowing  that  your  wife  might 
•write  to  those  people,  you  told  them  she  was  dead  ? — Yes. 

Where  did  you  think  she  was? — I  have  already  expressed  an  opinion 
on  that.       I  thought  she  had  gone  to  Chicago,  where  Bruce  Miller  lived. 
How  would  she  get  to  Chicago? — By  a  boat  and  by  train. 
Through  what  port? — Through  New  York  by  Philadelphia,  or  Boston, 
or  Quebec. 

New  York,  the  direct  route? — I  do  not  know  whether  New  York  is 
as  much  direct  as  Quebec. 

New  York,  where  she  had  two  sisters  alive? — Yes. 
And  a  stepfather? — Yes. 

And  Mrs.  Ginnette,   an  intimate  friend? — Yes. 

For  all  you  knew,  she  might  have  gone  to  see  those  people? — Yes.  But 
I  did  not  think  she  would. 

A,  .11  you  look  at  exhibit  71.  (Handed.)  "  39  Hilldrop  Crescent." 
The  envelope  post-marked  7th  April.  Is  that  when  you  wrote  it? — 
That  is  right. 

Your  wife  had  left  you  on  the  1st  February? — Yes. 
Gone  to  America? — Yes. 

How  did  you  know  she  had  not  called  upon  Mrs.   Mills? — I  did  not 
104 


Evidence  for  Defence. 

Hawley  Harvey  Crippen 

know,  but  I  felt  sure  that  if  she  had  I  would  have  had  some  word  from 
there. 

And  you  wrote  this  letter  to  Mrs.  Mills  and  her  husband? — Yes. 

"  My  dear  Louise  and  Robert  " — it  is  written  on  black  edged  paper  t — 
Yes. 

"  I  hardly  know  how  to  write  to  you  of  my  dreadful  loss.  The  shock 
to  me  has  been  so  dreadful  that  I  am  hardly  able  to  control  myself.  My 
dear  Cora  has  gone.  To  make  the  shock  to  me  more  dreadful  I  did  not 
even  see  her  at  the  last.  A  few  weeks  ago  we  had  news  that  an  old 
relative  of  mine  in  California  had  died,  and  to  secure  important  property 
to  ourselves  it  was  necessary  for  one  of  us  to  put  the  matter  in  a  lawyer's 
hands  at  once.  As  I  was  very  busy,  Cora  proposed  that  she  should  go, 
and  as  it  was  necessary  for  some  one  to  be  there  at  once,  she  would  go 
straight  through  from  here  to  California,  without  stopping  at  all,  then 
return  by  way  of  Brooklyn,  and  so  would  be  able  to  pay  you  a  long  visit. 
Unfortunately  on  the  way  out  my  poor  Cora  caught  a  severe  cold,  and  not 
having  while  travelling  a  chance  to  take  proper  care  of  herself,  it  settled 
on  her  lungs,  later  to  develop  into  pleuro-pneumonia.  She  wished  not  to 
frighten  me,  and  so  kept  writing  not  to  worry  about  her,  it  was  only  a 
slight  matter.  Next,  I  heard  by  cable,  she  was  dangerously  ill.  Two 
days  later,  after  I  had  cabled  to  know  -should  I  write  to  her,  I  heard  the 
dreadful  news  that  she  had  passed  away.  Imagine,  if  you  can,  the 
dreadful  shock  to  me  never  more  to  see  my  Cora  alive  nor  hear  her  voice 
again.  She  is  being  sent  back,  and  I  shall  soon  have  what  is  left  of  her. 
Of  course,  I  am  giving  up  the  house.  In  fact,  it  drives  me  mad  being  in 
it  alone.  I  will  sell  out  everything.  I  do  not  know  what  I  shall  do. 
Probably  find  some  business  to  take  me  travelling  for  a  few  months  until 
I  can  recover  from  the  shock.  As  soon  as  I  have  a  settled  address  I  will 
write  again  to  you,  as  it  is  so  terrible  to  me  to  have  to  write  this  dreadful 
news.  Will  you  please  tell  all  the  friends  of  our  loss.  With  love  to  all. 
I  will  write  again  soon,  and  give  you  my  address,  probably  in  France. 
From  Doctor."  What  scandal  was  there  which  made  it  necessary  for 
you  to  write  that  letter  to  Cora  Crippen'a  sister? — Because  I  knew  that 
Mrs.  Ginnette  was  in  New  York,  and  that  she  would  probably  go  to  see  the 
sisters,  and  that  if  she  did  so  it  was  necessary  for  them  to  know  why  she 
had  gone. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — I  am  afraid  I  do  not  understand  your 
answer.  Who  would  probably  go  to  see  her  sisters? — Mrs.  Ginnette,  who 
was  one  of  the  members  of  the  Guild. 

By  Mr.  MUIR — And,  for  all  you  knew,  Cora  Crippen  might  have  seen 
Mrs.  Ginnette? — If  she  had  I  should  have  heard  before. 

Do  you  ask  the  jury  to  believe  that  you  wrote  that  letter  without  the 
certainty ? — I  do. 

Listen — without  the  certainty  that  Cora  Crippen  would  never  see  her 
sisters  again? — I  do;  it  is  only  the  matter  of  the  sequence  of  lies  which 
I  was  obliged  to  tell. 

You  are1  telling  lies? — I  have  already  acknowledged  it. 

1  This  question  illustrates  the  acoustics  of  the  Central  Criminal  Court.  Obviously 
Dr.  Crippen  heard  it  as  "you  were  telling  lies — which  you  hoped  would  be  believed." 
As  it  stands  it  makes  the  witness  confess  to  committing  perjury  in  the  witness-box. — Ed. 

10S 


Hawley   Harvey   Crippen. 

Hawley  Harvey  Crippen 

You  are  telling  lies,  which  you  hope  will  be  believed? — Yes. 

And  you  think  they  will  be  believed? — I  believed  they  would  be. 

But  if  Cora  Crippen  were  alive  she  might  call  at  any  moment  on  her 
sisters? — I  did  not  think  she  would.  If  she  went  off  with  some  other 
man  I  did  not  think  she  would  have  the  face  to  go  there. 

This  was  a  very  elaborate  series  of  representations  to  a  large  number 
of  persons? — Yes. 

For  whose  sake  were  you  going  through  this  elaborate  process? — The 
sake  of  both  of  us. 

For  your  sake — what  did  it  matter  to  you? — Well,  I  did  not  wish  the 
friends  here  to  think  that  I  had  treated  her  so  badly  that  she  had  gone 
away  and  left  me. 

You  did  not  wish  your  friends  here  to  think  that  you  had  treated  her 
badly?— Yes. 

Is  that  right? — Yes,  so  far  as  my  part  of  it  was  concerned. 

Going  about,  as  you  were,  with  Ethel  Le  Neve? — That  was  not  public, 
outside  the  one  time  that  I  went  to  the  ball. 

And  again,  when  she  was  wearing  your  wife's  furs? — Yes. 

And  again  at  Dieppe,  and  again  taking  her  to  live  with  you  at  Hilldrop 
Crescent,  your  wife's  house? — Nobody  would  know  the  difference. 

How  were  you  saving  yourself  from  anything  by  telling  those  lies? — 
I  was  saving  myself  from  the  scandal  of  my  friends. 

What  scandal  were  you  covering  up? — The  scandal  of  the  separation 
from  my  wife. 

When  you  were  living  in  open  adultery,  according  to  you,  with  Ethel 
Le  Neve? — It  was  not  so  open  as  you  seem  to  imagine. 

The  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — This  is  comment  now,  Mr.  Muir.  The  only 
scandal  he  can  suggest  is  that  his  wife  had  gone  away;  that  Is  what  it 
amounts  to. 

By  Mr.  MUIR — Now,  you  had  treated  your  wife  well? — Yes. 

Given  her  money? — Yes. 

And  jewels? — She  had  them  to  wear. 

And  clothes? — Clothes. 

And  kept  up  an  establishment  for  her  for  four  years  after  you  ceased 
to  cohabit  with  her;  and  then  she  treated  you  with  ingratitude,  and  went 
away  and  left  you  for  no  cause  at  all  ? — Yes. 

Why  should  you  seek  to  cover  up  a  scandal  for  such  a  wife  as  that? — 
I  do  not  think  I  can  explain  it  any  further  than  I  have. 

A  wife  who  had  deserted  you  for  another  man — why  should  you  seek 
to  cover  up  scandal  for  such  a  wife  as  that? 

The  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — He  says  he  can  give  no  further  explanation ; 
there  is  no  object  in  repeating  it. 

By  Mr.  MUIR — You  had  been  a  tenant  of  39  Hilldrop  Crescent  for  five 
and  a  half  years? — Yes. 

Had  the  floor  of  the  cellar  of  that  house  been  disturbed  during  the 
whole  of  that  time? — Not  to  my  knowledge. 

But  would  you  know  if  it  had  been  ? — I  was  not  at  home ;  Sundays  was 
the  only  time  I  was  at  home — Sundays  and  holidays. 

As  far  as  you  knew,  it  had  not  been  disturbed? — As  far  as  I  knew; 
that  is  the  only  answer  I  can  give  you. 

106 


Evidence  for  Defence. 

Hawley  Harvey  Crippen 

When  you  were  not  at  home  your  wife  was? — There  were  many  times 
that  she  was  not  at  home;  very  often  she  went  out  in  the  morning,  and  I 
did  not  see  her  till  half-past  one  or  so  the  next  morning. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — Will  you  listen  to  the  question.  You  are 
being  asked  with  regard  to  the  cellar  being  disturbed.  You  say  that,  so 
far  as  you  knew,  it  had  never  been  disturbed,  and  you  had  no  reason  to 
think  that  it  was  ever  disturbed? — No,  I  had  no  reason  to  think  so. 

By  Mr.  Mum — You  had  no  reason  to  think  so  at  all? — No. 

Had  you  ever  been  in  the  cellar? — Yes. 

Who  carried  the  coals  upstairs  for  use  in  the  house? — We  did  not  use 
coal  upstairs. 

None  at  all? — None  at  all. 

Did  you  use  coal  in  the  house  at  all  ? — Not  very  much ;  we  had  mostly 
gas  fires. 

Did  you  use  any  at  all? — We  used  some  in  the  kitchen  range  at  times. 

But  who  carried  it  when  it  was  necessary  to  carry  it? — I  very  seldom 
ever  carried  it ;  sometimes  on  Sundays  I  carried  in  some  coal. 

So  that  you  were  familiar  with  the  cellar;  you  knew  where  the  place 
was? — I  have  not  said  that  I  was  not. 

You  know,  of  course,  that  those  remains  were  found  in  the  cellar? — 
I  was  told  when  I  returned  to  England  by  my  solicitor. 

So  far  as  you  know,  they  cannot  have  been  put  there  while  you  were 
tenants? — Not  that  I  know  of,  of  course. 

So  far  as  you  know,  that  is  impossible? — So  far  as  I  know.  1  would 
not  say  it  was  impossible,  because  there  were  times  when  we  were  away; 
during  my  absence  in  the  daytime  my  wife  was  often  away. 

By  the  LOKD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — Do  you  really  ask  the  jury  to  understand 
that  your  answer  is  that,  without  your  knowledge  or  your  wife's,  at  some 
time  during  the  five  years,  those  remains  could  have  been  put  there? — I 
say  that  it  does  not  seem  possible — I  mean,  it  does  not  seem  probable,  but 
there  is  a  possibility. 

By  Mr.  Mum — Now,  I  want  you  to  look  please  at  the  two  suits  of 
pyjamas.  (Handed.)  Are  those  your  pyjamas? — They  are. 

When  did  you  get  them? — I  think  I  bought  these  last  September. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — You  mean  September,   1909? — Yes. 

By  Mr.  Mum — Did  you  buy  them  yourself? — Yes,  I  bought  them 
myself. 

Where? — At  Jones  Brothers. 

Had  you  any  other  suits  of  pyjamas  at  that  time? — There  were  my 
worn-out  ones. 

Which  do  you  mean  by  your  worn-out  ones? — Well,  they  are  not  here. 

Look  at  exhibit  48  (handed)? — I  usually  had  three  pairs  at  a  time, 
and  this  is  some  of  the  previous  three  pairs  that  I  bought  before  I  bought 
this  lot. 

Mr.  TOBIN — My  lord,  when  he  said  that  he  bought  pyjamas  in  Septem- 
ber, 1909,  I  gathered  he  was  speaking  of  the  whole  lot. 

The  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — No,  he  was  speaking  of  the  two. 

The   WITNESS — Of  the  two. 

The  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — He  said,  "  I  had  just  bought  the  other 
previous  lot." 

107 


Hawley   Harvey   Crippen. 

Hawley  Harvey  Crippen 

The  WITNESS — There  should  be  another  pair  belonging  to  this  lot. 

By  Mr.  Mum — That  pair  of  trousers — how  long  have  you  had  those? — 
That  would  probably  be  a  long  time  previous  to  the  time  I  bought  these; 
I  could  not  say;  this  was  one  of  three  lots,  and  these  are  another — the  last 
three  lots  I  bought.  This  is  the  remains  of  the  previous  three  lots. 

You  are  giving  a  very,  very  important  answer? — Yes. 

I  do  not  want  you  to  do  it  hurriedly  at  all? — I  thoroughly  understand. 

Think  of  what  you  have  said,  and  look  at  those  things  again? — I 
thoroughly  understand  you.  I  say  that  these  two  are  part  of  a  lot  of  three 
that  I  bought  last  September,  a  year  ago;  this  is  the  only  remains  of  three 
that  I  bought  previous  to  this.  I  cannot  say  how  long  previous. 

Was  it  before  or  after  you  went  to  ililldrop  Crescent  1 — It  was  after. 

One  moment ;  listen  to  the  question ;  was  it  before  or  after  you  went  to 
Hilldrop  Crescent  that  you  bought  this  suit  of  pyjamas  of  which  the  trousers 
remain  ? — After. 

Can  you  tell  us  at  all  how  long  after? — I  think  it  was  shortly  after, 
because  it  was  only  at  that  time  that  I  began  to  wear  pyjamas. 

Shortly  after  you  went  to  Hilldrop  Croscent? — Yes. 

You  mean  in  1905? — Yes. 

Are  you  sure  that  you  bought  those  pyjamas,  of  which  those  are  the 
trousers,  in  the  year  1905? — I  will  not  say  I  am  sure  it  was  1905,  but  I 
know 

1905  or  1906? 

The  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — He  says  he  bought  them  shortly  after  he 
went  to  Hilldrop  Crescent. 

Mr.  MUIB — My  lord,  I  am  questioning  him  upon  certain  information 
that  I  have. 

The  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — You  must  take  his  answer,  that  is  all. 

By  Mr.  Mum — Were  not  those  trousers  one  of  the  same  purchase  of 
three  sets  as  the  other  two? — They  were  not;  I  am  sure  of  it — positive 
of  that — because  I  wore  them  right  straight  along — one  pair  one  week 
and  the  other  pair  the  next  week,  so  that  they  would  all  be  nearly  worn 
out  about  together. 

What  became  of  the  jacket? — That  I  could  not  tell  you;  I  could  not 
tell  you  what  became  of  the  other  two  pairs  of  trousers  and  the  two  jackets 
— probably  worn  out,  as  far  as  I  remember. 

Did  your  wife  ever  buy  pyjamas  for  you? — No,  I  bought  my  own. 

Did  not  your  wife  buy  those  pyjamas  for  you? 

The  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — Which  are  you  speaking  of  now? 

By  Mr.  Mum — All  three? — No. 

Did  not  your  wife  buy  those  pyjamas  for  you  at  Jones  Brothers'  winter 
sale  on  5th  January,  1909? — I  do  not  think  so. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — You  must  listen  to  that  question,  because 
you  have  sworn  that  you  bought  them  yourself.  Now,  be  careful.  The 
question  is  a  very  specific  one.  Did  not  your  wife  buy  them  at  about  the 
5th  January,  1909? — I  bought  some  myself.  I  would  not  say  that  she  did 
not  buy  some ;  she  may  have  bought  some  of  this  lot ;  I  bought  some  myself 
in  September. 

By  Mr.  Mum — Did  not  your  wife  buy  you  three  sets  of  pyjamas  at 
108 


Evidence  for  Defence. 

Hawley  Harvey  Crippen 

Jones  Brothers'  winter  sale  on  5th  January,  1909? — I  would  not  say  that 
she  did. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — Will  you  say  that  she  did  not? — I  won't 
say  that  she  did  not. 

By  Mr.  Mum — Are  not  those  articles  the  three  suits  of  pyjamas  bought 
by  your  wife  in  January,  1909,  minus  the  jacket? — I  do  not  think  so;  it 
cannot  be  possible ;  this  does  not  show  any  signs  of  wear  at  all. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — Never  mind  about  signs  of  wear? — That 
is  the  only  way  I  can  distinguish. 

By  Mr.  MUTR — Did  not  your  wife  buy  you  those  three  suits,  one  of 
them  being  now  minus  the  jacket,  on  5th  January,  1909? — She  bought  me 
some,  but  I  do  not  know  whether  these  were  the  ones  or  not. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — Two  minutes  ago  you  said  to  Mr.  Muir 
that  your  wife  never  bought  you  pyjamas,  but  that  you  always  bought  them 
yourself  ? — Yes. 

Now,  you  have  said,  "  My  wife  did  buy  me  some,  but  I  do  not  know 
whether  these  are  they  "? — Perhaps  I  should  not  have  put  it  so  positively. 

Which  is  true? — Perhaps  I  should  not  have  said  so  positively;  I  said 
she  may  have  bought  some. 

By  Mr.  Mum — Now,  will  you  take  out  of  the  jar  and  compare  it  with 
the  pattern  of  that  pair  of  trousers  (exhibits  79  and  80  handed).  Is  it  the 
same  pattern  ? — It  is  similar — not  the  same — I  would  not  say  it  is  the  same. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — "  Similar  "  is  one  thing ;  you  are  asked 
whether,  as  far  as  you  can  tell,  it  is  the  same  pattern? — It  looks  the  same. 
(The  exhibits  were  handed  to  the  jury.) 

Mr.  Mum — My  lord,  may  the  jury  have  a  lens  to  count  the  lines  of  the 
pattern  1 

The  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — Certainly.  Of  course,  gentlemen,  you  will 
observe  that  one  ia  wet  and  the  other  is  dry.  Do  not  say  anything,  just 
look  at  them  for  yourselves ;  you  have  not  heard  the  whole  of  the  evidence 
yet.  What  is  suggested  by  Mr.  Muir  is  that  on  careful  examination, 
having  regard  to  the  different  condition,  the  pattern  of  the  one  is  the  same 
as  the  pattern  of  the  other.  That  is  your  point,  I  think,  Mr.  Muir? 

Mr.  Mum — Yes,  my  lord. 

The  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — Gentlemen,  you  shall  have  them  in  your 
room  presently.  I  think  you  had  better  get  all  the  evidence  before  you 
ask  any  questions  about  them.  All  of  you  shall  have  an  opportunity  of 
examining  them. 

(To  Witness) — I  think  this  is  so  important,  Dr.  Crippen,  that  I  had 
better  tell  you  what  I  have  taken.  You  have  now  said  that  your  wife 
did  buy  some,  and  these  may  be  they? — Yea. 

The  clean  pair  of  trousers  I  am  speaking  of.  Do  you  wish  to  alter 
that  answer  at  all? — I  think  I  said  she  may  have — not  that  she  did  buy 
some. 

And  that  those,  what  I  will  call  the  trousers  alone,  may  be  part  of 
them? — These  may  be. 

You  were  asked  about  that  one? — And  the  other  one  may  be  from  the 
ones  that  I  bought  in  September. 

You  were  asked  about  those  which  are  being  shown  to  the  jury  together 
K  109 


Hawley  Harvey  Crippen. 

Havvley  Harvey  Crippen 

with  the  others;  you  were  asked  whether  you  would  swear  that  they  are 
mot  part  of  the  lot  bought  by  your  wife  for  you  in  January,  1909? — I  will 
not  swear  that  they  are  either. 

Will  you  swear  they  are  not? — No,  I  would  not  swear  they  are  not, 
but  I  say  I  think  that  that  pair  is  not  a  recent  pair  at  all. 

By  Mr.  MTJIR — If  those  trousers  were  not  part  of  what  your  wife 
bought  in  1909,  when  were  they  bought? — Well,  at  almost  every  sale — 
that  is  to  say,  we  will  say  September,  January,  and  midsummer — there 
were  pyjamas  bought  either  by  myself  or  her.  Now,  I  can't  say  what 
lot  this  comes  from ;  that  would  be  an  impossibility  for  me  to  say. 

How  many  sets  of  pyjamas  had  you  at  Hilldrop  Crescent? — That  I 
•ould  not  say. 

At  one  time? — I  generally  had  one  set  and  the  remains  of  another 
set — the  remains  of  a  worn-out  set  and  the  other  set. 

Did  not  you  tell  the  jury  a  little  time  ago  that  you  generally  had 
three  sets  going? — I  am  speaking  of  three  sets. 

i  The  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — I  think  he  meant  a  set  of  three.  He  said, 
"  I  always  had  a  set  of  three  and  part  of  a  worn-out  set.  " 

The  WITNESS — I  am  speaking  of  a  set  of  three,  and  parts  of  a  worn- 
out  set. 

The  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — He  is  not  speaking  of  two  sets  and  a  set  of 
three. 

Mr.  MUIR — Did  you  have  any  more? — Than  these  two  pairs? 

Yes — of  the  three? — Of  the  three,  I  could  not  say. 

Now,  I  am  going  to  put  this  to  you,  so  that  you  will  have  an  oppor- 
tunity of  altering  your  answers  if  you  desire  to  alter  them,  that  those 
three  sets  which  are  now  before  you,  one  of  them  incomplete,  were  manu- 
factured in  November,  1908,  and  the  cloth  of  which  they  were  made 
never  came  into  existence  before  November,  1 908  ? — I  can  only  say  that  I 
do  not  think  it  is  possible  that  that  is  so,  of  this  set,  for  the  reason  that 
this  is  so  much  worn  and  these  are  not. 

It  is  quite  possible  to  call  evidence  upon  this  point? — It  may  be 
possible,  but  to  my  mind  it  does  not  seem  possible. 

I  want  you  to  have  that  in  your  mind  before  you  give  your  final 
answer  with  regard  to  those  things — that  the  cloth  of  which  all  those 
three  things  before  you  were  made  was  made  in  November,  1908? — 1908. 

Yes,  1908— November?— Yes. 

And  that  the  jacket  in  that  jar  is  part  of  the  .same  cloth? — I  could 
not  say. 

And  that  it  was  sold  by  Jones  Brothers? — That  I  could  not  tell  you. 

If  that  is  right,  that  pyjama  jacket  must  have  got  in  beside  those 
remains  since  November,  1908? 

Mr.  TOBIN — My  lord,  I  do  not  know  how  far  your  lordship  thinks  my 
friend  should  carry  thia? 

The  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — I  do  not  think  Mr.  Muir  is  going  too  far, 
but  I  do  not  think  it  is  necessary  to  do  more  than  put  the  questions  that 
he  has  put.  This  is  not  the  time  for  argument. 

Mr.  MUIR — I  did  not  desire  to  pursue  it. 

The  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — You  have  indicated  some  very  forcible  facts 
110 


Evidence  for  Defence. 

Hawley  Harvey  Crippen 

to  this  witness — quite  fairly  enough — and  given  him  the  opportunity  of 
altering  his  answer  if  he  liked. 

By  Mr.  MUIR — Now,  do  you  wish  to  alter  any  answer  that  you  have 
given? — No,  I  do  not. 

When  did  you  make  up  your  mind  to  go  away  from  London? — The 
morning  after  Inspector  Dew  was  there — the  8th  or  9th. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — The  9th  July?— The  9th  July. 

By  Mr.  MUIR — Are  you  sure  about  that? — Yes. 

Had  you  the  day  before  been  contemplating  the  possibility  of  your 
going  away? — I  would  not  like  to  say  that  I  had  made  up  my  mind. 
When  Inspector  Dew  came  to  me  and  laid  out  all  the  facts  that  he  told  me, 
I  might  have  thought,  well,  if  there  is  all  this  suspicion,  and  I  am 
likely  to  have  to  stay  in  jail  for  months  and  months1  and  months,  perhaps 
until  this  woman  is  found,  I  had  better  be  out  of  it. 

On  the  8th  July  you  thought  that? — After  I  had  finished  with  Inspector 
Dew. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — You  must  answer  this  question,  Mr. 
Crippen ;  do  you  really  mean  that  you  thought  that  you  would  have  to  lie 
in  gaol  for  months1  and  months ;  do  you  say  that  ? — Quite  so,  yes. 

By  Mr.  MUIR — Upon  what  charge? — Suspicion. 

Suspicion  of  what? — Suspicion  of — Inspector  Dew  said,  "  This  woman 
has  disappeared,  she  must  be  found." 

Suspicion  of  what? — Suspicion  of  being  concerned  in  her  disappearance. 

What  crime  did  you  understand  you  might  be  kept  in  gaol  upon 
suspicion  of? — I  do  not  understand  the  law  enough  to  say.  From  what  I 
have  read  it  seems  to  me  I  have  heard  of  people  being  arrested  on  suspicion 
of  being  concerned  in  the  disappearance  of  other  people. 

The  disappearance  of  other  people? — Well,  I  am  doing  the  best  I  can 
to  explain  it  to  you ;  I  cannot  put  it  for  you  in  a  legal  phrase. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — Nobody  wants  you  to  put  it  in  a  legal 
phrase;  the  simple  question  is,  what  was  the  charge  that  you  thought 
might  be  brought  against  you  after  you  had  seen  Inspector  Dew? — I  could 
not  define  the  charge,  except  that  if  I  could  not  find  the  woman  I  was 
very  likely  to  be  held  until  she  was  found ;  that  was  my  idea. 

By  Mr.  MUIR — Because  of  what? — I  cannot  say  why;  I  can  only  say 
that  no  other  idea  than  that  entered  my  head.  If  I  could  not  produce 
the  woman 

Yes,  what  would  be  the  inference? — Mr.  Dew  told  me  that  I  should 
•be  in  serious  trouble;  well,  I  could  not  make  out  what  the  inference 
would  be. 

And  that  was  why  you  contemplated  on  the  afternoon  of  8th  July 
flying  from  the  country  ? — Quite  so — that,  and  the  idea  that  I  had  said  that 
Miss  Le  Neve  was  living  with  me,  and  she  had  told  her  people  she  was 
married  to  me,  and  it  would  put  her  in  a  terrible  position;  the  only  thing 
I  could  think  of  was  to  take  her  away  out  of  the  country  where  she  would 
not  have  this  scandal  thrown  upon  her. 

Had  you  made  up  your  mind  then,  when  you  spoke  to  Miss  Curnow? — 
No,  I  had  not  made  up  my  mind  then. 

Ill 


Hawley  Harvey  Crippen. 

Hawley  Harvey  Crippen 

"  If  anything  should  happen  to  me  give  the  envelopes  to  Miss  Le 
Neve  "1 — I  had  not  made  up  my  mind  then. 

You  had  not  made  up  your  mind  then? — I  had  not  made  up  my 
mind  then,  no. 

After  that  you  went  into  the  cellar? — Yes. 

With  Inspector  Dew? — Yes. 

And  stood  there  in  the  cellar? — Yea. 

Was  it  after  that  that  you  made  up  your  mind  ? — No,  it  was  the  next 
morning. 

Then  it  was  after  that? — Oh,  yea,  it  was  after  that;  it  was  the  next 
morning,  after  I  had  studied  the  whole  matter  over. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — What  Mr.  Muir  asks  is  this,  you  had 
thought  about  it  on  the  afternoon  of  the  8th,  but  you  made  up  your 
mind  on  the  morning  of  the  9th? — Yes,  after  I  had  studied  the  matter 
over,  and  after  I  had  consulted  with  Miss  Le  Neve  as  to  what  she  would 
like  to  do. 

By  Mr.  MUIR — You  thought  you  were  in  danger  of  arrest? — Yes. 

And  so  you  fled  the  country  ? — Yes. 

Under  a  false  name? — Yes. 

Shaved  oft  your  moustache  ? — Yes. 

Left  oft  wearing  your  glasses  in  public? — Yes. 

Took  Le  Neve  with  you? — Yes. 

Under  a  false  name? — Yesi. 

Posing  as  your  son  ? — Yes. 

Went  to  Antwerp? — Yea. 

Stayed  in  a  hotel  there? — Yes. 

Stayed  indoors  all  day? — Oh,  no. 

Practically  all  day? — We  did  not;  we  went  to  the  Zoological  Gardens, 
and  walked  all  over  the  place. 

Enjoying  yourselves? — Certainly. 

Signed  the  register  under  a  false  name  in  the  hotel  ? — I  do  not  remem- 
ber signing  the  register  in  Antwerp. 

I  mean  in  the  hotel  book.  What  name  did  you  give  at  the  hotel? — 
I  know  in  Brussels  I  signed  the  hotel  book  in  one  place,  and  in  another 
place  I  did  not. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — What  you  are  asked  is,  what  name  you 
gave? — If  I  gave  a  name  anywhere  it  would  be  "  Robinson." 

By  Mr.  Mura — la  this  a  strip  of  paper  cut  from  the  hotel  register? 

The  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — You  need  not  pursue  it;  he  says  he  gave  the 
name  of  Robinson.  It  is  perhaps  a  little  important,  and  I  will  read  it  as  I 
have  it  here — "John  Robinson,  merchant,  age  55;  place  resident  at, 
Canada.'*  Then  "  Vienne."  (To  Witness) — That,  I  suppose,  isi  the  place 
of  origin? — The  place  you  come  from. 

It  is  put  down  in  two  places.  Is  the  other  where  you  are  going  to? — 
No. 

There  are  two  "  Viennes  "  down  here? — I  think  Canada  is  the  place 
of  going  to,  and  Vienna  is  the  place  you  come  from. 

This  must  be  made  an  exhibit  now  (marked  83).       Is  that  your  hand- 
writing or  not? — Well,  the  bottom  one  is  not  my  handwriting. 
112 


Evidence  for  Defence. 

Hawley  Harvey  Crippen 

You  gave  the  information  for  that? — I  think,  my  lord,  the  bottom  one 
is  written  by  the  hotel-keeper. 

That  is  highly  probable,  and  you  gave  the  information  for  it? — I  did. 

The  name  is,  "  Robinson,  John;  trade,  merchant;  age,  55;  place  of 
birth,  Canada;  place  of  domicile,  Quebec;  authority  who  signed  the  pass- 
port, blank;  date  of  passport,  blank;  destination  indicated  in  passport, 
blank;  from  where  the  visitors  have  come,  Vienne  (that  is  Vienna);  Belgian 
authority  that  has  vised  passport,  blank;  date  of  arrival,  10.7.10;  (that  is 
the  10th  July);  date  of  departure,  blank;  place  where  the  passengers  have 
said  they  were  going  to,  Vienna."  That  is  the  line  for  John  Robinson. 
Then  there  is  "  Mr.  Robinson"  "  fils  "  (that  means  son)  "without  pro- 
fession ;  sixteen  years  old ;  born  in  Canada ;  residing  in  Quebec ;  no  passport ; 
no  date  of  departure;  place  they  have  come  from,  Vienna;  Belgian  authority 
that  has  vised  passport,  blank;  same  date  of  arrival,  10th  July;  place 
going  to,  Vienna."  You  have  no  doubt  you  gave  that  information? — Yes, 
I  have  no  doubt  about  it. 

By  Mr.  Mum — Then  the  second  description  is  that  of  Miss  Le  Neve? 
—Yes. 

Disguised  as  a  boy? — Yes. 

Passing  as  your  son? — Yes. 

From  what  hotel  does  that  come ;  I  think  it  is  the  Hotel  des  Ardennes  ? 
—Yes. 

That  is  somewhere  in  Brussels,  is  it? — Yes. 

That  is  the  hotel  you  stayed  at? — In  Brussels,  yes. 

When  you  got  to  Quebec  on  board  the  steamer,  or  near  Quebec, 
Inspector  Dew  came  on  board? — Yes. 

You  were  much  surprised  to  see  him? — I  did  not  expect  to  see 
Inspector  Dew. 

Did  you  recognise  him  at  once? — Yes. 

Though  he  was  disguised;  he  was  not  dressed  in  his  inspector's  dress? 
— Well,  as  soon  as  I  saw  him  in  the  cabin  I  recognised  him. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — You  are  asked  whether  you  recognised 
him  when  he  came  on  board? — No,  I  did  not  recognise  him  when  he  came 
on  board. 

He  was  dressed  as  a  pilot? — Yes,  he  was  dressed  as  a  pilot;  I  did 
not  recognise  him  until  he  came  into  the  cabin. 

By  Mr.  Muni — You  were  quite  taken  by  surprise  that  you  should  be 
interrogated  by  him  <or  spoken  to  by  him  ? — Yes,  I  did  not  expect  to  se« 
him. 

Up  to  that  time  had  you  thought  at  all  of  what  charge  would  be  made 
against  you? — I  had  not. 

He  told  you  that  you  would  be  charged  with  the  murder  and  mutila- 
tion of  your  wife? — When  he  read  the  warrant,  do  you  mean? 

Inspector  Dew  on  board  the  "  Montroee  "  told  you  that  you  would 
be  charged  with  the  murder  and  mutilation  of  your  wife? — Do  you  mean 
that  that  was  in  the  warrant  that  he  read  to  me? 

No,  no;  that  is  what  he  said  before  he  read  the  warrant? — Well,  I 
would  not  pay  much  attention  to  what  he  told  me,  because  I  was  in  euch 
a  confusion  at  the  time. 

113 


Hawley  Harvey  Crippen. 

Hawley  Harvey  Crippen 

The  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — It  is  a  little  more  than  that.  Just  pay 
attention.  It  is  very  important.  You  had  better  put  it  to  him  again, 
Mr.  Muir.  Ask  him,  "did  he  not."  You  are  making  a  statement  to 
him,  and  he  does  not  accept  it. 

The  WITNESS — No,  I  do  not  accept  it,  because 

By  Mr.  MUIR — Did  the  inspector  say,  "  Good  morning,  Dr.  Crippen  j 
I  am  Inspector  Dew  "  1 — Yes. 

And  did  you  say,  "  Good  morning,  Mr.  Dew"? — "  Good  morning, 
Mr.  Dew." 

Did  the  inspector  then  say,  "  You  will  be  arrested  for  the  murder 
and  mutilation  of  your  wife,  Cora  Crippen,  in  London,  on  or  about  2nd 
February  last"? — I  would  not  say  that  I  took  that  ip,  because  I  was  so 
very  much  surprised  and  confused  that  I  did  not  quite  have  my  right 
senses. 

Did  a  Canadian  officer,  Mr.  McCarthy,  caution  you? — He  did. 

And  tell  you  that  you  need  not  say  anything  unless  you  liked? — Yea, 
and  then  the  other  one  cautioned  me  later  on. 

Wait  a  moment — caution  you  that  anything  you  did  say  would  be 
taken  down  in  writing  and  might  be  used  in  evidence  against  you? — I 
do  not  remember  the  legal  part  of  that. 

He  cautioned  you? — He  cautioned  me,  yes. 

And  you  realised  that  you  were  being  charged? — Yes. 

With  what? — I  realised  I  was  being  charged. 

With  what? — Well,  I  realised  that  I  was  being  arrested  for  murder; 
I  remember  hearing  that. 

The  murder  of  your  wife? — Yes. 

Up  to  that  time  did  you  believe  she  was  alive? — I  did. 

Did  you  put  any  question  to  Inspector  Dew  as  to  whether  she  had 
been  found? — I  did  not  put  any  question  at  all. 

As  to  how  he  knew  she  was  dead? — No. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — You  put  no  questions  at  all? — I  put  no 
questions  at  all. 

By  Mr.  Mum — You  made  no  reply? — I  made  no  reply. 

Were  you  left  in  charge  of  Mr.  M'Carthy  in  the  cabin? — Mr.  McCarthy 
and  the  other  one. 

Dennis? — Dennis — well,  I  did  not  know  the  name. 

There  was  another  police  officer? — Yes,  there  was  another  one. 

And  the  chief  engineer  of  the  ship  ? — Yes. 

Did  those  persons  remain  in  the  cabin  until  Inspector  Dew  came  back  t 
—Yes. 

When  Inspector  Dew  came  back  did  he  go  frith  you  to  another  cabin? 
— Yes,  he  took  me  downstairs  to  the  cabin. 

Up  to  that  time  you  had  been  in  the  captain's  cabin  ? — Yes. 

As  you  left  the  cabin  did  you  say  to  him,  "  I  am  not  sorry,  the 
anxiety  has  been  too  much  "? — Yes. 

Anxiety  for  what? — Anxiety  thinking  I  might  be  pursued  from  London. 

For  what? — For  the  same  reason  that  I  ran  away. 

That  was  the  anxiety  that  was  too  much  for  you? — Yes. 
114 


Evidence  for  Defence. 

Hawley  Harvey  Crlppen 

To  be  arrested  on  some  charge  the  nature  of  which  you  did  not  under- 
stand?— I  did  not  understand,  no. 

Do  you  remember  the  handcuffs  being  put  on  1 — I  do. 

Do  you  remember  the  inspector  saying  to  you,  "  I  must  put  theae 
on,  because  on  a  card  found  on  you  you  have  written  that  you  intend  to 
jump  overboard  "1 — Yes,  I  do. 

Did  you  say  this  to  him,  "  I  won't;  I  am  more  than  satisfied,  because 
that  anxiety  has  been  too  awful  ";  did  you  say  that? — Yes,  the  same 

What  anxiety? — The  same  as  I  have  already  explained. 

Do  you  remember  being  searched  by  Inspector  Dew? — Yes. 

While  that  waa  going  on,  do  you  remember  asking  him,  "  How 
is  Miss  Le  Neve"? — Yes. 

And  his  saying,  "  Agitated,  but  I  am  doing  all  I  can  for  her  "1 — Yes. 

Did  you  say  to  the  inspector,  "It  is  only  fair  to  her  to  say  that  she 
knows  nothing  about  it;  I  never  told  her  anything  "? — Yes. 

"  It  is  only  fair  to  say  "  ;  that  meant  "  fair  to  Le  Neve  "  ? — Quite  so. 

Did  you  know  she  had  been  arrested? — It  said  so  in  the  warrant. 

It  said  on  the  warrant  that  she  was  charged  jointly  with  you  with  the 
murder  of  your  wife? — Yes;  that  was  after  the  warrant  was  read  to  me. 

And  it  was  fair  to  her  to  eay  that  she  knew  nothing  about  it? — 
Quite  so. 

That  is,  nothing  about  the  murder  of  your  wife? — Nothing  about  any 
of  the  circumstances  beyond  what  I  have  already  given  in  my  answers  to 
Mr.  Huntly  Jenkins. 

That  she  knew  nothing  about  "  it  ";  she  was  only  charged  with  one 
thing?— Yes. 

The  murder  of  your  wife? — Well,  I  did  not  refer  to  the  murder.  I 
referred  to  the  circumstances  under  which  the  arrest  had  come  about. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — Just  listen.  I  want  you  to  appreciate 
this  point  clearly.  What  I  took  you  down  as  saying  yesterday  was  that  you 
had  told  her  your  wife  had  run  away  and  left  you,  and  that  you  afterwards 
told  her  that  your  wife  was  dead  ? — Yes,  that  is  the  two  things  I  told  her. 

And  that  you  told  her  nothing  else? — I  told  her  nothing  else. 

Now,  in  view  of  what  you  told  us  yesterday,  and  have  now  repeated 
to-day,  answer  Mr.  Muir's  question  as  to  what  you  meant  by  saying  "  It 
is  only  fair  to  say  that  she  knows  nothing  about  it"? 

By  Mr.  MUIB — What  was  "  it  "? — I  referred  to  the  disappearance  and 
the  lies  which  I  told,  which  I  knew  would  throw  me  under  suspicion  from 
what  Mr.  Dew  had  expressed  when  he  was  at  the  house. 

"  I  never  told  her  anything  "? — Yes;  I  never  told  her  anything  about 
the  letters  or  the  lies  that  I  had  told  at  all.  I  told  her  only  two  facts, 
one,  that  Mrs.  Crippen  had  gone  to  America,  and  one  that  she  was  dead. 
That  13  the  only  two  facts  I  ever  told  her.  I  never  told  her  anything 
about  the  lies  I  had  given  out,  and  I  never  told  her  anything  about  the 
letter  that  I  had  written,  so  that  she  knew  nothing  about  the  suspicious 
circumstances  which  brought  about  my  arrest. 

That  is  not  what  you  said;  you  say  that  is  what  you  meant? 

The  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — He  says  that  is  what  he  referred  to. 

115 


Hawley  Harvey  Crippen. 

Hawley  Harvey  Crippen 

The  WITNESS — That  is  what  I  referred  to  when  I  said  "it." 

By  Mr.  MUIR — You  never  told  her  anything  about  the  suspicious 
circumstances  in  which  you  had  left  London  ? — No. 

How  did  you  persuade  her  to  disguise  herself  as  a  boy  and  to  cut  off 
her  hair? — I  told  her  that  Mr.  Dew  had  said  that  there  would  be  serious 
trouble  if  I  did  not  find  Mrs.  Crippen. 

You  told  her  nothing  about  the  suspicious  circumstances  under  which 
you  left  London ;  how  did  you  persuade  her  to  cut  off  her  hair  and  disguise 
herself  as  a  boy? — Am  I  not  just  explaining  it  to  you? 

Will  you  explain  that? 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — Give  your  answer,  please,  to  that  ques- 
tion. I  did  not  think  you  understood  it,  and  Mr.  Muir  was  right  to 
repeat  it? — I  explained  this  to  her  ;  she  told  me,  of  course,  that  she  had 
made  a  statement,  the  same  as  I  had;  I  explained  to  her  that  that  state- 
ment involved  her  in  describing  that  she  lived  with  me,  and  that  my 
statement  gave  the  same,  and  that  there  would  be  a  scandal  which  would 
turn  her  folks  against  her,  and  that  Mr.  Dew  had  sa;d  that  if  I  did  not 
produce  Mrs.  Crippen  there  would  be  trouble  for  me,  and  the  only  way 
I  saw  for  us  would  be  to  escape  this  by  going  away  to  another  place  where 
we  could  be  alone  and  start  a  new  life  together. 

By  Mr.  Mum — Both  of  you  disguised? — Both  of  us  disguised. 

And  you  hoped  unrecognisably  disguised? — Quite  so,  so  far  as  getting 
out  of  London  was  concerned ;  I  never  thought  of  any  disguise  after  that. 

That  is  all  you  told  her  to  persuade  her  to  do  that? — That  isi  all. 

Will  you  look  at  the  card,  exhibit  2  (handed).  When  did  you  write 
that?  Inspector  Dew  arrived  on  board  on  31st  July? — I  wrote  it  then 
on  the  30th. 

Whose  idea  was  it  that  you  should  write  this  card? — The  eailor,  or 
rather  the  quartermaster,  suggested  to  me  that  I  must  leave  something 
to  show  that  I  was  going  to  jump  overboard. 

Was  it  his  idea  or  your  idea? — Well,  it  was  my  idea  to  put  it  in  this 
way;  it  was  his  suggestion. 

That  you  should  leave  something  behind  you? — Something  behind 
me,  some  writing,  he  said,  to  show  that  I  was  going  to  jump  overboard. 

The  language  of  it  entirely  your  own? — Quite  so. 

And  without  a  suggestion  from  the  quartermaster? — Yes. 

What  time  on  30th  July  did  you  have  your  first  communication  with 
the  quartermaster? — It  was  along  towards  noon  some  time — about  noon. 

Where  were  you  when  the  quartermaster  spoke  to  you? — I  was  sitting 
just  behind  the  captain's  cabin. 

This  communication  made  by  the  quartermaster  entirely  without  invi- 
tation from  you? — Yes. 

What  was  it  the  quartermaster  said  to  you? — He  said,  "  I  have  a 
letter  I  want  to  give  you  about  three  o'clock,"  then  at  three  o'clock  I  went 
to  the  little  room  that  was  in  front  of  the  captain's  cabin;  it  is  a  wheel- 
room  ;  I  do  not  know  what  you  call  it,  a  room  where  there  is*  a  wheel. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — The  wheelhouse? — That  is  it — the  wheel- 
house.  He  gave  me  this  letter  to  read,  and  in  the  letter  it  said  that  the 
captain  knew  who  I  was,  and  that  the  police  were  coming  to  arrest  me  at 
116 


Evidence  for  Defence. 

Hawley  Harvey  Crippen 

Quebec,  and  that  if  I  liked  he  would  stow  me  away  and  smuggle  me  ashore 
at  Montreal. 

By  Mr.  MUIR — Was  it  signed? — I  do  not  remember  whether  it  was 
signed  or  not. 

By  the  LORD  CHEEP  JUSTICE — That  was  his  suggestion? — It  was  his 
suggestion. 

It  did  not  come  from  you  ? — Not  from  me. 

By  Mr.  MUIR — Was  it  signed  ? — The  letter  was  not  signed,  and  he  took 
it  right  back  again ;  he  seemed  afraid  to  trust  me  with  it. 

What  was  his  name? — I  do  not  know  his  name;  I  would  not  know 
his  name. 

How  many  quartermasters  were  there? — I  think  there  were  four. 

How  many  did  you  see  ? — I  believe  there  were  four ;  I  think  I  saw  four 
different  ones. 

What  was  this  one  like? — He  was  little  taller  than  I  am,  very  thick 
Bet,  dark ;  that  is  the  nearest  description  I  can  give. 

Any  hair  on  his  face? — Yes,  he  had  a  moustache. 

Is  that  all? — That  is  all. 

Had  any  of  the  other  quartermasters  got  moustaches  ? — Yes. 

All  of  them  ? — I  think  they  all  had ;  I  am  not  sure. 

All  dark  ? — I  cannot  say.  I  particularly  noticed  him  because  I  spotted 
him  to  remember  him  the  next  day. 

Were  all  the  quarterma-sters  dark? — I  could  not  say. 

All  thick  set? — No,  some  of  them  were  tall,  and  some  of  them  were 
short. 

Was  this  man  the  tallest  or  the  shortest  of  them  ? — He  was  a  medium 
size. 

Were  any  of  the  others  medium? — I  think  there  was  another  medium 
size  man,  and  I  think  the  other  two  were  tall  men,  one  was  a  very  tall  man. 

You  would  have  no  difficulty  in  distinguishing  this  man  if  you  saw 
him? — Not  if  I  saw  him. 

Did  he  tell  you  what  you  were  going  to  be  arrested  for? — He  did  not. 

And  you  had  no  idea? — Any  more  than  the  suspicions  I  have  already 
given  you. 

You  intended  this  document  to  be  found  by  the  police  officers? — Well, 
I  had  arranged  that  it  should  be  found,  so  that  Miss  Le  Neve  would  say  she 
found  it  the  next  morning. 

And  hand  it  to  the  police? — Yes. 

So  that  the  police  would  believe  what  was  stated  in  it? — Yes. 

And  would  understand  it? — Yes. 

Would  understand  what  it  meant? — They  would  understand  what  it 
meant,  because  the  quartermaster  was  to  say  that  I  had  jumped  overboard. 

And  would  understand  what  was  expressed  in  it  here? — Yes. 

"  I  cannot  stand  the  horrors  I  go  through  every  night  any  longer." 
What  horrors  were  you  going  through  every  night? — The  fear  of  arrest; 
I  was  not  going  through  any  horrors  every  night ;  it  was  purely  imaginative. 

What  horrors  did  you  mean  the  police  to  understand  that  you  were 
going  through  every  night? — That  they  were  coming  to  arrest  me. 

What  horrors  did  you  mean  the  police  to  understand  you  were  going 

117 


Hawley   Harvey  Crippen. 

Hawley  Harvey  Crippen 

through  every  night,  which  you  could  not  stand  any  longer? — The  dread 
of  arrest. 

For  some  unknown  offence? — Yea;  I  have  already  explained  that. 

"  I  can  see  nothing  bright  ahead,  and  money  is  coming  to  an  end.'* 
It  very  nearly  had,  had  it  not? — No,  indeed. 

How  much  had  you  left? — There  was  some  70  dollars,  I  believe,  and 
about  £90  worth  of  diamonds.  That  is  hardly  "at  an  end." 

"  I  have  made  up  my  mind  to  jump  overboard  to-night.  I  know  I 
have  spoilt  your  life,  but  hope  some  day  you  will  learn  to  forgive  me;  the 
last  word,  Love,  your  H."  That  was  all  pretence? — Certainly. 

And  the  horrors  were  the  horrors  of  your  imagination  entirely? — Yes. 

You  had  arranged  this  with  Misa  Le  Neve  ? — Yes. 

That  she  was  to  remain  on  board  and  carry  on  the  pretence? — Yes. 

Now,  that  card  looks  as  if  you  were  confessing  your  guilt  of  some 
offence,  does  it  not? — It  was  intended  to  do  that. 

Intended  to  make  the  police  believe  that  you  had  confessed  to  your 
guilt  and  jumped  overboard? — Well,  I  should  not  have  put  that  inter- 
pretation upon  it;  probably  you  do. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — Just  listen.  The  card  ia  supposed  to 
be  left  and  picked  up  by  a  policeman? — Quite  so. 

What  Mr.  Muir  puts  to  you  is,  would  it  not  convey  to  that  man  the 
idea  that  you  had  jumped  overboard  because  of  your  horrors? — Well,  I 
have  explained  what  horrors 

No,  no !  answer  Mr.  Muir's  question.  What  do  you  say  it  would 
convey  to  the  policeman? — Well,  I  cannot  answer  it  in  that  way;  I  do  not 
know  how  to  answer  it. 

By  Mr.  Mum — Now,  you  have  given  your  explanation  of  that  card 
in  the  witness-box  yesterday? — Yes. 

For  the  first  time? — The  first  time.  I  could  not  give  it  before, 
because  I  was  not  in  the  witness-box  before. 

Did  you  get  into  communication  with  the  solicitor  who  is  now  defend- 
ing you  on  2nd  or  3rd  August? — Yes. 

By  telegram? — Yes. 

From  him  to  you? — Yes. 

Did  you  have  further  telegrams  from  him? — One  more,  I  believe — one 
other. 

And  a  letter  or  letters? — Yes. 

Did  you  write  to  him  while  you  were  in  Canada? — I  did. 

And  did  you  see  him  soon  after  your  arrival  in  London? — The  next 
Sunday. 

Has  he  been  conducting  and  had  charge  of  your  defence  ever  since? — 
He  has. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — How  many  days  after  you  arrived  was  it 
that  you  saw  him;  you  say  it  was  the  next  Sunday? — The  next  day,  the 
Sunday  would  be  the  next  day ;  I  arrived  on  the  Saturday  night. 

By  Mr.  Mum — Were  you  asked  before  the  magistrate  whether  you 
desired  to  give  evidence? — I  do  not  think  I  was.  I  did  not  hear  any 
such  request  as  that. 

Did  you  desire  to  give  evidence  before  the  magistrate  ? — Not  before  the 
magistrate ;    no. 
118 


Evidence  for  Defence. 

Hawley  Harvey  Crippen 

Were  you  asked  whether  you  had  any  statement  to  make  before  the 
magistrate? — I  do  not  think  I  was. 

Did  you  know  that  you  could  qrive  evidence  if  you  wanted  to? — I  did 
not  know  that  I  could  before  the  magistrate.  It  was  not  mentioned  between 
my  solicitor  and  myself  at  all. 

Were  you  offered  the  opportunity  of  attending  the  coroner's  inquest? 
— Yes. 

And  did  you  decline  to  attend  it  ? — I  declined  to  attend,  it,  through  the 
advice  of  my  solicitor.  He  said  it  was  not  necessary  for  me  to  go ;  other- 
wise I  should  have  gone.  I  did  intend  to  go  at  first. 

Did  you  ask  your  solicitor  to  find  this  quartermaster? — No,  I  did  not. 
As  soon  as  I  arrived  I  explained  to  him,  and  I  left  it  entirely  in  his  hands. 

So  that  your  solicitor  knew  about  this  quartermaster  as  soon  as  you 
arrived? — The  same  Sunday. 

Do  you  know  that  the  "  Montrose"  has  been  in  London  twice  since 
then? — No;  I  know  she  has  been  here  once,  through  seeing  it  in  the  papers. 
I  saw  in  the  papers  that  the  captain  was  here,  but  I  did  not  know  until 
some  one  called  my  attention  to  a  paragraph  in  the  papers  stating  that 
the  "  Montrose  "  had  sailed  somewhere  from  London — I  did  not  know  before 
that  that  she  had  been  in  London. 

So  far  as  you  know,  has  any  effort  been  made  to  bring  that  quarter- 
master here? — No,  not  so  far  as  I  know. 

Of  course,  you  understand  that  if  your  wife  is  alive  there  is  no  founda- 
tion for  this  charge  at  all? — Decidedly  not. 

And  that  if  she  could  be  found  you  would  at  once  be  acquitted  of  it? — 
Oh,  rather. 

What  steps  have  been  taken  by  you  to  find  your  wife? — I  have 
not  taken  any  steps. 

So  far  as  you  know,  has  anybody  else  taken  any  steps  to  find  your  wife? 
— Not  that  I  know.  I  have  left  myself  entirely  in  my  solicitor's  hands.  I 
have  made  no  efforts  of  any  kind — in  fact,  I  could  not. 

Was  Mrs.  Ginnette  a  great  friend  of  your  wife's? — Yes. 

She  is  well  known  in  the  theatrical  profession — the  music  hall  profession 
especially — in  America? — No,  not  to  my  knowledge;  she  is  well  known  on 
this  side;  I  do  not  know  about  the  other  side. 

Did  you  see  her  in  Quebec? — I  saw  her  in  Quebec ;  that  is,  she  came  to 
the  room  where  I  was,  but  I  did  not  speak  to  her. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — Do  you  mean  you  could  not  speak  to  her, 
or  that  you  could  have  spoken,  and  did  not? — I  think  she  asked  if  she  could 
speak  to  me,  and  she  was  told  she  could  not. 

By  Mr.  Mora — She  was  in  the  same  room  with  you? — Yes. 

As  near  to  you  as  I  am  now? — More  near  than  that. 

For  how  long? — A  few  minutes. 

At  that  time  you  knew  you  were  charged  with  the  murder  of  your  wife? 
—Yes. 

Did  you  ask  Mrs.  Ginnette  to  try  and  find  your  wife  ? — I  could  not  speak 
to  Mrs.  Ginnette. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — Just  answer  the  question  first;  did  you 
ask  Mrs.  Ginnette? — I  did  not,  because  I  supposed  that  I  should  not  be 
allowed  to  speak  to  her. 

119 


Hawley   Harvey  Crippen. 

Hawley  Harvey  Crippen 

Never  mind  about  supposing;  you  did  not  speak  to  her.  Why  did 
you  not  speak  to  her  ? — Because  I  supposed  I  would  not  be  allowed  to  speak 
to  her. 

By  Mr.  Mum — Did  Mrs.  Ginnette  come  into  this  room  and  ask  to  speak 
to  you? — I  do  not  know  what  she  came  into  the  room  for.  She  came  into 
the  room  and  sat  down,  and  I  heard  her  speak,  I  think  it  was  to  Inspector 
M'Carthy;  I  am  not  sure,  but  I  understood  her  to  ask  could  she  speak  to 
me,  and  I  thought  he  said  no;  but  I  know  she  did  not  speak  to  me,  and 
consequently  I  did  not  speak  to  her. 

Now,  if  your  wife  was  alive  and  in  America,  there  was  her  friend 
Mrs.  Ginnette,  who  is  an  American,  is  she  not? — She  was  in  America  then. 

Her  headquarters  are  New  York? — Yes. 

Could  she  not  have  found  your  wife  for  you? — I  do  not  know. 

Or  try? — She  could  have  tried,  but  I  did  not  speak  to  her,  because  I 
supposed  I  could  not. 

Mrs.  Mills  and  Mr.  Mackamotzki  are  all  living  in  New  York,  the  step- 
father, the  half-sister,  and  the  sister  of  your  wife? — Yes. 

Was  any  application  made  to  them  to  find  your  wife  ? — No. 

Did  you  ask  Chief  Inspector  Dew  to  try  and  find  your  wife? — Yes,  we 
discussed  the  matter.  I  asked  him  if  he  could  not  find  her  by  applying 
to  the  police  in  Chicago. 

When? — When  he  was  at  the  house  in  Hilldrop  Crescent. 

That  was  when  the  advertisement  was  prepared? — Yes. 

And  left  behind  by  you? — Yes. 

Now,  Mrs.  Nash — Lilian  Hawthorne — she  was  a  great  friend  of  your 
wife? — Yes.  I  have  not  seen  her  since  the  arrest. 

Did  you  see  her  and  her  husband  on  28th  June? — I  did. 

Had  they  just  come  back  from  America? — They  told  me  BO. 

At  that  time,  28th  June,  you  were  representing  that  your  wife  had  been 
in  America  and  had  died  there? — Yes. 

Was  that  the  first  time  you  had  Been  her  since  your  wife's  death? — 
Since  her  disappearance. 

Since  her  death  was  announced? — Yes. 

And  was  Mrs.  Nash  much  distressed? — I  do  not  know  that  she  seemed 
very  much  distressed. 

Were  you  very  much  distressed? — Well 

Did  you  sob  with  grief  in  the  presence  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Nash? — No, 
I  did  not. 

Sobbing  with  grief,  I  suggest  to  you  you  were,  in  the  presence  of  Mr. 
and  Mrs.  Nash  on  the  28th  June? — I  was  not. 

Were  they  pressing  you  for  particulars  of  where  your  wife  died  ? — They 
were. 

Did  they  say  that  they  had  just  come  back  from  America? — Yes. 

Did  they  tell  you  that  they  could  find  no  trace  of  her  ? — No. 

Did  they  tell  you  that  they  had  seen  Mrs.  Ginnette? — They  told  me 
they  had  seen  Mrs.  Ginnette,  yes. 

And  that  Mrs.  Ginnette  had  heard  nothing  of  your  wife  being  in 
America,  or  having  been  in  America? — No. 

Or  having  died  there? — They  did  not  tell  me  that. 
120 


Evidence  for  Defence. 

Hawley  Harvey  Crlppen 

They  pressed  you  very  much,  did  they  not,  for  particulars? — They 
pressed  me  for  particulars,  but  they  did  not  tell  me  that. 

Did  you  know  that  they  were  going  back  to  America? — I  did  not. 

That  was  28th  June? — Yes ;  at  least,  I  accept  your  statement;  I  do  not 
know  the  date  myself. 

When  did  you  first  think  of  prescribing  hyoscin  for  your  patients? — 
Well,  the  first  I  knew  of  hyoscin  as  a  prescription,  as  a  treatment  at  all, 
was  in  1885. 

Here,  in  London? — Here  in  London. 

Yes? — It  was  early  in  January. 

Of  this  year? — Yes. 

For  how  long  had  you  been  prescribing  for  patients  in  London  ? — Well, 
I  had  been  treating  patients  chiefly  for  ear  troubles  for  a  very  long  time, 
but  not  in  a  general  way. 

How  long  had  you  been  prescribing  medicines  for  patients  in  London  ? 
— I  had  not  been  prescribing  any  special  remedies ;  I  have  been  prescribing 
Munyon's  remedies  for — well,  ever  since  I  have  been  here. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — Just  confine  yourself  to  the  question.  You 
were  asked  not  about  selling  remedies,  but  about  prescribing  for  patients, 
that  is,  making  up  prescriptions? — When  I  prescribed  for  the  patients  I 
always  prescribed  Munyon's  remedies  up  to  about  that  time. 

By  Mr.  Mum — Am  I  right  in  taking  it  that  you  mean  that  before  1910 
you  had  no  patients  for  whom  you  made  up  prescriptions? — Oh,  yes,  I  had 
patients. 

For  how  long  before  January,  1910? — Well,  I  only  made  an  occasional 
rule  of  doing  so  for — well,  three  to  six  months  maybe;  I  would  not  like 
to  fix  a  date. 

Approximately  six  months? — Three  to  six  months,  but  I  did  not  make 
it  a  rule  to  do  as  I  did  afterwards ;  I  can  explain  to  you  why. 

Did  you  do  it  through  the  post? — Yes. 

How  did  you  get  into  touch  with  those  patients? — Through  Munyon's 
letters. 

Do  you  mean  through  their  answering  the  advertisementa? — Yes,  I 
was  acting  as  their  medical  adviser. 

Did  you  see  them  personally,  or  was  it  conducted  by  correspondence? 
— Very  few  personally — most  by  correspondence. 

You  would  have  to  have  their  names  and  addresses  in  order  to  aend 
them  the  remedies? — I  did  not  send  the  remedies. 

Who  sent  them  off'? — They  had  what  we  called  a  despatching  clerk. 

Who  was  that? — That  was  in  Munyon's  office. 

Who  was  it? — I  do  not  know  her  last  name;  her  name  is  Maggie. 

Was  she  in  the  employ  when  you  last  were  there? — Yes. 

Where  did  you  usually  get  the  addresses  from  ? — From  the  letters. 

The  letters  would   be  kept? — Yes. 

They  will  be  in  existence  now? — Yes. 

So  that  you  can  give  the  names  of  the  persons  to  whom  you  sent  those 
remedies,  and  their  addresses? — If  I  went  and  looked  them  up. 

Have  you  asked  anybody  to  look  them  up?  Had  you  told  anybody 
before  this  ? — I  think  my  solicitor  has  been  in  communication  with  Munyons 

on  the  question. 

121 


Hawley  Harvey  Crippen. 

Hawley  Harvey  Orippen 

So  that  if  the  names  and  addresses  of  the  persons  for  whom  you  pre- 
scribed are  in  existence,  he  would  know  them? — He  would  have  been  able 
to  find  them,  I  believe. 

Were  you  prescribing  hyoscin  for  any  of  those  patients? — Yes. 

As  a  medicine? — Yes. 

To  be  administered  through  the  mouth? — Decidedly. 

For  what  disease? — Nervous  diseases — coughs  of  a  septic  character — 
and  asthmatic  complaints. 

Is  there  any  pharmacopoeia  or  medical  work  that  you  can  refer  to 
which  advises  the  administration  of  hyoscin  through  the  mouth  for  any 
disease  whatever? — I  think  if  you  refer  to  Hempel  and  Arndt's  "  Dictionary 
of  Homoeopathic  Therapeutics  "  you  will  find  under  the  article  "  Hyos- 
cyamine  "  mention  of  hyoscyamine  as  being  used  in  nervous  diseases. 

Hyoscyamine  and  hyoscin  are  two  totally  different  things ;  I  am  asking 
you  about  hyoscin? 

The  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — This  is  very  important  with  reference  to  a 
question  put  by  one  of  the  jurymen  yesterday.  If  there  is  any  book  in 
which  hyoscin  is  described  or  indicated  as  a  medicine  to  be  given  by  the 
mouth,  you  had  better  produce  it? — I  have  said  that  I  think  you  will  find 
it  in  that  book. 

By  Mr.  MUIR — Hyoscyamine  you  refer  to? — No — hyoscin. 

You  are  talking  about  a  book;  what  is  the  book? — It  is  a  homoeo- 
pathic book. 

Where  is  it? — I  have  not  seen  a  copy  of  it  for  ten  or  fifteen  years. 

The  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — This  is  a  very  vital  matter  for  you,  Dr. 
Crippen.  If  there  is  any  book  in  which  hyoscin  is  prescribed  for  use  in 
this  way,  you  had  better  produce  the  book.  All  you  say  is  that  you  think 
there  is  such  a  book,  but  you  have  not  seen  it  for  twelve  years. 

Mr.   MUIR — Fifteen  years  I  think  he  said. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — What  is  the  book  that  you  are  thinking 
of? — Hempel  and  Arndt's,  I  think  the  title  is  "  The  Dictionary  of  Homoeo- 
pathic Materia  Medica  ";  it  is  a  book  in  several  volumes. 

The  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — We  will  have  that  book  sent  for. 

Mr.  MUIR — I  have  not  got  that  book,  my  lord. 

The  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — Mr.  Tobin,  if  there  be  such  a  book  you  had 
better  have  it  sent  for.  It  may  be  important. 

By  Mr.  MUIR — Now,  as  I  understand  your  evidence  given  yesterday, 
you  put  up  into  pillules  some  two- thirds  of  the  5  grains  of  hyoscin  that 
you  bought? — No,  I  said  all  of  it.  Wait  a  moment.  I  do  not  think 
you  comprehend  the  way  in  which  I  prepared  it. 

As  I  understood  your  evidence — of  course,  I  may  have  totally  mis- 
understood it — you  put  it  into  pillules? — I  see  what  you  mean,  yes;  I  had 
used  about  two-thirds  of  the  quantity. 

What  became  of  the  remaining  third? — It  was  left  in  the  office  wh< 
I  went  away. 

It  ought  to  be  there  now? — I  should  think  it  would  be. 

Have  you  directed  any  search  to  be  made  for  it? — I  have  not. 

Nor   suggested   to  anybody  that   it  should    be    searched   for? — Yea, 
Mr.  Newton  has  gone  there  to  look. 
122 


Evidence  for  Defence. 

Hawley  Harvey  Crippen 

Has  he  found  it? — He  told  me  that  he  could  not  find  any  of  my 
bottles  that  I  left  there. 

Where  did  you  leave  this  quantity  of  hyoscin? — It  was  in  a  cabinet 
in  my  private  room. 

Can  you  give  a  number  to  the  room? — Room  58. 

Albion  House? — Yes. 

Who  besides  yourself  ever  used  that  room? — Well,  up  to  about  three 
weeks  before  I  left  nobody  but  myself  used  that  room. 

The  last  three  weeks? — The  last  three  weeks  I  had  put  a  dental 
chair  in  there,  and  occasionally  used  it  as  an  extra  room. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — What  you  are  asked  is,  did  anybody 
use  it  besides  yourself? — It  was  then  occasionally  used  for  dental  patients. 

By  whom? — By  an  assistant. 

What  is  his  name? — I  am  very  bad  at  names;  perhaps  Mr.  Newton 
can  help  me  on  that. 

Mr.  NEWTON — Was  it  Long? 

The  WITNESS — No,  not  Long;  there  was  Dr.  Rylance — oh,  it  was 
Coulthard ;  that  is  the  name ;  I  have  got  it. 

By  Mr.  Mum — Was  that  room  locked  when  you  left  it? — Never 
locked — well,  my  rooms  were  always  locked  at  night. 

Who  had  the  key? — Long  had  the  key. 

Was  that  one  of  the  keys  that  you  sent  him  in  the  envelope? — No; 
these  were  the  keys1  of  the  house. 

Will  you  look  at  exhibit  38  (handed).  You  wanted  this  hyoscin, 
as  I  understand  you,  for  a  perfectly  legitimate  purpose? — Quite  so. 

"  Name  of  purchaser,  Munyons,  per  H.  H.  Crippen  "? — Yes,  I  always 
bought  my  drugs  in  that  way. 

"Address  of  purchaser,  rooms  57  and  61"? — "57  to  61,"  which 
includes  my  own  offices  and  Munyona. 

"Purpose  for  which  it  is  required,  homoeopathic  preparations"? — 
Yes. 

Have  you  got  any  of  those  homoeopathic  preparations  left? — Do  you 
mean  in  my  office? 

Which  contained  hyoscin? — I  have  already  given  that  answer. 

Pardon  me,  will  you  answer  this  question,  have  you  got  anywhere 
left  any  homoeopathic  preparation  into  which  you  put  this  hyoscin? — 
They  were  all  sent  out  as  they  were  made. 

You  have  none  left? — I  have  none  left. 

Have  you  got  here  any  patient  to  whom  you  sent  such  homoeopathic 
preparations? — Mr.  Newton  has  been  looking  the  matter  up;  I  do  not 
know. 

Re-examined  by  Mr.  TOBIN — You  arrived  in  England  on  Saturday, 
27th  August?— Yes. 

And  were  then  taken  into  custody? — Yes. 

And  from  that  moment  onwards  you  have  been  kept  in  prison? — 
Right. 

The  day  after  your  arrival  Mr.  Newton  saw  you  in  the  prison  cells!  ? — 
Yes. 

123 


Hawley  Harvey  Crippen. 

Hawley  Harvey  Crippen 

And  from  that  moment  has  he  conducted  your  defence  and  looked 
after  your  interests? — Entirely. 

He  appeared  for  you  before  the  magistrate? — Yes. 

And  he  watched  your  interests  at  the  coroner's  inquiry? — Yes;  I  left 
everything  to  him. 

One  other  point  as  regards  dates.  On  21st  September  you  were 
committed  for  trial  by  the  magistrate  on  this  charge? — Yes. 

And  on  26th  September  the  coroner's  inquiry  concluded? — Yes. 

Five  days  later? — Yes. 

As  regards  your  making  up  prescriptions,  for  how  many  years  about 
have  you  been  making  up  prescriptions  for  patients? — Well,  off  and  on — 
do  you  mean  for  treatment  by  correspondence — for  treatment  by  post? 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — Sending  people  prescriptions;  that  is 
what  Mr.  Tobin  means — not  a  remedy,  but  a  prescription? — Oh,  .seventeen 
or  eighteen  years. 

By  Mr.  TOBIN — I  have  here  some  glasses.  What  do  you  call  this? 
Is  that  a  graduated  glass? — Yes,  a  graduated  measure. 

That  is  used  for  prescriptions? — Yes,  for  measuring  prescriptions. 

How  long  have  you  had  that  about? 

The  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — You  must  ask  him  first,  is  that  one  that 
he  had? 

The  WITNESS — That  is  one  that  I  used  as  a  measure  for  ounces ;  that 
is  an  ounce  measure. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — Where  did  it  come  from? — We  had  that 
in  Munyons. 

But  where  did  you  get  it  from  to  give  to  Mr.  Newton? — I  think  Mr. 
Newton  got  it  himself  from  my  office. 

That  is  what  I  thought.  You  may  say  that  you  had  glasses  like 
that,  but  you  do  not  know  where  that  has  come  from? — I  do  not  know- 
where  that  particular  one  came  from,  no. 

By  Mr.  TOBIN — Now,  had  you  constantly  things  like  that  glass  which 
I  show  you? — Yes. 

Will  you  tell  the  jury  what  it  is  called? — This  is  a  dropper;  it  is 
used  for  drops;  it  is  so  that  you  can  get  a  drop  at  a  time. 

When  you  release  your  finger  a  drop  comes  out? — Yes. 

Then  there  are  three  other  things.  Will  you  tell  the  Court  what 
they  are  called? — These  are  testing  glasses. 

You  had  testing  tubes1,  too? — Yes. 

Now,  was  there  something  that  you  sent  to  patients  called  "  ohrshob  "  f 
—Yes. 

Is  that  a  thing  that  you  made  up  yourself  or  not? — Decidedly  yes — 
entirely  myself. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — Is  that  an  ear  salve? — It  was  known* 
under  the  name  of  ohrshob  as  a  special  preparation. 

"  Ohr,"  of  course,  is  the  German  for  "  ear."  What  does  "  shob"' 
mean? — It  comes  from  "  absorb  ";  there  is  the  German  word  for  "  ear," 
and  then  "  absorb." 

By  Mr.  TOBIN — Was  that  something  that  you  prescribed  for  deafness? 
— Yes. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — Has  ohrshob  got  hyoscin  in  it? — No. 

124 


nviaence  tor  ueience. 

Hawley  Harvey  Crippen 

By  Mr.  TOBIN — I  have  a  number  of  letters  here.  Is  that  one  of  the 
letters  from  some  patient? — Yes,  that  is  one. 

What  is  the  date  of  it ;  you  will  find  the  date  at  the  top,  I  think,  the 
3rd  October,  1908;  is  that  right? — There  is  another  date  here,  when 
the  letter  was  looked  up  again  on  the  6th  January,  1909. 

The  date  I  saw  was  the  3rd  October,  1908?— That  is  the  date  of  the 
letter. 

The  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — Let  us  keep  to  what  is  material.  Does 
this  prove  more  than  that  he  had  prescribed  for  people? 

Mr.  TOBIN — Nothing  else,  my  lord. 

The  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — You  can  take  it  generally  that  he  did  pre- 
scribe for  people.  (To  Witness) — Is  that  so? — I  have,  yes. 

You  had  communicated  with  the  patients  in  writing,  and  then  pre- 
scribed for  them? — Yes,  for  a  very  long  time. 

By  Mr.  TOBIN — Is  there  any  letter  that  you  know  of  which  refers  to 
anything  that  you  prescribed  containing  hyoscin? — There  should  be  plenty 
of  letters  with  registered  on  the  back,  "  Special  nerve  remedy."  There 
should  be  plenty  of  those;  it  would  not  refer  to  "  hyoscin." 

I  have  a  number  of  letters  here;  you  know  what  they  are? — Yes. 

They  relate  to  prescriptions? — Yes. 

The  point  is  this,  do  any  of  those  letters  that  I  have  got  here,  so  far 
as  you  know,  refer  to  prescriptions  made  up  by  you,  containing  hyoscin? — 
There  must  be  some  there. 

Where  did  you  get  this  hyoscin? 

The  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — Do  keep  to  one  thing  at  a  time.  I  want 
you  to  have  every  opportunity — it  is  most  important  that  you  should. 
If  there  is  anything  that  he  swears  relates  to  a  preparation  containing 
hyoscin  the  date  is  of  importance,  and  you  are  entitled  to  refer  to  it ; 
but  simply  to  say  that  you  have  a  number  of  letters  from  patients  carries 
it  no  further  than  you  have  got  in  the  general  answer — that  he  has  for 
many  years  prescribed  for  patients. 

Mr.  TOBIN — My  lord,  I  only  wanted  to  find  out  which  letter,  if  any, 
in  this  bundle  refers  to  some  prescription  containing  hyoscin.  (To 
Witness) — Can  you  tell  me  by  looking? — I  think  I  can. 

I  want  anything  which  refers  to  a  prescription  containing  hyoscin. 
Could  you  tell  by  looking? — I  should  by  looking. 

These  are  letters  from  patients,  are  they? — Yes.  (A  number  of  letters 
were  handed  to  the  witness.)  No,  these  are  not  the  letters  that  would 
refer  to  that. 

I  have  no  other  letters.  Were  there  any  other  letters? — They  were 
all  in  Munyons'  files,  not  my  files ;  those  come  from  my  personal  files. 

My  friend  Mr.  Muir  points  out  this1  one  to  me;  will  you  look  at  it. 
You  mentioned  yesterday  the  name  of  M'Sweeney.  I  do  not  know  whether 
that  letter — (handed) — bears  in  any  way  on  the  question  whether  you  pre- 
scribed hyoscin? — Yes,  that  is  right. 

By  the  Lord  CHIEF  JUSTICE — What  is  the  date? — 31st  January,  1910. 
You  will  see  "  nerve  tonic  "  there. 

By  Mr.  TOBIN — Do  you  remember  when  you  first  began  to  use  hyoscin  ? 
— About  seventeen  or  eighteen  years  ago,  when  I  was  preparing  remedies 
for  Munyons  in  the  laboratory. 

I  125 


Hawley  Harvey   Crippen. 

Hawley  Harvay  Crippen 

In  England  or  America? — In  America. 

You  did  use  it  in  America? — Yes,  in  a  similar  manner  to  -what  I  used 
it  here. 

This  is  a  letter  from  a  gentleman  named  M'Sweeney  in  August,  1909; 

that  cToes  not  refer  to  it  at  all,  of  course;  but  on  the  back  of  it 1 — On 

the  back  there  is  registered  the  prescription  and  the  date. 

On  the  back  there  is  this — "  January  10th,  Vilatiser;  31st,  4s.  6d. 
Sp.  1."  What  is  that?—"  Special." 

Is  that  your  handwriting? — No;  that  is  the  girl  who  registered  this 
for  me. 

"  4s.  6d.  Sp.  1  Blood  and  Nerve  Tonic."  What  do  you  say  that  was? 
— That  is  one  of  the  remedies  which  contained  hyoscin ;  there  should  be 
many  other  letters. 

The  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — I  will  admit  that,  as  far  as  it  goes,  but  it 
is  not  his  entry  at  all;  it  is  the  entry  of  somebody  else  that  she  sent  out 
a  special  nerve  tonic. 

By  Mr.  TOBIN — How  long  have  you  been  in  England — do  you  say  ten 
years?— More  than  that — twelve. 

Fifteen  years,  about? — Yes. 

Is  hyoscin  a  thing  that  you  regularly  kept  in  your  place,  or  only  very 
seldom? — No,  I  never  kept  it  until  lately. 

The  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — You  forget  his  answer  yesterday.  He  said 
that  he  bought  it  in  America,  but  never  in  England  until  19th  January. 
You  cannot  put  to  him  that  he  regularly  kept  it. 

By  Mr.  TOBEN — Why  did  you  buy  it  in  England  ? — Because  I  wanted  to 
prepare  some  special  nerve  remedies  for  some  very  obstinate  cases. 

Obstinate  cases  of  what? — Nerve  diseases,  spasmodic  ailments. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — Now,  Dr.  Crippen,  listen  to  me.  We 
have  heard  a  description  of  your  wife  and  her  habits  by  these  witnesses  as 
to  her  vivacious  manner  and  bright  spirits,  and  all  that.  Apart  from  the 
quarrels  with  you,  which  I  quite  understand,  you  agree'  in  that  description, 
I  understand? — Yes. 

To  her  friends  she  was  amiable  and  pleasant? — Yes,  to  the  outside 
world  she  was  extremely  amiable  and  pleasant. 

To  the  outside  world  extremely  amiable  and  popular? — Yes. 

As  she  has  been  described,  quite  bright  and  vivacious? — Occasionally 
she  had  quarrels  with  her  friends,  and  would  not  speak  to  them  for  a  time. 

This  skeleton  in  the  house  and  quarrel  with  you  were  not  known  to 
her  friends  I  gather? — Not  at  all. 

Was  she  fond  of  jewellery? — She  was  very  anxious  to  have  plenty  to 
wear. 

And  fond  of  dress  ? — Very  fond  of  fine  clothes  if  she  could  get  them. 

And  very  fond  of  jewellery? — Yes. 

You  came  back  on  the  evening  of  1st  February  and  found  she  had  gone. 
You  had  no  idea  of  her  going  until  you  found  she  had  gone? — No,  any  more 
than  she  had  done  before. 

She  had  threatened  you  so  often  before 'that  you  thought  it  was  only 
her  threat? — That  is  all. 

Did  you  examine  the  house? — Yes,  I  went  right  through  the  house. 
128 


Evidence  for  Defence. 

Hawley  Harvey  Crippen 

Were  her  clothes  in  the  usual  place,  hanging  up? — No;  in  the  back 
bedroom,  where  she  kept  most  of  her  clothes,  there  were  lots  of  clothes 
strewn  about. 

Are  you  able  to  tell  us  of  any  clothes  that  she  took  away? — No,  she 
had  an  immense  lot  of  clothes ;  I  could  not  define  any  special  clothes  that 
she  took. 

Are  you  able  to  tell  us  whether  on  that  evening  you  discovered  that 
any  trunk  had  been  taken  away? — No,  I  could  not  swear  to  that. 

Of  course,  it  is  extremely  important  for  your  own  interests  if  you  can 
do  it,  and  I  thought  I  had  better  ask  you.  Did  you  ascertain  that  night 
that  any  trunk  or  any  quantity  of  clothes  had  been  taken  from  the  house  ? — 
No,  I  did  not  see  any ;  I  mean  to  say,  I  did  not  miss  any. 

Except  the  few  rings  and  the  watch  that  she  had  before  her  marriage, 
according  to  you,  all  the  jewellery  was  left  behind? — Yes. 

She  had  been  wearing  this  jewellery  previously  on  her  visits  to  these 
people? — Yes. 

Where  did  you  find  that? — I  found  it  up  in  her  bedroom. 

Now,  I  want  to  put  to  you  again  specifically  what  Mr.  Muir  has  put 
to  you — that  your  wife,  having  threatened  many  times  to  go,  had  at  last 
gone;  did  you  take  no  steps  to  find  out  where  she  had  gone? — No,  I  did  not. 

Whether  she  had  gone  abroad  ? — No,  because  she  had  been  threatening 
to  go  so  often. 

But  you  took  no  steps? — No,  I  took  no  steps. 

Then  I  understand  you  to  say  that  you  took  no  steps  right  away  up 
to  the  8th  of  July?— No,  not  at  all. 

Now,  up  to  the  8th  of  July  I  understand  you  had  no  idea  of  changing 
your  name? — Not  at  all. 

Or  disguising   yourself? — Not   at   all. 

Or  disguising  Miss  Le  Neve? — Not  at  all. 

You  had  heard  nothing  to  arouse  your  suspicions  at  all? — No  charge 
was  made,  and  I  never  expected  one;  I  had  no  reason. 

Except  this — what  you  have  described  very  properly  as  a  mass  of  wicked 
lies — you  had  nothing  to  disturb  your  mind  at  all? — Nothing  to  disturb 
my  mind  in  any  way. 

Now,  I  want  you  to  tell  the  jury,  please,  the  upshot  of  what  Mr.  Dew 
said  to  you  on  the  8th  which  alarmed  you.  I  want  you  to  repeat  all  that 
he  said  which  you  say  alarmed  you  ? — Mr.  Dew  said  to  me  that  if  I  could 
not  find  my  wife  there  would  be  very  serious  trouble  in  store  for  me. 

Anything  else? — Well,  he  repeated  that  in  two  or  three  different  forms, 
but  that  is  the  gist  of  what  he  said  to  me. 

Do  you  represent  to  the  jury  that  a  woman  who  was,  we  will  say,  going 
wrong,  or  had  got  relations  with  another  man,  is  anything  uncommon  or 
extraordinary? — Do  I  think  it  is  anything  uncommon? 

Yes.  You  know  you  have  spoken  of  it  in  answer  to  Mr.  Muir  as  a 
scandal;  but,  assuming  that  your  wife  had  left  to  go  with  another  man, 
do  you  represent — you  are  a  man  of  the  world — that  that  is  anything 
uncommon? — I  do  not  think  it  is  anything  uncommon,  but  I  am  very 
sensitive  to  any  censure  or  any  scandal  of  that  kind. 

I  quite  understand  it,  and  you  tried  to  get  rid  of  that  scandal  by  what 

127 


Hawley  Harvey  Crippen. 

Hawley  Harvey  Crippen 

you  said.  I  want  you  to  tell  the  jury  what  was  the  charge  which  up  to 
that  time  you  thought  might  be  brought  against  you  when  Mr.  Dew  told 
you  that  there  would  be  trouble  on  8th  July? — I  did  not  think  there  was 
any  specific  charge,  except  that  I  might  be  arrested  and  held  on  suspicion. 
I  do  not  know  law  at  all ;  but,  of  course,  I  have  been  a  reader  of  romances 
to  a  great  extent,  and  I  had  an  idea  that  I  might  be  arrested  and  held  on 
suspicion  until  she  was  found. 

You  ask  the  jury  to  believe  that  that  was  your  motive  in  going  away — 
because  you  thought  you  might  be  arrested  and  held  on  suspicion? — On 
suspicion,  yes. 

I  gather  that  up  to  Dew's  coming  to  your  house  you  had  no  suspicion 
or  fear  of  any  kind? — Not  at  all,  not  the  slightest. 

Now,  I  also  understand  you  to  tell  Mr.  Muir  that  if  those  pyjamas 
were  bought  after  1905,  how  they  got  into  your  cellar  you  cannot  explain? 
— No,  I  have  no  idea. 

Now,  I  must  ask  you  a  question  or  two  about  the  last  part  of  your 
evidence  to  Mr.  Muir,  and  also  your  answers  to  Mr.  Tobin.  Did  you  keep 
a  prescription  book  or  not  ? — No,  I  never  kept  a  prescription  book. 

Did  you  write  out  any  prescriptions? — No. 

Never? — Homoeopathic  physicians  do  not  write  out  prescriptions. 

I  did  not  ask  you  about  what  homoeopathic  physicians  did.  When  you 
talk  of  prescriptions  for  patients  you  mean  sending  out  medicines,  do  you? 
— I  mean  preparing  and  sending  medicines.  The  word  "  prescription  "  is 
a  wrong  word. 

Now,  you  told  us  yesterday  that  you  never  bought  any  hyoscin  in 
England  until  19tIT January? — Yes. 

Did  you  ever  buy  any  afterwards? — No. 

You  were  in  England  for  nearly  six  months,  from  19th  January  to  8th 
of  July?— Yes. 

And  you  did  not  buy  any  during  that  time? — No. 

Were  you  going  on  prescribing  this  remedy? — Yes. 

You  bought  no  more? — No,  there  was  still  some  left. 

I  am  not  speaking  only  of  what  was  left,  but  of  the  things  that  were 
made  up.  Was  the  cabinet  locked? — No,  the  cabinet  was  not  locked. 

Was  there  any  other  poisonous  stuff — I  mean  drugs  which  might  be 
poisonous,  but  used  for  medicine — in  the  cabinet  besides  the  hyoscin? — 
There  was  some  aconite,  some  gelsemium,  some  belladonna* 

All  left  by  you?— All  left  by  me,  yes. 

Now,  you  told  Mr.  Muir  that  you  spent  the  £80  and  the  £115  partly 
in  advertisements — the  greater  part,  you  said? — The  greater  part  in 
advertising. 

Have  you  any  account  with  anybody  for  the  advertisements? — The 
books  will  all  be  found  in  my  office. 

I  am  not  speaking  of  the  books  in  your  office;  I  am  speaking  of  the 
evidence  here.  Have  you  any  one  who  will  come  and  speak  to  your  spend- 
ing money  in  advertisements? — Well,  outside  the  advertising,  I  can  give 
the  names  of  the  papers;  will  that  do? 

You  can  do  what  you  like.  I  am  asking  you  this  question.  If  you 
know  how  much  you  paid  to  any  particular  man  it  would  be  of  some 
128 


Evidence  for  Defence. 

Hawley  Harvey  Crippen 

importance  to  you.     Are  any  of  the  people  here  to  whom  you  paid  money? 
— In  Court,  no. 

Are  any  of  the  people  to  whom  you  paid  money  after  31st  January,  or 
2nd  of  February  to  be  quite  accurate,  coming  as  your  witnesses  or  not? — 
No,  I  am  not  calling  such  witnesses. 

You  told  Mr.  Muir,  and  I  think  you  told  me  too,  that  the  first  you 
heard  of  Mr.  Newton  was  by  telegram? — Yes. 

At  Quebec?— Yes. 

Did  you  know  him  before? — Well,  I  knew  him  as  a  reputable 

I  did  not  ask  you  whether  you  knew  him  by  reputation ;  did  you  know 
him  personally? — I  met  him  about  twelve  years  ago,  I  think,  in  opposition 
to  me  in  a  case  I  had  at  Marlborough  Street. 

Nobody  is  disputing  his  ability  or  hisi  position — not  the  least  in  the 
world.  I  am  referring  to  an  answer  which  I  did  not  understand  at  first. 
You  said  you  got  a  telegram  from  Mr.  Newton? — Yes. 

Do  you  know  how  he  came  to  telegraph  to  you? — Yes,  one  of  my 
friends  asked  him  to  telegraph  to  me. 

Do  you  know  who  that  friend  is? — Yes. 

You  can  give  his  name  if  necessary;  I  do  not  ask  for  more  than  that? 
—Yes. 

Then  having  received  a  telegram  from  him,  you  replied  to  it? — I 
immediately  replied  asking  him  to  conduct  my  defence. 

And,  as  you  have  told  Mr.  Muir  and  Mr.  Tobin,  since  you  have  been 
home  you  have  told  him  everything  you  could  ? — Told  him  everything,  and 
left  everything  entirely  in  hie  hands. 

As  you  have  told  us,  of  course,  you  know  the  gravity  of  this  charge, 
and  that  if  you  found  your  wife  there  is  an  end  to  the  whole  thing? — Yes. 

Why  did  you  not  let  that  advertisement  that  you  drafted  on  8th  of 
July  go  to  the  Press? — Because  I 

Just  think  before  you  answer.  You  are  urged  by  Dew  to  find  your 
wife? — To  do  the  best  I  could. 

You  believing  her  to  be  alive? — Believing  her  to  be  alive. 

You  draft  the  advertisement? — Yes. 

Why  did  you  not  send  it  to  the  Press? — I  left  it  there  because  I  left  it 
behind  me  when  I  went  away,  and  I  thought  it  was  no  use  my  bothering. 

I  have  put  this  to  you  in  order  to  understand  your  position,  and  I  am 
anxious  to  do  so.  The  first  suspicion  that  passed  your  mind  was  on  the 
8th?— Yes. 

After  this  long  interview  you  were  desired  by  Dew  to  find  your  wife, 
and  an  advertisement  is  drawn  up;  why  did  you  not  advertise  for  her — 
you  had  not  changed  your  name  then ;  why  did  not  you  advertise  for  her? — 
Because  I  dropped  the  matter  at  once  when  I  went  away. 

But  you  had  not  gone  on  the  8th,  and  you  said  to  Mr.  Muir  that  you 
did  not  make  up  your  mind  to  go  until  the  morning  of  the  9th? — I  did 
not  think  they  would  bother  with  me  after  I  got  out  of  England. 

You  did  not  think  if  you  got  out  of  England  the  police  would  trouble 
any  more  about  it? — I  did  not  think  they  would  trouble  any  more;  I  did 
not  think  the  case  was  of  sufficient  importance  to  them  for  that. 

Why  did  you  go  by  Antwerp? — Because  I  thought  I  could  get  a  cheap 
trip  that  way;  in  fact,  it  was  a  very  cheap  trip. 

129 


Hawley  Harvey   Crippen. 

Hawley  Harvey  Crippen 

Did  you  find  out  that  there  was  a  boat  going  from  Antwerp? — Oh,  I 
Lad  been  that  way  before. 

Did  you  know  when  the  boat  sailed? — No,  I  did  not  know  till  after  I 
was  there. 

After  you  disguised  Miss  Le  Neve,  as  you  told  us,  you  passed  under 
a  false  name? — Yes,  after  that  time. 

[A  communication  from  the  jury  was  handed  to  his  lordship.] 

The  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — Your  question,  sir,  is  a  little  argumentative, 
but  I  will  put  it  to  him. 

(To  Witness) — You  say  that  you  remember  Hempel  &  Arndt's  book? — 
Yes. 

Which  you  have  not  seen  for  fifteen  years? — Yes. 

Do  you  remember  what  the  contents  of  the  book  were  as  regards 
quantities  or  anything  of  that  kind? — Do  you  mean  as  to  hyoscin? 

Yes,  I  do? — No,  I  cannot  remember  now. 

What? — I  cannot  remember  what  the  doses  were. 

I  will  put  the  question  suggested  (a  very  proper  question)  in  a  different 
way.  Can  you  tell  us  any  work  which  tells  people  the  safe  quantity  of 
hyoscin  that  can  be  used  by  the  mouth  as  distinguished  from  the  dangerous 
quantity? — I  will  deal  with  it  in  this  way.  I  may  say  there  are  what  we 
may  call  two  classes  of  medicines,  allopathic  and  homoeopathic. 

You  had  better  answer  the  question  first? — I  cannot  answer  it. 

Can  you  mention  any  book  which  tells  you  the  safe  quantity  of  hyoscin 
to  be  used? — Yes,  the  British  Pharmacopoeia  tells  the  safe  quantity. 

A  JUROR — I  understand  that  the  prisoner  said  that  he  got  the  informa- 
tion about  hyoscin  from  this  particular  publication  that  he  has  men- 
tioned  

The  LORD  CHEEP  JUSTICE — Yes. 

The  JUROR — What  we  want  to  know  is,  ii  he  can  remember  after  all 
these  years  the  particular  quantity  of  hyoscin  that  would  be  safely  used  in 
administering  the  drug. 

The  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — Quite  right,  but  that  is  a  matter  of  comment. 
If  we  are  to  have  that,  we  must  have  the  book  here. 

(To  Witness) — Do  you  know  whether  that  book  gave  you  the  safe 
quantity  or  not? — They  would  only  recommend 

Do  you  know? — They  do  not  recommend  the  doses  in  those  books.  If 
you  would  not  mind  my  explaining,  I  could  put  it  very  clearly. 

You  may  explain  if  you  wish? — The  allopathic  books  give  you  a 
specific  dose,  but  the  homoeopathic  booka  simply  say,  "  an  infinitesimal 
dose,"  which  means  a  very  minute  dose  like  the  10,000th  of  a  grain. 

Will  you  call  attention  to  any  book  that  recommends  hyoscin  as  a  drug 
to  be  taken  internally?  You  say  Hempel  &  Arndt's  book  did  so;  if  so,  you 
must  produce  it? — That  is  the  only  one  I  can  think  of  at  the  present  time. 

Dr.  GILBERT  MAITLAND  TURNBULL,  examined  by  Mr.  TOBIN — I  am, 
director  of  the  Pathological  Institute  at  the  London  Hospital.  The  con- 
ducting of  post-mortem  examinations  falls  to  my  department.  I  am  Master 
of  Arts,  a  Doctor  of  Medicine,  a  Bachelor  of  Surgery  of  the  University  of 
Oxford,  a  member  of  the  Royal  College  of  Surgeons,  London,  a  licentiate 
130 


Evidence  for  Defence. 

DP.  Turnbull 

of  the  Royal  College  of  Physicians,  and  I  am  also  a  member  of  the  Patho- 
logical Society  of  Great  Britain,  which  is  the  largest  pathological  institute 
in  the  United  Kingdom.  In  1907,  1908,  and  1909  the  average  number  of 
post-mortem  examinations  made  under  my  supervision  was  1251  each  year. 
Complete  microscopic  investigations  are  carried  out  under  my  supervision. 
I  devote  the  whole  of  my  time  to  that  and  to  the  microscopic  examination 
of  similar  material  that  is  sent  down  by  the  surgeons.  I  have  on  three 
occasions — 9th  September,  15th  and  17th  October — seen  the  piece  of  skin 
and  flesh  that  is  now  shown  to  me.  On  9th  September  a  slice  about  4£ 
inches  long  was  made  across  that  piece  of  skin  by  Mr.  Pepper.  That  slice 
goes  across  the  right  hand  of  what  has  been  called  the  horse-shoe  depression 
as  the  skin  lies  on  the  tray.  The  cut  does  not  go  across  the  folded  side 
of  the  so-called  horse  shoe  which  Mr.  Pepper  thinks  is  a  scar — it  goes 
across  and  beyond  on  each  side  of  the  so-called  scar.  There  is  another  cut 
through  this  other  limb  of  the  depression  which  was  made  by  Dr.  Spilsbury ; 
I  think  it  is  said  that  Dr.  Spilsbury  made  it  the  same  day.  That  cut  goes 
beyond  the  fold  on  either  side,  and  goes  outside  it  on  each  side.  I  have 
examined  the  portions  removed  by  this  cut  and  a  third  cut  that  was  made. 
First  of  all,  one  single  long  cut  was  made  at  our  request.  There  was  a 
piece  removed,  up  by  the  fold,  and  then  a  second  piece  from  the  so-called 
scar,  and  then  a  third  piece  from  the  edge,  completely  outside  the  scar. 
I  have  examined  those  three  bits  with  the  microscope. 

Does  your  microscopical  examination  enable  you  to  say  whether  that 
is  a  scar  in  fact,  or  which  one  of  those  bits  was  cut? — It  enables  me  to 
say  that  it  cannot  possibly  be  a  scar.  I  have  formed  that  opinion  because 
of  certain  structures  which  are  found  in  this  area  which  is  described  as  a 
soar,  and  which  have  never  been  found  in  a  scar  before.  First  of  all,  there 
are  two  groups  of  hair  follicles.  In  one  group  there  are  three  hair  follicles, 
and  in  the  other  there  are  two  hair  follicles.  A  hair  follicle  is  the  sheath 
round  the  hair.  In  these  follicles  or  sheaths  the  hairs  are  also  to  be  seen 
cut  in  cross-sections.  In  addition  to  that,  one  finds  in  two  of  the  sections 
in  relation  to  these  hairs,  as  one  would  expect,  a  large  piece  of  sebaceous 
gland,  and  then  another  large  piece  in  another  section  of  the  same  sebaceous 
or  fatty  gland. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — In  all  that  I  am  saying  about  the  hair 
follicles  I  am  referring  to  what  I  discovered  on  the  piece  which  isi  cut  through 
the  mark.  These  are  the  structures — the  hair  follicles  containing  hairs  and 
the  sebaceous  gland.  There  is  another  portion  of  a  fatty  tissue  I  might 
mention,  I  think,  because  it  is  a  most  important  landmark,  as  it  could  not 
be  present  in  a  stretched  scar — a  bay  or  outer  process-  of  the  fatty  tissue 
which  lies  below  this  true  skin  which  is  found  within  the  area,  described  as 
a  scar.  That  could  not  exist,  and  it  is  an  important  landmark,  because  it 
may  be  found  in  the  sections  of  all  the  six  slices  that  have  been  cut.  This 
portion  of  fatty  tissue  coming  into  the  true  skin,  as  it  is  called — we  could 
tell  by  that  landmark  very  clearly ;  we  could  trace  through  each  of  the  six 
sections  any  structure  that  we  see  in  one.  Six  strips  have  been  taken 
from  the  piece  cut  along  the  mark,  and  they  all  show  the  fatty  tissue. 

Examination  continued — Is  there  any  other  reason  why  you  say  that 
in  your  opinion  that  cannot  have  been  a  scar? — One  of  these  reasons  would 
be  sufficient. 

131 


Hawley  Harvey  Crippen. 


Dr.  Turnbull 


You  are  asked  if  there  is  any  other.  If  there  is  another  weaker  reason 
I  will  not  trouble,  but  are  those  the  best? — Those  are  the  best,  and  in  my 
opinion  they  are  conclusive.  If  that  mark  on  one  side  is  not  in  fact  a 
scar  it  was  caused  by  folding  of  the  skin  by  pressure,  which  allowed  the  skin 
in  that  area  to  get  somewhat  dried;  the  juices,  as  it  were,  are  somewhat 
dried.  It  is  quite  a  practicable  thing  to  handle  that  bit  of  skin  to  indicate 
how  it  was  folded.  [The  witness  indicated  how  it  was  folded.]  That,  in 
my  opinion,  would  account  for  the  mark  which  has  been  called  a  scar. 
There  are  markings  near  the  so-called  scar  to  indicate  that  there  must 
have  been  pressure  of  some  material.  As  to  the  pattern  of  the  material,  it  is 
visible  to  the  naked  eye,  as  I  explain  to  the  jury.  [The  witness  explained 
to  the  jury.] 

Take  now  the  clean  long  cut  right  through  the  area  of  the  so-called 
scar  and  beyond  it  on  each  side — have  you  any  remark  to  make  about  the 
cut  edges  shown  by  that  long  straight  cut? — What  I  should  like  to  say 
is  that  taking  the  two  cuts,  the  one  that  passes  through  one  groove  and  the 
other  that  passes  through  the  other  groove,  examining  the  cut  edges  of 
these  cuts  in  both  grooves,  one  finds  the  same  appearance. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — You  say  that,  taking  right  through  the 
area  of  the  so-called  scar  and  the  cut  of  what  is  called  the  fold,  you  find 
the  same  appearance? — That  is  it. 

Examination  continued — If  one  cut  had  been  really  through  a  scar, 
would  you  expect  the  same  appearance  in  both  cuts  or  not? — No. 

What  different  appearance  would  there  have  been  in  the  out  through  the 
so-called  scar,  if  it  really  was  a  scar? — There  would  be  no  reason  for  a  scar 
to  have  this  clear,  transparent,  horny  appearance  that  both  these  cut 
surfaces  have.  That  is  not  the  appearance  of  a  scar  in  section  at  all ;  that 
is  due  to  this  drying  from  the  folding. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — If  it  was  a  scar  I  would  not  have  expected 
the  horny  appearance  which  I  find  in  both  cuts. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  MUIR — I  am  a  qualified  surgeon,  but  I  never 
do  any  surgery;  I  am  a  specialist,  and  I  only  do  this  work.  I  cannot  say 
definitely  what  part  of  the  body  that  piece  of  skin  comes  from,  but  I  have 
a  very  good  idea.  I  think  that  the  best  explanation  is  that  it  comes  from 
the  lowest  part  of  the  abdomen. 

Then  you  do  agree  that  it  cornea  from  the  lower  part? — I  will  not 
disagree. 

Do  you,  with  your  great  experience,  agree  that  it  does  come  from  the 
lower  part  of  the  abdomen? — I  will  admit 

I  am  not  talking  about  what  you  admit;  you  are  not  here  to  make 
admissions.  You  are  asked  to  say,  with  your  great  experience,  to  the  best 
of  your  honest  judgment,  from  what  part  that  wa«i  taken? — Then  I  would 
say  the  abdomen. 

The  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — Please  remember  that  you  are  not  here  as 
an  advocate,  but  as  a  witness,  and  the  word  "  admit  "  is  not  the  right  word 
to  use. 

By  Mr.  MUIR — When  I  first  examined  that  piece  of  flesh  I  formed  a 
different  opinion  as  to  the  part  of  the  body  it  had  come  from.  I  put  that 
opinion  in  writing,  but  I  did  not  give  a  definite  opinion.  I  have  never 
132 


Evidence  for  Defence. 

Dr.  Turnbull 

beei  present  while  Mr.  Pepper,  Dr.  Spilsbury,  or  Dr.  Willcox  have  been 
•sxajained  or  cross-examined. 

Was  it  by  your  -wish  that  you  were  not  present? — No,  I  cannot  say 
thai — well,  I  think  I  ought  to  modify  that.  It  was  not  by  my  wish,  but 
I  tkink  I  had  said  before,  at  the  very  beginning,  when  I  was  asked  to 
undertake  this,  that  I  hoped  it  would  not  mean  having  to  give  evidence. 

Did  you  give  your  first  opinion  on  that  understanding? — I  had  been 
premised  that  I  would  not  be  called  at  all  as  a  witness. 

You  gave  your  first  opinion  upon  the  understanding  that  you  would 
not  be  called  as  a  witness  1 — No,  I  would  not  say  that.  I  went  to  see  these 
remains  on  that  understanding.  I  had  been  promised  at  the  very  start 
that  I  would  not  be  called  as  a  witness.  Since  then  Mr.  Pepper,  Dr. 
Willcox,  and  Dr.  Spilsbury  have  been  cross-examined  upon  what  was 
suggested  in  my  opinion.  I  have  not  been  present  to  hear  the  reasons  they 
gave  for  their  opinions,  but  I  had  a  copy  of  their  depositions  sent  to  me. 

After  you  had  seen  their  answers  to  the  questions  put  upon  your 
opinion  did  you  alter  your  opinion? — Not  because  of  any  such  questions — 
oh,  it  must  be  so. 

Please  answer  my  question? — I  altered  my  opinion  considerably  after 
the  second  time  I  examined  that  piece. 

I  asked  you  whether  you  altered  your  opinion  after  you  had  seen  the 
reasons  they  gave  for  their  opinions? — Yes,  it  must  have  been  after  that. 

In  your  opinion  which  you  first  gave,  did  you  state  that  the  aponeurosis 
was  absent  from  that  piece  of  flesh? — No,  I  said  that  I  thought  there  was 
an  absence  of  the  aponeurosis  characteristic  of  the  abdomen.  There  were 
aponeuroses  there.  My  opinion  now  is  that  that  is  from  the  lower  part  of 
the  abdominal  wall. 

Did  you  find  there  the  abdominal  muscle? — Which  abdominal  muscle? 

The  rectus  abdominis? — Yes,   I  think  so. 

Is  that  muscle  in  life  attached  to  the  pubic  bone  by  a  tendon? — Yes. 

Do  you  find  there  part  of  the  tendon  which  had  attached  that  muscle 
to  the  pubic  bone? — I  had  not  seen  that. 

Do  you  see  it  now? — No.  [Dr.  Spil&bury  pointed  out  what  was  sug- 
gested as  the  tendon.] 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — Now,  what  is  your  answer? — It  is  not 
where  I  should  expect  it  from  the  dissections  I  have  made. 

You  are  asked  whether  you  can  see  the  presence  or  traces  of  the  presence 
of  the  tendon  which  attaches  the  muscle  to  the  pubic  bone.  Your  last 
answer  is  that  the  abdominal  muscle  is  attached  to  the  pubic  bone  by  the 
tendon.  Do  you  say  that  it  is  there  or  is  not? — I  do  not  think  this  is  it. 

You  say  you  do  not  find  it? — There  is  a  tendon  there,  and  if  that  is 
the  rectus  it  is. 

Please  answer  this  one  way  or  the  other;  it  is  most  important.  Do 
you  find  that  tendon  there  or  not? — Yes. 

By  Mr.  Mum — Is  that  tendon  attached  to  a  muscle  which  is  at  present 
loose  behind  the  piece  of  skin? — Yes. 

If  you  pull  that  muscle  down  to  what  in  life  would  be  the  bottom  of 
the  piece  of  flesh,  does  it  come  into  the  position  in  which  it  would  be 
attached  to  the  pubic  bone  ?  Pull  it  down  now  and  then  answer  my  ques- 

133 


Hawley  Harvey  Crippen. 

Dr.  Turnbull 

tion? — It  does  not  naturally;  it  pulls  it  out  of  position.      You  can  pill  it 
into  that  position. 

If  you  pull  it  up  as  far  as  it  will  go  in  the  other  direction,  ii  the 
direction  of  the  navel,  in  what  position  is  it? — It  goes  right  up,  marly 
4J  inches  up. 

Would  it  then  be  behind  the  navel? — It  might  be  behind  the  navel. 

Have  you  any  doubt  that  this  piece  of  skin  is  part  of  the  abdomen  ? — 
Yes. 

You  have? — Yes. 

The  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — Do  listen,  Dr.  Turnbull. 

By  Mr.  Mum — What  part  of  the  body  do  you  suggest  it  comes  fiom 
if  not  from  the  abdomen? — I  have  told  you,  and  I  do  not  think  you  can 
have  a  better  explanation. 

What  part  does  it  come  from  if  not  from  the  abdomen? — From  ihe 
upper  part  of  the  thigh. 

The  LOED  CHIEF  JUSTICE — I  am  in  a  great  difficulty  here.  I  understood 
this  witness  to  say  in  examination-in-chief  that  in  his  opinion  this  piece 
of  skin  did  come  from  the  abdominal  wall.  That  was  the  best  suggestion 
he  could  make.  When  I  misunderstood  Mr.  Tobin's  cross-examination,  and 
thought  that  he  suggested  that  it  came  from  another  part  of  the  body, 
Mr.  Tobin  said  that  I  was  wrong.  I  think  now  we  must  proceed  on  the 
hypothesis  that  it  does  come  from  the  abdominal  wall,  in  accordance  with 
the  evidence  of  the  other  witnesses. 

By  Mr.  Mura — Now,  will  you  kindly  read  what  you  said  in  your 
original  report  about  this  piece  of  flesh,  not  coming  from  the  abdominal 
wall? — "  We  are  of  opinion  that  that  skin  does  not  come  from  the  abdomen 
for  the  following  reasons."  (Reads.)  That  is  a  joint  opinion  along  with 
Dr.  Wall. 

You  now  tell  us  that  the  characteristic  aponeurosis  is  present  in  that 
piece  of  skin? — The  aponeurosis,  I  think,  is  characteristic. 

Was  Dr.  Wall  also  promised  that  he  would  not  be  called  as  a  witness 
before  he  signed  that  report? — No,  he  was  not. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — I  should  say  that  I  had  had  twenty 
minutes'  examination  of  this  specimen  with  Dr.  Wall  before  I  wrote  the 
report  in  which  I  said  that  there  was  no  aponeurosis  present. 

By  Mr.  Mura — Do  you  find  on  the  side  of  that  piece  of  flesh,  which 
would  be  the  left  side  in  life,  some  transverse  muscles  on  the  deepest  surfaoe 
of  the  specimen? — Yes. 

The  fibres  running  in  two  directions,  one  super-imposed  on  the  other? 
— In  one  direction,  certainly. 

Do  those  correspond  with  the  fibres  of  the  internal  oblique  muscle  and 
the  transversalis  muscle  of  the  abdomen? — They  could,  I  think. 

But  do  they? — It  is  really  impossible  to  say  that.  They  might  corre- 
spond, but  they  are  so  altered  that  you  cannot  see. 

If  they  do  correspond,  would  that  not  show  beyond  question  that  they 
came  from  the  abdominal  wall? — Yes. 

Do  you  find  a  mark  on  that  piece  of  skin  which  shows  the  incision 
made  for  the  purpose  of  an  operation? — No. 

Do  you  know  the  American  method  of  stitching  the  abdominal  wall 
134 


Evidence  for  Defence. 

Dr.  Turnbull 

•where  it  is  cut  open  for  the  purposes  of  an  operation,  the  method  by  which 
the  stitches  do  not  come  to  the  surface  except  at  the  beginning  and  at  the 
end? — There  are  several  methods. 

So  that  there  would  be  only  one  stitch  there  if  that  method  of  operation 
were  used?— Yes.  I  did  not  find  the  mark  of  a  stitch  there.  In  opening 
the  wall  of  the  abdomen  for  the  purpose  of  an  operation,  first  of  all  the 
incision  is  made,  then  the  wall  is  pulled  asunder,  the  organs  are  removed, 
and  the  abdominal  wall  is  sewn  up.  It  is  not  a  common  thing  for  part 
of  the  epidermis  to  be  enfolded  when  the  wall  is  sewn  up  again,  but  I  have 
seen  it  happen  in  a  few  cases,  very  few.  The  surgeon  always  takes  some 
instruments  and  turns  up  the  edges  to  prevent  that  after  he  has  put  in 
the  suture. 

I  put  it  to  you  that  it  is  not  at  all  uncommon  in  that  condition? — I 
do  not  agree.  Of  course,  it  does  happen,  and  I  have  seen  the  edges  turned 
in. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — Not  quite  the  edges  turned  in,  but  the 
result  of  the  edges  being  turned  in  is  that  a  bit  of  the  epidermis  gets  enfolded 
or  below  the  folds  of  the  scar? — I  have  only  read  of  that. 

By  Mr.  Mum — You  have  never  seen  it? — No. 

So  that  you  are  not  familiar  with  the  appearance  of  such  a  case? — Yes, 
but  not  from  operation ;  from  accidents  it  is  very  familiar. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — I  am  familiar  with  the  appearance  of  an 
accident  scar,  not  an  operation  scar — where  the  epidermis  has  got  enfolded 
or  below  the  folds  of  the  scar. 

By  Mr.  Mum — I  am  talking  about  an  operation  scar? — The  appear- 
ances are  similar. 

How  do  you  know  if  you  have  never  seen  them? — I  have  read  about 
them.  I  have  never  seen  an  operation  scar  where  part  of  the  epidermis 
has  been  enfolded  in  the  wound. 

Then  you  cannot  tell  me  what  takes  place  when  such  a  wound  heals  ? — 
Yes,  I  have  seen  this  phenomenon  of  which  you  are  speaking  when,  for 
instance,  a  man  has  fallen  upon  his  hand  here  and  cut  his  hand,  causing 
an  incision  like  an  operation,  and  it  has  been  allowed  to  heal,  and  he  has 
got  such  an  included  epidermis. 

That  is  the  nearest  you  have  ever  come  to  seeing  such  a  case? — Yes. 

Now,  I  put  it  to  you  that  in  such  a  case  as  I  have  described  the 
inclusion  of  epidermis  in  the  incision  made  for  the  purposes  of  an  operation, 
was  easily  mistaken  for  sebaceous  glands? — For  one  sebaceous  gland,  but 
not  easily. 

For  sebaceous  glands  is  my  question? — No. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — What  Mr.  Muir  is  putting  to  you  is*  that 
where  you  get  the  flesh  included  you  might  find  one  or  more  sebaceous 
glands,  what  I  will  call  in  between  the  lips  of  the  scar? — No,  I  would  not 
agree  with  that  at  all.  I  think  what  he  puts  is  that  the  appearance  of 
such  an  incision  might  be  mistaken  for  a  sebaceous  gland.  Is  that  so? 

Not  for  one  sebaceous  gland,  but  for  sebaceous  glands.  Sebaceous 
glands  are  distributed  over  the  epidermis,  are  they  not? — Yes.  Would  you 
mind  making  this  clearer  to  me? 

136 


Hawley  Harvey  Crippen. 


Dr.  Turnbull 


You  have  said  that  it  might  be  mistaken  for  one  sebaceous  gland,  but 
not  for  more.  We  do  not  understand  what  you  mean  by  that? — I  know 
the  appearance  of  these  inclusions,  because  I  know  that  the  accidental  ones 
are  similar  to  those  in  operations.  I  have  never  seen  one  in  an  operation 
scar,  but  I  have,  of  course,  read  about  them.  Such  inclusion  might  by 
somebody  unaccustomed  to  the  microscope  be  mistaken. 

By  Mr.  Mum — We  are  not  talking  about  people  unaccustomed  to  the 
microscope.  We  are  talking  about  people  like  Mr.  Spilsbury.  I  am  sug- 
gesting to  you  that  persons  accustomed  to  the  microscope  might  be  deceived  ? 
— No,  I  will  not  agree  with  that.  The  epidermis  is  composed  of  cells, 
which  are  called  epithelial  cells.  I  do  not  think  that  those  cells  might  be 
mistaken  for  sebaceous  glands.  The  cells  lining  hair  follicles  have  a 
similar  appearance. 

If  the  epithelial  cells  were  included  in  a  healed  scar,  might  they  not  be 
mistaken  for  sebaceous  glands  or  for  hair  follicles? — Not  for  hair  follicles 
with  the  hair,  because  the  hair  has  such  a  very  special  structure  that  you 
could  not  mistake  it  for  anything  else. 

Not  if  included? — Not  in  an  old  scar,  no.  I  do  not  think  you  under- 
stand. 

I  think  I  do.       Pray  give  me  the  credit  for  understanding  it. 
By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — Do  not  get  into  controversy  with  Mr. 
Muir;  do  not  suggest  that  he  does  not  understand  what  he  is  putting.     You 
say  not  hair  follicles? — No. 

By  Mr.  Muni — I  say  no,  because  there  is  no  resemblance;  they  would 
not  be  at  all  alike. 

What  is  the  difference? — Between  a  hair  follicle  with  a  hair  and  an 

included 

A  hair  follicle  without  a  hair;  I  am  talking  of  the  hair  follicle,  not 
the  hair.  Might  an  epithelial  cell  not  be  mistaken  for  a  hair  follicle  in- 
cluded in  a  clean  scar? — Would  you  repeat  the  question  to  me? 

No,  sir,  I  will  not.  The  horny  appearance  in  that  is  due,  you  say, 
to  drying? — Yes.  The  first  occasion  we  saw  it  was  on  9th  September.  It 
had  been  out  of  the  grave  since  14th  July.  I  cannot  remember  what 
happened  to  it  in  between  those  two  dates. 

Might  it  have  dried  between  those  two  dates? — No — the  skin  might 
have  dried,  yes. 

Re-examined  by  Mr.  TOBIN — I  was  not  present  here  in  Court  the  first 
three  days.  My  time  is  valuable,  and  I  have  duties  to  attend  to.  I  was 
supplied  by  Mr.  Newton  with  copies  of  the  depositions,  and  I  have  been 
supplied  daily  during  the  progress  of  this  trial  with  copies  of  the  evidence 
of  the  medical  gentlemen  at  the  trial. 

From  start  to  finish,  as  regards  the  scar,  have  you  ever  wavered  in 
your  opinion  that  that  was  not  a  scar? — No. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — You  said  in  your  first  report  that  you  and 
Dr.  Wall  were  of  opinion  that  no  aponeurosis  was  present? — No  charac- 
teristic aponeurosis.  May  I  read  my  report  again?  "  The  aponeuroses, 
so  characteristic  of  the  abdominal  wall,  were  not  present."  I  definitely 
wrote  a  different  opinion  after  the  second  examination  on  15th  March. 

Up  to  that  time  you  had  let  the  advisers  be  under  the  opinion  that 
136 


Evidence  for  Defence. 

Dr.  Turnbull 

what  you  thought  was  the  absence  of  aponeurosis  was  conclusive  against 
it  being  the  lower  part  of  the  stomach? — No,  I  had  simply  said 

Do  attend.  Had  you  told  them  you  had  changed  your  opinion  before 
18th  October? — No. 

Up  to  that  time  you  had  let  Mr.  Newton  and  the  advisers  be  under  the 
impression  contained  in  your  first  opinion? — Yes — oh,  no,  I  beg  your 
pardon — I  had  asked  Mr.  Newton  before  if  we  could  not  see  the  specimen 
again  to  confirm  our  opinion. 

When  did  you  first  communicate  to  Mr.  Newton  that  that  opinion  of 
yours  had  changed? — On  15th  October. 

Now,  I  want  Mr.  Pepper  to  go  beside  the  witness.  It  is  unfortunate 
that  you  did  not  hear  Mr.  Pepper's  evidence — I  do  not  say  that  it  is  your 
fault  at  all.  In  the  first  place,  let  me  ask  this,  have  you  yourself  seen  old 
scars  of  ovarian  operations? — Yes. 

Now,  Mr.  Pepper,  will  you  kindly  point  out  to  the  witness  the  three 
dimensions  that  you  spoke  of,  and  let  Dr.  Turnbull  see  what  you  mean. 
[Mr.  Pepper  did  so.]  Now,  having  had  that  pointed  out  by  Mr.  Pepper, 
I  want  to  ask  this,  is  it  or  is  it  not  characteristic  of  abdominal  operations 
that  the  scar  is  wider  at  the  bottom  than  at  the  top? 

Mr.  PEPPER — Certainly. 

The  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — I  did  not  ask  you,  Dr.  Pepper.  I  was  asking 
Dr.  Turnbull. 

Mr.  PEPPER — I  beg  your  pardon,  my  lord. 

The  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — Perhaps  you  had  better  leave  Dr.  Turnbull 
now.  Before  you  go  you  might  point  out  the  three  points  we  were  referring 
to.  [Mr.  Pepper  showed  by  marking  with  pins  the  three  positions,  and 
the  plate  was  handed  to  the  jury.]  Now,  Dr.  Turnbull,  is  it  in  accordance 
with  your  experience  that  the  mark  of  a  scar  from  ovariotomy  is  wider  at 
the  bottom  of  the  abdomen,  or  the  lower  part  of  the  abdomen,  than  it  is 
higher  up? — No.  I  have  read  that  one  of  the  witnesses  here  said  that  he 
had  performed  many  hundreds  of  operations,  and  that  the  scar,  as  a  rule, 
was  wider  at  the  bottom  than  it  was  at  the  top.  I  do  not  agree  with  that. 
I  have  never  performed  any  operations  myself,  but  I  have  examined  scars 
of  ovariotomy. 

You  say  that  that  is  untrue? — No,  you  asked  for  my  experience;  I  do 
not  say  it  is  untrue.  It  is  not  my  experience  that  the  scar  is  generally 
wider  at  the  bottom  than  at  the  top. 

Does  the  fact  that  there  is  that  difference  of  what  I  will  call  a  mark 
affect  your  judgment  at  all? — Yes,  if  it  is  said  to  be  a  stretched  scar,  I 
should  have  thought  it  would  be  stretched  to  its  widest  in  a  different 
position. 

I  am  talking  about  the  scar  on  the  lower  part  of  the  woman's  stomach? 
— It  might  be  stretched  one  inch. 

I  put  it  as  Mr.  Pepper  has  shown  it,  that  the  skin  has  finally  healed ,. 
showing  a  mark  which  is  seven-eighths  of  an  inch  at  the  lower  part,  an 
inch  and  three-quarters  higher  up,  and  a  quarter  of  an  inch  another  inch 
and  three-quarters  higher  up.  Would  that  affect  your  judgment  at  all  as 
to  its  being  a  scar  or  not? — I  think  that  is  against  it  being  a  scar. 

Do  you  say  that  a  mark  of  that  kind  could  be  caused  by  folding,  that 
is  to  isay,  a  mark  which  is  wider  at  the  bottom  and  narrows  up  ? — Yes. 

137 


Hawley  Harvey  Crippen. 


Dr.  Wall 


Dr.  REGINALD  CECIL  WALL,  examined  by  Mr.  TOBIN — I  am  a  Master 
of  Arts,  a  Doctor  of  Medicine  of  the  University  of  Oxford,  a  Fellow  of  the 
Royal  College  of  Physicians,  London,  and  a  member  of  the  Royal  College 
of  Surgeons.  I  obtained  the  Fitzgerald  Exhibition  at  Queen's  College, 
Oxford.  The  examination  for  that  is  in  classical  subjects,  and  has  nothing 
to  do  with  medicine.  I  obtained  the  Andrew  Clark  Exhibition  in  medi- 
cine and  pathology  at  the  London  Hospital.  I  am  assistant  physician 
to  the  London  Hospital,  and  also  to  the  hospital  for  consumptives  at 
Brompton.  Until  the  beginning  of  this  year  I  was  one  of  the  pathologists 
to  the  London  Hospital.  I  am  an  examiner  in  materia  medico,  at  the 
Apothecaries  Hall.  I  am  a  Fellow  of  the  Medical  Society  of  London,  and 
also  of  the  Royal  Society  of  Medicine.  I  am  the  author  of  various  medical 
works.  I  was  demonstrator  of  physiology  for  two  years  at  the  London 
Hospital  College.  I  have  seen  the  piece  of  skin  and  flesh  which  was  before 
the  last  witness.  I  saw  it  first  on  9th  September,  second  on  15th  October, 
and  third  on  17th  October.  I  was  present  when  Mr.  Pepper  made  one 
transverse  cut  across  the  piece  of  skin,  including  the  site  of  what  he  said 
was  a  scar.  I  was  not  present  when  Dr.  Spilsbury  made  the  subsequent 
cuts  for  the  removal  of  pieces  of  skin  for  microscopical  examination.  On 
15th  October  my  examination  of  the  piece  of  skin  commenced  at  11.30  and 
finished  at  4.15.  It  was  an  examination  with  the  eye  and  with  a  hand 
lens,  not  a  microscopical  examination.  At  the  second  examination  on  17th 
October  we  saw  the  piece  of  skin  for  a  third  time  to  identify  certain 
points  that  we  wanted  to  confirm;  and  the  remainder  of  the  time  we  were 
present  we  were  examining  the  microscopic  sections  which  had  been  pre- 
pared by  Dr.  Spilsbury.  The  time  spent  over  that  examination  was  a  little 
over  two  hours,  mainly  on  the  microscopical  examination. 

As  the  result  of  those  examinations  is  that  one  groove — one  limb  of 
the  so-called  horse  shoe — in  your  opinion  a  scar  or  not? — In  my  opinion 
it  is  not  a  scar.  I  could  not  see  on  inspection  by  the  naked  eye  or  with  tJie 
hand  lens  such  an  appearance  as  I  should  have  expected  to  find  if  there 
had  been  a  scar  in  that  situation.  I  found  appearances  which  I  could 
explain  much  more  easily  on  the  supposition  that  the  skin  had  been  folded 
in  that  region.  Secondly,  after  the  incision  which  had  been  made  by 
Mr.  Pepper  very  kindly,  I  did  not,  on  examining  the  cut  surfaces  of  the 
edges  of  the  skin,  find  such  an  alteration  in  structure  as  I  should  have 
expected  had  there  been  originally  a  scar,  and  on  comparing  the  cut 
surface  at  the  site  where  the  scar  was  alleged  to  be  I  did  not  find  that 
the  appearance  of  the  cut  surface  differed  from  the  appearance  of  the 
cut  surface  of  the  other  part  of  the  groove  where  it  is  admitted  there  is 
no  scar. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — Either  right  or  left  of  the  scar  you  did 
not  find  any  differences? — At  the  site  of  where  I  understood  the  scar  was 
supposed  to  be  I  found  appearances  which  corresponded  with  the  appear- 
ances in  the  opposite  limb  of  the  groove — the  other  limb  of  the  groove. 
In  the  part  which  is  supposed  to  be  a  scar  the  appearance  seemed  to  me 
to  resemble  the  cut  edge  of  the  part  of  the  groove  which  was  admitted  not 
to  be  a  scar. 

Examination  continued — I  should  have  expected  that  if  the  two  cut 
138 


Evidence  for  Defence. 

DP.  Wall 

surfaces  were  not  of  the  same  nature  it  would  not  have  presented  the  same 
appearance. 

What  different  appearance  would  you  have  expected  from  a  part 
which  really  came  from  a  true  scar? — That  is  a  very  difficult  question  to 
answer.  The  different  new  tissue  may  assume  various  appearances  in 
different  circumstances.  All  that  I  should  have  expected  would  be  that 
it  presented  a  different  appearance — not  the  same  appearance.  On  my 
examination  with  the  naked  eye  I  saw  no  structures  which  could  not 
occur  in  a  scar.  On  microscopical  examination  I  observed  traces  of  hair 
follicles,  five  in  number,  and  a  sebaceous  gland — apparently  one;  that  is, 
in  the  region  called  a  scar.  Outside  the  region  called  a  scar  there  were 
other  hairs  and  other  sebaceous  glands  similar  in  appearance  to  those  in 
the  so-called  scar. 

You  said  that  the  appearance  would  be  much  more  easily  explained 
by  the  skin  being  folded.  Would  you  mind  having  the  tray  before  you 
and  showing  the  jury  what  you  mean  by  that? — What  I  meant  by  that 
was  this — The  first  edge  folds  over  like  that  (describing),  and  the  second 
edge  seemed  naturally  to  fold  over  like  that  (describing).  A  member  of 
the  jury  asks  if  it  would  be  more  marked  in  the  upper  part  of  the  skin 
if  it  had  been  folded.  I  think  the  reason  for  that  is  that  some  substance, 
same  fabric,  was  placed  in  here,  besides  the  two  sides  of  the  fold. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — There  are  no  traces  of  the  fabric  in  the 
outer  roll.  I  imagine  that  the  piece  of  skin  had  been  folded  up  like  that 
(describing) — roughly — and  thrown  into  the  grave. 

Do  you  mean  accidentally  or  deliberately? — Accidentally. 

By  a  JUROR — Could  it  have  been  kept  in  that  position? — It  could 
have  been  kept  in  that  position  if  it  had  been  held  there  by  some  sub- 
stance lying  on  it. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — If  put  into  that  position  it  would  remain 
in  that  position  until  something  came  on  top  of  it? — Something  falling 
on  the  top  of  it  might  have  rolled  it  back  into  that  position. 

Examination  continued — I  have  not  been  in  attendance  daily  at  this 
particular  part  of  the  case. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — You  say  that  to  produce  what  you  have 
described  it  must  have  been  rolled  over  twice,  and  you  said,  accidentally 
rolled  over.  Would  it  remain  in  the  rolled-over  position  if  it  was  put  or 
thrown  down  without  something  being  on  the  top  of  it? — No,  I  do  not 
know  that  it  would. 

If  rolled  over  twice,  as  has  been  described,  that  would  keep  it  in 
that  position  until  the  super-incumbent  weight  comes  upon  it? — It  might 
have  been  rolled  over  by  something  falling  upon  it. 

Twice? — Well,  if  we  throw  a  cloth  into  a  basket  it  will  roll  over  a 
good  many  times. 

You  think  it  could  have  been  rolled  over  twice  by  something? — I 
think  it  is  very  easy  to  explain  it  in  that  way. 

Examination  continued — I  have  not  been  in  attendance  daily  at  this 
trial,  as  my  time  is  valuable  and  I  have  important  duties.  A  copy  of  the 
depositions  given  by  the  medical  men  at  the  Police  Court  was  sent  to  me 
by  the  solicitor  for  the  defence,  Mr.  Newton,  and  day  by  day  during  the 

139 


Hawley  Harvey  Crippen. 

DP.  Wall 

progress  of  this  trial  I  have  been  supplied  with  a  copy  of  the  Daily  Mail 
report  of  the  evidence. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  Mum — I  have  been  dependent  for  the  medical 
details  given  by  those  gentlemen  who  were  called  as  expert  witnesses  in 
this  case  for  the  prosecution  upon  a  newspaper  report.  I  have  had  no 
other  means  of  knowing  what  the  reasons  were  that  they  gave  for  their 
opinions. 

Were  you  a  party  to  a  report  before  any  of  those  experts  were  cross- 
examined  at  the  Police  Court? — Yes.  I  did  not  hear  any  of  the  medical 
experts  for  the  Crown  give  their  evidence  either  at  the  Police  Court  or 
here.  I  have  been  present  in  Court  to-day,  and  have  heard  Dr.  Turnbull 
examined  and  cross-examined.  He  is  the  only  medical  witness  in  this 
case  that  I  have  heard  examined  or  cross-examined.  I  agree  with  Dr. 
Turnbull  practically  entirely;  there  is  no  essential  detail  in  which  I  dis- 
agree— I  do  not  think  there  is  any  detail  at  all. 

Did  you  read  this  passage  in  the  copy  of  the  depositions  sent  to  you — 
"  If  Dr.  Wall  and  Dr.  Turnbull  say  that  there  is  an  entire  absence  of 
apeneouroses,  I  should  say  it  is  due  to  forgetfulness  or  defective  observa- 
tion "  1— Yes,  I  did. 

That  waa  a  question  which  professedly  was  put  upon  your  report? — I 
believe  it  was. 

Did  you  report  that  there  was  an  entire  absence  of  aponeuroses? — 
No.  The  report  that  Dr.  Turnbull  has  just  read  was  a  joint  report  of 
ourselves.  I  reported  thalt  the  aponeuroses  so  characteristic  of  the 
abdominal  wall  were  not  present. 

That  was  a  report  of  the  absence  of  aponeuroses  ? — Of  the  characteristic 
aponeuroses. 

Of  the  absence  of  aponeuroses  such  as  you  would  find  in  the  abdominal 
wall? — It  was  different  from  the  entire  absence  of  aponeuroses  mentioned 
in  the  depositions.  I  did  not  say  that  the  aponeuroses  were  entirely 
absent;  I  eimply  said  in  this  report  that  we  did  not  recognise  the 
aponeuroses  which  we  considered  to  be  characteristic  of  the  abdominal 
wall.  The  words  of  the  report  are — "  The  aponeuroses  so  characteristic 
of  the  abdominal  wall  were  not  present." 

That  refers  to  an  entire  absence  of  the  aponeuroses  of  the  abdominal 
wall.  Is  that  not  so? — I  do  not  see  why  you  put  it  in  those  words;  it 
seems  to  me  a  very  different  statement. 

By  the  LORD  CBIEF  JUSTICE — What  is  "entirely  absent"? — The 
aponeuroses  characteristic  of  the  abdominal  wall.  I  do  not  say  aponeuroses, 
because  there  are  aponeuroses  in  all  sorts  of  parts  of  the  body.  Our  sole 
point  is  that  the  aponeuroses  characteristic  of  the  abdominal  wall  were 
absent.  I  am  quite  willing  to  admit  that  we  have  modified  that  opinion 
since. 

By  Mr.  Mum — Nothing  was  said  about  my  giving  or  not  giving  evidence 
when  I  signed  that  report.  I  was  first  asked  to  give  evidence  on  Saturday 
last,  I  think.  There  was  a  further  examination  at  the  general  request 
of  Dr.  Turnbull  and  myself  after  we  had  read  the  evidence  of  Mr.  Spilsbury, 
Mr.  Pepper,  and  Dr.  Willcox.  We  made  that  request  for  a  further 
examination  on  Tuesday  or  Wednesday  of  last  week,  two  or  three  days 
140 


Evidence  for  Defence. 

Dr.  Wall 

before  we  actually  made  the  second  examination,  which  was  on  the  15th. 
I  was  asked  to  give  evidence  after  we  had  made  the  second  examination, 
and  before  we  had  made  the  third.  After  our  second  examination  we  made 
a  verbal  report,  saying  that  we  were  not  so  certain  that  the  piece  of  skin 
did  not  come  from  the  abdominal  wall.  My  opinion  now  is,  that  it  may 
have  come  from  the  abdominal  wall,  but  there  is  not  sufficient  evidence 
to  say  definitely  where  it  comes  from.  I  think  it  probably  does  come  from 
the  abdominal  wall. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — The  two  parts  of  the  body  from  which 
it  might  be  derived,  as  we  thought  when  we  first  saw  the  piece  of  skin, 
were  the  lower  part  of  the  abdomen  and  the  upper  part  of  the  thigh  on  the 
inner  side.  We  reported  that  in  our  opinion  it  probably  did  not  come 
from  the  abdominal  wall;  that  is  the  opinion  we  have  modified. 

With  all  your  present  lights,  with  what  you  now  know  about  the 
aponeurosis,  have  you  any  doubt  that  it  did  come  from  the  abdominal 
wall? — I  have  a  doubt  in  so  far  as  I  am  not  absolutely  certain. 

Have  you  any  doubt  about  it? — Yesi,  I  have. 

Where  do  you  think  it  came  from? — That  is  the  trouble.  If  I  could 
suggest  where  it  came  from 

It  might  be  useful? — That  is  why  I  said  I  thought  it  probably  came 
from  the  abdominal  wall. 

Dr.  ALEXANDER  WTNTER  BLYTH,  examined  by  Mr.  TOBIN — I  am  a 
member  of  the  Royal  College  of  Physicians,  a  Fellow  of  the  Institute  of 
Chemistry,  a  Fellow  of  the  Chemical  Society,  and  I  have  various  other 
qualifications.  I  am  the  author  of  a  medical  work  entitled  "  Poisons  :  Their 
Effects  and  Detection." 

Dr.  Willcox  told  us  yesterday  that  going  through  the  ordinary  processes 
he  at  last  extracted  a  gummy  substance.  Now,  is  a  gummy  substance  char- 
acteristic of  hyoscin  and  not  of  hyoscyamin,  atropine,  or  any  animal 
alkaloid? — Certainly  not.  You  can  have  a  gummy  substance  in  extracting 
various  alkaloids.  Often  the  slightest  impurity,  especially  with  regard  to 
hyoscyamin,  causes  it  not  to  crystallise.  By  the  term  "  gummy  substance  " 
I  presume  is  meant  something  that  is  not  crystalline — a  sticky  substance. 

It  is  said  that  atropine  crystallises  and  hyoscyamin  crystallises,  but 
hyoscin  does  not.  Do  you  agree  with  that  or  not? — I  do;  that  would  be 
in  a  pure  state. 

Now,  as  to  applying  Vitali's  test — the  reaction  of  violet  fading  into  a 
brownish  colour.  Is  that  reaction  characteristic  of  the  vegetable  mydriatic 
alkaloids,  and  also  of  the  animal  mydriatic  alkaloids  or  not? — I  know 
of  my  own  knowledge  that  it  is  characteristic  of  the  vegetable  alkaloids ; 
but  with  regard  to  the  animal  alkaloids,  I  have  no  experience  of  a  mydriatic 
alkaloid  obtained  from  animal  tissues,  and  whether  those  alkaloids  that 
do  dilate  the  pupil,  which  have  been  found,  give  that  test  or  not,  I  do  not 
know.  In  fact,  most  of  the  work  done  in  that  direction  was  done  before 
1880,  or  about  that  time,  when  Vitali's  test  was  published;  therefore  in 
1869,  for  instance,  it  could  not  have  been  applied;  so  we  do  not  know;  no 
one  knows. 

Further,  Dr.  Willcox  said  that   small   round  spheres  were  produced. 

M  141 


Hawley  Harvey  Crippen. 

Dr.  BIyth 

Are  those  round  spheres  characteristic  of  hyoscin  alone,  or  are  they  also 
found  with  hyoscyamin  and  atropine? — I  have  not  been  able  to  get  them.  I 
have  attempted  to  get  what  Dr.  Willcox  has  stated  according  to  the 
depositions  that  have  been  forwarded  to  me,  but  I  must  confess  that  I  have 
not  been  able  to  distinguish  between  the  atropine,  hyoscyamin,  and  hyoscin 
by  hydrochloric  acid,  as  Dr.  Willcox  has  done.  No  one  knows  whether 
those  round  spheres  might  be  produced  at  last  in  the  case  of  animal 
alkaloids. 

Dr.  Willcox  told  us  that  in  the  lungs,  which  were  most  decomposed, 
he  found  only  a  trace  of  any  alkaloid.  If  this  was  an  animal  alkaloid  in 
fact,  would  you  expect  that  he  should  have  found  most  of  the  animal 
alkaloid  in  the  most  decomposed  part,  the  lungs? — I  should  not  have 
expected  so,  because  animal  alkaloids  arise,  it  is  well  known,  at  a  particular 
stage  of  putrefaction,  and  when  that  stage  is  passed  any  animal  alkaloid 
that  has  been  produced  becomes  more  or  less  destroyed;  so  that  in  the 
same  decomposing  tissue  at  different  times  of  its  putrefaction  you  would 
never  expect  to  find  the  same  amount  of  putrefaction  alkaloid. 

If  you  get  more  putrefaction,  is  there  the  greater  probability  of  finding 
an  animal  alkaloid? — There  is  not,  because  it  has  gone  a  stage  beyond  the 
time  of  production. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — 'First  of  all,  it  is  produced  by  putrefac- 
tion; then  putrefaction  goes  on  and  the  traces  disappear. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  Mum — I  have  never  tested  a  mydriatic  animal 
alkaloid.  I  have  read  in  Dr.  Luff's  evidence  that  he  has  himself  found 
a  mydriatio  animal  alkaloid  in  putrefied  meat  and  has  tested  it,  and  that 
it  did  not  give  the  purple  colour  on  Vitali's  test.  I  dare  say  he  is  quite 
correct.  I  do  not  dispute  for  a  moment  that  there  may  be  many  mydriatic 
alkaloids. 

The  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — This  gentleman  has  said  that  he  had  no 
experience  of  animal  mydriatic  alkaloids. 

By  Mr.  Mm* — You  are  speculating  at  large? — I  do  not  know  about 
speculating. 

Do  you  know  of  any  animal  mydriatic  alkaloid  except  mydalein? — 
That  particular  one  was  investigated,  but  there  are  others  that  have  not  been 
thoroughly  investigated.  I  know  of  none  by  specific  name  except  under  the 
name  of  mydriatio  alkaloids. 

Is  not  that  the  only  mydriatic  animal  alkaloid  that  you  can  give  a 
name  to? — One  was  separated  in  1869  by  Sonnenschein,  and  he  gave  it  no 
name,  but  it  seems  not  to  have  agreed  with  mydalein. 

Can  you  give  any  name  of  any  other  animal  mydriatio  alkaloid  but 
mydalein? — No,  I  cannot,  because  they  are  unnamed. 

Have  you  any  experience  of  them  at  all? — Not  practically. 

In  your  opinion,  is  it  possible  to  make  a  mistake  between  animal 
mydriatic  alkaloids  and  vegetable  mydriatic  alkaloids  ? — I  think  the  evidence 
points  that  they  are  the  same  thing. 

But  is  it  possible  to  make  a  mistake  between  the  two? — You  would 

like  me  to  answer  yes  or  no,  but  that  would  not  be  fair.      In  my  opinion, 

some  of  them  are  identical,  and  therefore  it  is  possible  to  make  a  mistake 

between  the  two.    Being  referred  to  page  485  of  my  book  "  Poisons  :  Their 

142 


Evidence  for  Defence. 

Dr.  Blyth 

Effects  and  Detection  "  (the  last  edition,  1895) — "  Definition  of  a  ptomaine. 
That  is  an  animal  alkaloid.  A  ptomaine  may  be  considered  as  a  basic 
chemical  substance  derived  from  the  action  of  bacteria  on  nitrogenous 
substances.  If  this  definition  is  accepted,  a  ptomaine  is  not  necessarily 
formed  in  the  dead  animal  tissue;  it  may  be  produced  by  the  living,  and 
in  all  cases  it  is  the  product  of  bacterial  life.  A  ptomaine  is  not  necessarily 
poisonous ;  many  are  known  -which  are,  in  moderate  doses,  quite  innocuous. 
When  Selmi's  researches  were  first  published  there  was  some  anxiety  lest 
the  existence  of  ptomaines  would  seriously  interfere  with  the  detection  of 
poison  generally,  because  some  were  said  to  be  like  strychnine,  others  like 
colchicine,  and  so  forth.  Further  research  has  conclusively  shown  that  at 
present  no  ptomaine  is  known  which  so  closely  resembles  a  vegetable  poison 
as  to  be  likely  in  skilled  hands  to  cause  confusion."  I  do  not  think  that 
that  is  absolutely  correct.  I  have  altered  my  opinion  since  I  wrote  that 
book.  I  have  not  had  an  opportunity  yet  of  publishing  that  altered  opinion. 
I  altered  my  opinion  during  this  month  on  reading  up  the  various  papers — 
foreign  papers. 

For  the  purposes  of  this  case? — In  connection  with  this  case,  of  course, 
obviously. 

For  the  purposes  of  this  case  you  have  altered  your  opinion? — I  have, 
yes.  I  think  there  is  strong  evidence  that  there  is  in  putrefying  tissues  a 
substance  very  much  resembling  the  mydriatic  alkaloids  produced.  I  have 
read  that  Dr.  Luff  said,  "  I  think  it  quite  impossible  to  mistake  animal  for 
vegetable  alkaloids  if  Vitali's  test  is  applied."  I  disagree  with  that  entirely, 
because  some  of  the  Italian  chemists  declare  that  they  have  got  different 
reactions.  I  forget  the  names  of  those  particular  chemists;  there  is  one 
Giotti.  I  have  only  seen  extracts  from  their  papers.  . 

Dr.  Willcox  has  said  that  he  searched  the  original  paper,  and  that 
statement  is  not  to  be  found  in  it? — Well,  I  cannot  help  that.  I  have  not 
searched  for  it;  I  have  not  had  time.  I  cannot  refer  to  any  book  which 
says  that  animal  alkaloids  will  give  the  purple  colour  under  Vitali's  test. 

[At  this  stage  the  Lord  Chief  Justice,  the  jury,  Mr.  Tobin,  Mr.  Pepper, 
Dr.  Spilsbury,  Dr.  Turnbull,  and  Dr.  Wall  went  into  an  adjoining  Court 
for  the  purpose  of  an  examination  of  the  microscopic  slides  and  the  piece 
of  skin  and  flesh.] 

On  the  public  trial  being  resumed — 

Mr.  Mum — My  lord,  I  have  an  application  to  make  to  your  lordship 
with  regard  to  those  pyjamas.  No  statement  was  made  at  all  as  to  when 
the  prisoner  acquired  them  until  after  he  went  into  the  witness-box.  It 
was  impossible  for  us  in  examination-in-chief  to  deal  with  the  question  of 
the  date  on  which  he  acquired  them.  I  desire  to  call  evidence  upon  that 
point. 

The  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — I  shall  allow  you  to  call  evidence  as  to  the 
date  of  sale. 

Mr.  Mum — And  the  date  of  manufacture,  in  order  to  identify  them. 

The  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — We  will  see  about  that;  it  may  be  fixed  not 
before  a  certain  date,  but  I  should  not  allow  you  to  call  attention  to  the 
date  of  manufacture  unless  it  bears  directly  on  the  question  of  sale. 

Mr.  Mum — It  does,  I  think.  Then,  my  lord,  there  is  another  point, 

143 


Hawley   Harvey  Crippen. 

•with  regard  to  the  dates  upon  which  the  "  Montrose"  has  been  in  London 
since  the  defendant  has  been  in  this  country,  to  show  that  he  had  oppor- 
tunities of  communicating  with  the  quartermaster  he  has  been  speaking  of. 

The  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — He  has  himself  said  that  he  knew  the  ship 
was  here  once.  I  think  that  is  a  little  too  remote. 

Mr.  Mura — If  your  lordship  pleases. 

Mr.  TOBIN — As  to  the  first  application  of  my  learned  friend,  the 
information  that  they  now  have  was,  I  presume,  in  their  possession  before 
this  trial  began,  and  if  notice  of  it  had  been  given  to  us  we,  the  defendant's 
advisers,  might  have  made  inquiry  into  it. 

The  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — That  is  true,  and  I  am  quite  sure  that  if 
it  had  been  in  their  possession  you  would  have  had  notice.  In  my  judgment 
the  point  that  is  now  raised  as  to  the  purchase  of  these  pyjamas  being 
made  under  circumstances  which  the  prosecution  say  are  impossible  was 
not  put  to  the  witnesses  for  the  Crown  so  as  to  direct  your  attention  to  it. 
I  think  the  evidence  is  clearly  admissible  as  to  that  part  of  it.  I  think  it 
right  to  say,  Mr.  Tobin,  because  there  is  sometimes  a  misunderstanding 
about  this,  that  the  question  of  notice  is  never  conclusive  as  to  whether 
evidence  is  admissible.  It  is  the  practice  of  our  law  always  to  give  the 
prisoner  every  notice  that  is  possible,  but  in  every  case  in  which  a  point 
arises  as  to  whether  the  evidence  is  material,  it  is  for  the  judge  to  say 
whether  or  no  it  is  admissible.  It  does  not  depend  on  notice  being  given. 
I  am  quite  sure  that,  having  regard  to  the  practice  of  our  law  and  the 
practice  of  the  Director  of  Public  Prosecutions,  had  this  been  foreseen, 
notice  would  have  been  given. 

Mr.  TOBIN — I  am  obliged  to  your  lordship.  My  point  was  rather  this, 
that  it  ought  not  to  be  admitted  at  this  stage  when  they  could  have  given 
the  evidence  in  chief. 

The  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — In  my  judgment  the  point  made  by  Dr. 
Crippen  with  regard  to  this — I  will  not  say  all  through  his  evidence,  but 
in  part^of  his  evidence — was  not  developed  either  by  the  cross-examination 
or  in  anything  put  at  the  Police  Court  or  here. 

Mr.  TOBIN — It  was  not,  because  one  did  not  know  anything  about  it. 

The  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — Do  not  think  I  am  blaming  you,  but  it  is 
Dr.  Crippen' s  own  evidence  that  makes  this  so  material. 


Further    Evidence    for   the    Prosecution. 

WILLIAM  JAMES  CHILVERS,  examined  by  Mr.  Mum — I  live  at  47  Guildford 
Park,  Muswell  Hill.  I  am  buyer  to  Messrs.  Jones  Brothers,  Holloway. 
I  have  seen  the  two  pyjama  suits  and  pair  of  trousers  in  this  case.  I 
recognise  the  material  of  which  they  are  made.  They  were  sold  to  my 
firm  previous  to  December,  1908.  I  am  afraid  I  cannot  say  how  long 
before,  but  I  should  think  it  would  be  about  a  month  or  three  weeks 
before  December,  1908.  They  were  sold  by  my  firm  between  28th 
December  and  during  January,  1909.  We  keep  sale  duplicates.  I  have 
here  the  sale  duplicate  for  5th  January,  1909.  The  goods  mentioned  in 
144 


Evidence  for  Defence. 

William  J.  Chllvers. 

that  sale  duplicate  were  delivered,  but  I  am  afraid  I  could  not  say  whether 
they  were  sent  by  the  cart  or  by  special  messenger.  They  were  sent 
"  Pay  on  delivery,"  and  17s.  9d.  was  paid  to  my  firm  in  respect  of  that 
transaction  on  that  day. 

By  the  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — I  am  able  to  say  that  the  17s.  9d.  applies 
to  the  pyjamas.  There  are  other  two  items  paid  for  at  the  time,  to  the  same 
address,  39  Hilldrop  Crescent,  £2  5s.  4d.  and  4s. 

Examination  continued — Now,  will  you  look  at  the  pair  of  trousers, 
which  I  will  call  the  odd  pair  of  trousers.  Is  the  pattern  of  those  trousers 
different  from  that  of  the  other  two  sets  ? — The  pattern  is  different. 

Look  at  the  pieces  in  the  jar.  Was  what  was  in  the  jar  sold  by  you 
as  part  of  a  pyjama  suit? — Yes. 

As  part  of  what  pyjama  suit? — This  (pointing)  is  the  trousers,  aoi 
this  (pointing)  is  the  coat. 

The  odd  trousers  were  sold  with  some  others,  a  jacket  of  which  that 
is  the  material  in  the  jar? — Yes. 

It  is  a  jacket  from  the  same  suit  as  the  trousers? — Yes.  I  have  seen 
the  tab  on  the  part  which  is  in  the  jar;  it  bears  the  words  "  Jones 
Brothers,  Holloway,  Limited."  Jones  Brothers  have  been  a  limited  com- 
pany since  1906. 

Mr.  TOBIN — No  questions.     I  do  not  call  any  other  evidence. 


Closing    Speech   for   the    Defence. 

Mr.  TOBIN  addressed  the  jury  on  behalf  of  the  prisoner.  He  said  he 
did  not  propose  to  repeat  at  any  length  the  arguments  which  he  had  used 
on  the  previous  day.  He  adhered  to  every  one  of  the  arguments,  and  he 
was  persuaded  that  the  jury  would  not  forget  to  consider  every  one  of 
them  when  they  came  to  reflect  upon  their  verdict.  He  could  not  insist 
too  much  on  the  fact  that  in  the  administration  of  our  criminal  law  the 
burden  of  proof  rested  on  the  prosecution,  and  if  on  a  single  material 
point  there  could  be  reasonable  doubt  it  was  not  for  him  to  appeal  for 
mercy ;  he  had  only  to  claim  what  was  the  right  of  the  prisoner.  If  there 
could  be  any  real  doubt,  he  asked  them,  having  heard  the  evidence,  and 
the  many  mysterious  things  in  this  case — when  they  called  to  mind  the 
widely  differing  opinions  of  honest  professional  men  on  either  side  on 
points  of  surgery,  on  points  of  medicine,  and  on  the  properties  of  poisons 
— whether  they  were  able  to  say  with  the  satisfied  judgment  and  safe 
consciences  which  the  law  required,  that  they  were  prepared  to  send  a 
fellow  man  to  his  death.  Was  it  safe?  If  it  was  not  safe  on  any  material 
point,  then  the  law  said  that  the  man  had  a  right  to  his  acquittal.  It 
was  better  far  that  guilty  men  should  escape  than  that  a  single  one 
should  be  convicted  when  there  was  a  real,  substantial  doubt  on  any 
material  point. 

145 


Hawley  Harvey  Crippen. 

Mr.  Tobln 

He  proposed  to  deal  very  briefly  with  the  evidence.  Dr.  Crippen  had 
himself  given  evidence,  though  there  had  been  no  obligation  upon  him  to 
go  into  the  witness-box.  He  had  said  that  he  had  made  no  inquiries  as 
to  the  whereabouts  of  his  wife  between  1st  February,  the  date  of  her 
disappearance,  and  31st  July,  the  date  of  his  arrest.  Dr.  Crippen  had 
been  living  with  Le  Neve,  his  mistress,  and  he  did  not  want  to  make 
inquiries.  He  and  his  wife  had  been  unhappy  at  home,  and  she  had  left 
him  because  of  their  constant  quarrels.  It  was  idle  to  suppose  that  he 
would  be  other  than  relieved  at  her  departure  from  Hilldrop  Crescent.  One 
would  have  supposed  that  he  did  not  care,  or  that  he  would  prefer  her  to 
be  away.  He  did  not  want  her,  having  his  mistress  there,  and  why 
then  should  he  make  inquiries  about  her?  His  conduct  in  not  making 
inquiries  was  absolutely  consistent  with  the  case  that  he  had  presented, 
viz.,  relief  at  the  departure  of  the  wife  and  contentment  at  having  his 
mistress  at  Hilldrop  Crescent. 

The  next  point  was  that  Dr.  Crippen  had  said  in  reply  to  Mr.  Muir, 
"  I  know  no  one  who  has  seen  her  alive  since  1st  February,  and  I  know 
DO  one  who  has  received  a  letter  from  her  since  that  date."  The  law 
did  not  cast  on  Dr.  Crippen  the  burden  of  finding  out  where  his  wife 
might  be,  whether  she  was  alive  or  not,  whether  she  was  in  some  foreign 
country,  or  whether  she  had  joined  some  man  or  not.  Dr.  Crippen  had 
said  that  on  2nd  February — and  this  was  an  important  point — Le  Neve 
had  slept  with  him  at  Hilldrop  Crescent.  Was  it  conceivable  that  a  few 
hours  before  Le  Neve  slept  in  that  house  Dr.  Crippen  could  have  taken 
his  wife's  life,  buried  the  flesh  and  skin  in  a  hole  in  the  cellar  floor,  and 
done  away  with  the  head,  the  hands,  feet,  and  bones?  He  had  been  at 
his  work  all  day,  and  what  time  had  he  had  in  which  to  do  all  that? 
There  had  only  been  the  night  hours  of  1st  February  to  afford  him  the 
time  and  opportunity  to  mutilate  the  remains,  bury  the  flesh  in  the  cellar, 
and  get  rid  of  all  the  limbs  and  bones  before  Le  Neve  arrived.  They 
could  not  imagine  that  on  the  night  of  2nd  February  Le  Neve  could 
have  been  taken  to  sleep  at  that  house  if  Dr.  Crippen  knew  that  there  was 
a  trace  of  his  wife,  when,  if  she  saw  any  spot  of  blood  or  trace  of  the 
murder,  she  might  have  fled  from  the  house  in  terror  and  gone  straight 
to  the  police.  It  was  inconceivable  that  he  could  have  taken  her  there 
within  a  few  hours  of  committing  the  murder,  knowing  the  risk  he  ran 
if  Le  Neve  should  detect  it. 

In  regard  to  the  campaign  of  lies  on  which  he  had  embarked,  Dr. 
Crippen,  in  reply  to  Mr.  Muir,  had  said  that  at  the  time  he  told  those 
lies  and  wrote  those  false  letters  he  did  not  know  for  certain  whether  his 
wife  might  not  be  writing  to  her  friends  and  relations.  Surely  this 
explanation  was  simple  if  his  tale  was  true.  If  she  had  gone  away,  and  if 
she  had  appeared  again,  or  had  been  writing  to  her  friends,  those  friends 
would  have  been  glad  indeed  to  find  that  Dr.  Crippen 's  story  of  her 
illness  and  her  death  was  quite  untrue,  and  further,  they  would  have 
thought  none  the  worse  of  Dr.  Crippen  for  having  told  those  lies  in  order 
to  try  and  cover  up  his  wife's  disappearance  and  his  wife's  shame.  There 
146 


[Photo,  hi/ 

A.  A.  Tobin,  K.C.,  leading  Counsel  for  the  Defence. 


Closing  Speech  for  the  Defence. 

Mr.  Tobln 

was  nothing,  surely,  in  that  point  inconsistent  with  the  defence  set  up  by 
Dr.  Crippen. 

Dr.  Crippen  had  been  pressed  that  morning  as  to  the  reason  for  his 
flight,  and  pressed  further,  though  he  could  hardly  appreciate  why,  as 
to  the  reason  why  he  had  gone  in  disguise  and  under  a  false  name.  That, 
however,  carried  the  case  no  further;  it  had  been  part  of  his  scheme  of 
flight.  They  had  to  consider  what  was  the  reason  for  his  flight,  or  his 
folly,  if  they  liked.  A  man  had  done  the  same  thing  before  when  he 
had  heard  of  a  charge  in  connection  with  the  disappearance  of  his  wife. 
They  had  to  realise  the  time  of  his  flight,  and  what  had  just  been  said 
by  Inspector  Dew.  They  had  to  remember  the  lies  Dr.  Crippen  had  told, 
and  that  he  had  admitted  that  they  were  lies.  They  must  not  forget  what 
Inspector  Dew  had  said  to  him,  "  I  am  not  satisfied  about  your  wife," 
and,  "  There  will  be  serious  trouble  in  store  for  you  unless  you  find  your 
wife."  A  man  who  had  lost  sight  of  his  wife  for  all  those  months,  who 
had  no  notion  where  she  was,  and  who  remembered  that  he  had  told 
lie  after  lie  as  to  the  reason  for  her  disappearance,  might  be  thoroughly 
alarmed  when  an  officer  of  the  law  appeared  and  said  there  would  be 
serious  trouble  in  store  for  him  about  this  disappearance.  Dr.  Crippen 
realised  the  mass  of  prejudice  he  had  raised  against  himself  by  the  lies 
he  had  told,  and  was  flight,  although  an  act  of  folly,  a  clear  proof  of 
guilt? 

The  next  point  in  the  cross-examination  had  been  as  to  the  story  of 
the  card  on  the  "  Montrose."  "  Is  the  quartermaster  here?  "  Mr.  Muir 
had  asked.  No,  he  was  not.  Mr.  Muir  was  entitled  to  make  all  he 
could  of  that,  but  the  jury  were  bound  to  look  on  that  point  as  men  of 
the  world.  Was  it  likely  that  the  quartermaster  would  be  a  very  willing 
man  to  come  at  all  or  to  confess  to  such  a  tale,  when,  if  he  did,  the  very 
act  of  his  corroborating  that  story  would  go  to  show  that  he  was  a  party 
to  impeding  the  officers  of  the  law? 

The  next  point  had  been  that  Dr.  Crippen  had  not  given  evidence 
before  the  magistrate  or  the  coroner.  He  was  then  in  the  hands  of  his 
solicitor,  Mr.  Newton,  under  whose  advice  he  acted.  It  was  quite  clear 
that  the  magistrate  was  bound  on  the  evidence  of  the  Crown  witnesses  to 
send  the  case  for  trial.  It  was  a  difficult,  complicated  case,  requiring  a 
good  deal  of  research  into  matters  connected  with  medicine,  anatomy, 
and  poison,  apart  from  all  the  difficult  questions  of  general  fact  outside 
of  those  technicalities.  In  his  experience  it  would  have  been  most 
unusual  and  most  unwise  had  Mr.  Newton  put  Dr.  Crippen  in  the  witness- 
box  before  the  magistrate,  knowing  that  whatever  evidence  he  gave  the 
magistrate  would  send  the  case  for  trial.  It  would  have  been  a  most 
unwise  and  most  dangerous  thing  in  a  case  of  this  kind.  Further,  it  would 
have  been  absolutely  idle  for  Dr.  Crippen  to  have  given  evidence  before 
the  coroner  when  he  had  already  been  committed  for  trial  by  the  magis- 
trate before  the  inquest  closed.  That  fully  accounted  for  his  not  having 
gone  into  the  box  before. 

He  would  make  no  more  comments  on  Dr.  Crippen's  evidence,  but 
would  pass  on  to  say  that  the  jury  must  be  satisfied  beyond  any  reasonable 

147 


Hawley   Harvey  Crippen. 

Mr.  Tobin 

doubt.  Suspicion  was  not  enough.  It  was  not  enough  to  say  "  1  suspect 
strongly."  They  must  be  satisfied  that  the  flesh  was  the  flesh  of  a 
woman,  and  next,  they  must  be  satisfied  beyond  all  reasonable  doubt 
that  it  was  the  flesh  of  Belle  Elmore.  He  reminded  them  that  the  law 
did  not  demand  that  a  prisoner,  before  he  was  entitled  to  his  acquittal, 
should  show  that  the  remains  were  those  of  a  man  or  whose  they  were — 
least  of  all  that  he  should  prove  to  them  where  Belle  Elmore  was.  The 
law  presumed  every  man  in  the  land  to  be  innocent  until  the  Crown  had 
forged  every  single  link  in  the  chain  against  him.  There  was  too  much 
doubt  on  those  points  whether  it  was  the  flesh  of  a  woman,  and,  if  so, 
whether  it  was  the  flesh  of  Belle  Elmore;  there  was  too  much  doubt 
for  them  to  find  the  verdict  to  which  the  law  attached  the  penalty  of 
death.  They  would  pause  before  they  made  up  their  minds  on  those  two 
points. 

Strange  things  were  recorded  in  our  legal  history  where  a  man  had 
been  convicted  of  murder,  where  he  had  been  hanged,  and  where,  after- 
wardsi,  the  supposed  victim  had  appeared  alive  again.  These  things  were 
recorded  as  having  happened  in  spite  of  all  of  the  fair  and  able  administra- 
tors of  justice,  and  they  must  be  careful  that  such  a  thing  should  not 
happen  again.  That  the  jury  would  approach  their  verdict  with  the 
fairest  minds  and  the  closest  recollection  of  all  he  had  urged  he  knew 
perfectly  well.  This  was  a  case  which  they  would  all  remember  to  their 
dying  day,  and  if  in  the  course  of  time — not  for  the  first  time  in  history 
— Belle  Elmore  should  in  very  truth  appear  again,  what  then?  This 
was  the  first  time  that  any  one  in  the  land  had  heard  both  sides  of  the 
case.  It  was  the  first  time  it  had  been  argued  on  his  side  at  all,  and 
theirs  was  the  duty  to  say  whether  they  ought  not  in  justice  to  surmount 
those  mountains  of  prejudice,  which,  by  his  lies  and  by  his  flight,  Crippen 
had  reared  against  himself.  It  was  for  them  now  to  say  whether  they 
could  pierce  the  veil  of  suspicion  which  his  folly  in  so  lying  and  the  folly 
of  his  flight  had  created  against  him.  Hisi  disappearance,  his  lies,  his 
flight  were  no  proof  whatever  that  he  committed  murder.  There  were 
some  things  needed  in  this  case.  There  was  the  question  of  motive. 
Murders  had  sometimes,  he  supposed,  been  committed  without  any  motive, 
or,  at  any  rate,  people  had  been  convicted  where  no  motive  had  been 
proved,  but  in  all  cases  of  murder,  where  there  was  such  a  grave  conflict 
as  there  was  here,  one  looked  to  see  whether  or  not  there  was  any 
adequate  motive  for  such  a  crime.  There  was  the  money  motive — 
wholly  insufficient.  The  prisoner  could  not  touch  the  money  until  some 
eleven  months  after  hisi  wife  had  disappeared.  The  motive  that  he 
(counsel)  suggested  himself  was  that  he  might  have  wanted  to  marry 
Le  Neve2  but  that  had  gone  by  the  board  because  he  never  married  her. 
There  was  another  thing  which  was  admittedly  needed,  and  that  was  a 
dexterous  hand,  well  versed  in  anatomical  operations.  So  far  from  being 
dexterous  in  anatomy,  he  was,  compared  with  the  skill  required  by  an 
anatomical  surgeon,  a  very  commonplace  manager  for  Munyons'  remedies. 
Something  else  was  needed.  There  was  needed  the  fiend  incarnate  to  do 
a  deed  like  that;  but  the  prisoner's  reputation  was  that  of  a  kind-hearted, 
good-hearted,  amiable  man.  Were  they  to  be  told  that  during  the  doctor's 

148 


Closing  Speech  for  the  Defence. 

Mr.  Tobin 

close  intimacy  with  his  friends  in  London,  and  with  his  business  people 
in  London,  they  would  never  have  detected  any  trait  such  as  cruelty  or 
something  of  that  kind  in  his  nature?  The  characteristics  of  the  man 
who  would  do  a  deed  like  thisi  were  absolutely  absent. 

They  must  have  proof  positive  that  those  remains  had  been  buried 
since  half-past  one  on  the  morning1  of  1st  February  of  this  year.  In  a 
ca.se  of  life  and  death  could  they  say  that  they  were  satisfied  beyond  all 
doubt  that  that  flesh  and  those  remains  in  the  cellar  were  buried  there 
since  that  time?  He  reminded  them  that  Dr.  Marshall  had  said  that 
some  bodies  remained  in  an  excellent  state  of  preservation  for  some  years 
if  buried  in  lime  and  in  soil  of  a  light  clay,  which  practically  excluded  all 
air.  Those  were  the  conditions  obtaining  in  that  case.  Those  remains, 
whosesoever  they  were  and  whoever  had  buried  them,  had  been  buried  in 
clay  which  practically  excluded  all  air,  and  there  was  lime  in  the  hole  as 
well.  Dr.  Marshall  had  said  that  he  had  known  bodies,  buried  under  such 
conditions  remain  in  an  excellent  state  of  preservation  for  some  years. 
Were  they  then  able  to  say  upon  their  oaths  and  in  their  consciences, 
and  to  say  safely,  that  they  were  satisfied  beyond  all  reasonable  doubt 
that  the  remains  were  buried  some  five  and  a  half  months  only  before 
they  were  discovered  by  Inspector  Dew? 

There  wa,s  another  thing  lacking  in  that  case,  and  that  was  a 
positive  proof  that  the  remains  were  those  of  a  woman  at  all.  Witnesses 
for  the  Crown  frankly  admitted  that  the  only  way  to  tell  with  certainty 
whether  the  remains  were  those  of  a  man  or  a  woman  was.  on  anatomical 
grounds.  Mr.  Pepper  agreed,  however,  that  these  grounds  were  wholly 
wanting  in  that  case.  Even  if  they  were  able  to  say  with  a  clear  conscience 
that  they  were  convinced,  in  spite  of  the  absence  of  anatomical  grounds, 
that  the  remains  were  those  of  a  woman,  they  had  to  go  a  step  further 
and  to  be  persuaded  in  their  own  minds,  that  the  remains  were  those  of 
Belle  Elmore.  Mrs.  Martinetti,  a  witness  for  the  Crown,  had  said  that 
she  saw  on  Mrs.  Crippen's  body  the  navel  just  above  that  scar,  but  on 
the  piece  of  flesh  before  them  there  was  no  navel  above  the  scar  in  the 
way  described  by  Mrs.  Martinetti.  That  consideration  alone  must  make 
them  pause,  and  pause  long,  ere  they  could  give  a  verdict  against  the 
prisoner  at  the  bar.  In  view  of  the  evidence  given  by  doctors  of  high 
position  on  either  side,  could  they  as.  laymen  say  with  certainty  that  they 
were  persuaded  beyond  all  reasonable  doxibt  that  that  mark  was  the  scar 
of  an  operation?  The  Crown  admitted  that  the  mark  on  one  side  was 
caused  by  a  folding.  Could  not  the  other  mark  have  been  caused  in  the 
same  way?  The  conflict  went  much  further,  because  Dr.  Turnbull,  an 
expert  in  the  use  of  the  microscope,  had  told  them  that  he  could  detect 
structures  which  could  not  have  been  there  if  that  were  in  truth  a  scar. 
When  men  of  high  position  and  unimpeached  honesty  disagreed  upon  a 
point  like  that,  how  could  they  in  a  matter  of  life  and  death  say  whether 
they  were  certain  that  there  were  sebaceoiis  glands  and  hair  follicles  there? 

The  question  of  poison  had  also  to  be  proved  beyond  the  shadow  of 
a  doubt.  It  was  unfortunate  that  before  Dr.  Willcox  tested  for  hyoscin, 
and  before  he  formed  the  opinion  that  he  had  found  hyoscin,  he  had 
heard  that  Dr.  Crippen  had  bought  hyoscin  on  19th  January  of  this 
year.  He  did  not  say  more  than  that.  The  point  wasi  whether  the 

149 


Hawley  Harvey  Crippen. 


Mr.  Tobln 


gummy  substance  which  Dr.  Willcox  found  was  a  vegetable  alkaloid 
obtained  from  a  plant  or  an  animal  alkaloid  produced  by  the  natural 
procesa  of  putrefaction.  Had  they  reached  the  limits  of  their  scientific 
knowledge  so  that  they  were  able  in  a  matter  of  life  and  death  to  say  that 
that  substance  might  not  have  been  the  result  of  some  animal  alkaloid 
produced  after  death  by  a  natural  process  of  putrefaction?  Were  they 
sure  that  scientific  men  had  got  to  the  bottom  of  things,  or  did  they  not 
think  that  as  the  years  rolled  on  they  would  acquire  new  knowledge? 
Only  eight  years  ago  it  was  thought  that  the  chemical  formulae  of  those 
three  alkaloids — atropine,  hyoscyamin,  and  hyoscin — were  identical.  It 
was  now  proved  that  they  were  not,  and  who  knew  whither  the  researches 
of  their  great  scientists  might  not  lead  on  that  point?  Were  they 
satisfied  beyond  all  doubt  that  science  had  reached  the  limit? 

Leaving  these  technicalities,  there  was  one  factor  in  the  case  that 
dominated  the  whole,  and  that  was  the  fact  that  Crippen  went  daily  to 
work,  constantly  saw  his  friends,  took  Le  Neve  at  once,  the  very  day  after 
the  disappearance  of  his  wife,  to  live  in  this  house,  and  yet  none  of  his 
friends,  business  or  social,  saw  any  strange  look  in  the  man,  any  sign  of 
fright  or  agitation.  Was  it  conceivable  that  if  during  the  night  of  31st 
January  he  had  been  engaged  in  that  gruesome  task  of  cutting  up  the 
body,  severing  the  limbs,  burying  the  remains,  carrying  parts  away 
piecemeal  from  the  house  and  getting  rid  of  stains  of  blood — was  it  con- 
ceivable that  he  could  have  done  all  that  in  a  short  time?  Was  it 
conceivable  that  if  a  murderer  had  done  these  things  he  would  have  gone 
next  morning  to  his;  work  without  a  trace  of  terror  or  a  strange  look  in 
his  eyes?  It  was  beyond  the  powers  of  belief;  and  that  element  in  the 
case  the  jury  would  not  allow  themselves,  he  knew,  for  one  moment  to 
overlook  when  they  were  trying  to  solve  all  the  doubtful  matters  in  this 
case. 

Gentlemen,  the  materials  are  before  you  now.  My  lord  holds  the 
scales  of  justice  even.  It  is  for  you  to  say  which  way  those  scales  shall 
come  down.  My  only  anxiety  is  this — lest  I,  by  any  want  of  vigilance  or 
care  in  this  case,  by  any  omission  on  my  part,  have  done  anything  that 
might  imperil  this  man's  life.  But  this  I  do  want  to  say.  I  want  to 
acknowledge,  and  I  should  be  ungenerous  if  I  did  not,  the  loyal  help  given 
to  me  and  the  wise  suggestions  made  to  me  not  only  in  Court,  but  for 
long  hours  out  of  Court,  by  my  two  colleagues  with  me  in  this  case,  Mr. 
Huntly  Jenkins  and  Mr.  Roome,  and  all  those  who  collected  the  material 
to  enable  me  to  present  the  case  for  the  prisoner.  I  do  not  plead  for 
mercy.  Not  at  all.  I  do  not  plead  for  mercy.  There  is  only  one 
anxiety  which  oppresses  me,  and  that  anxiety  is  that  you  should  have 
the  will  power,  because  you  need  it — that  is  no  slight  on  you,  gentlemen 
— you  need  all  the  will  power  a  man  could  have  to  enable  you  to  expel  the 
poison  or  prejudice  which  must  have  been  instilled  into  your  minds  by 
reason  of  his  lies,  by  reason  of  his  folly,  and  beyond  that  by  reason  of 
so  much  that  has  appeared  in  the  columns  of  the  papers.  You  need 
the  will  power  to  expel  all  that  prejudice.  All  I  plead  for  is  that  you 
should  give,  as  you  mean  to  give,  the  verdict  with  minds  unclouded  by 
any  preconceived  prejudices.  What  I  do  demand,  and  what  I  have  a 
150 


Closing  Speech  for  the  Defence. 

Mr.  Tobin 

right  to  demand,  is  that  you  should  never  forget  that  greatest  principle 
of  all  in  English  justice — that  great  principle  of  the  benefit  of  the  doubt. 
That  is  not  a  principle  to  be  ignored,  you  know.  That  is  a  principle 
to  be  jealously  guarded  and  to  be  sacredly  preserved  by  every  juror, 
whatever  the  case  may  be.  Each  of  you,  let  me  remind  you,  is  separately 
responsible  for  the  verdict  which  you  jointly  give.  Each  of  you  individu- 
ally. Not  one  of  you  must  yield  his  opinion  to  that  of  the  others 
unless  his  reason  and  his  conscience  dictate  to  him  that  he  should  so 
yield.  Not  one  of  you  can  shelve  his  responsibility.  Each  of  you  is 
responsible  for  his  verdict  to  his  conscience  and  his  God. 

The  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — I  find  that  that  text-book  of  Hempel  & 
Arndt's  is  obtainable,  Mr.  Tobin.  I  have  directed  it  to  be  sent  for,  and 
it  shall  be  placed  at  your  disposal  to-morrow  morning. 

The   Court  adjourned. 


Fifth    Day— Saturday,  22nd   October,   1910. 

The  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — Mr.  Muir,  I  have  received  an  enormous 
number  of  communications,  some  of  which  are  entitled,  I  think,  to  some 
respect.  One  has  reference  to  an  answer  to  a  question  put  by  one  of  the 
jury  yesterday,  and  I  think  it  is  fair  to  put  Dr.  Crippen  in  the  box  again, 
and  ask  him  another  question  about  it.  First  of  all,  I  should  like  to 
know  if  Hempel  &  Arndt's  book  is  forthcoming? 

Mr.  Mum — My  lord,  it  is  not.  An  officer  was  engaged  up  to  eight 
o'clock  last  night  trying  to  get  it,  without  success. 

HAWLET  HARVEY  CRIPPEN  (recalled),  examined  by  the  LORD  CHIEF 
JUSTICE — I  did  not  mention  Hempel  &  Arndt's  book  to  my  advisers ;  I  never 
mentioned  that  book  until  here  in  Court  yesterday.  When  I  said  in  my 
evidence  in  chief  that  I  had  known  hyoscin  administered  at  the  Bethlem 
Lunatic  Asylum,  I  meant  the  Bethlem  Royal  Hospital,  where  I  studied 
for  three  months.  In  the  Royal  Bethlem  Hospital  and  in  my  own 
practice,  in  cases  of  insanity  in  which  hyoscin  is  administered  it  is  always 
given  by  hypodermic  injection.  It  may  be  given  in  cases  of  nervous 
debility  in  infinitesimal  doses  by  the  mouth.  I  treated  most  of  my 
patients  by  correspondence;  I  seldom  saw  a  patient.  My  principal 
practice  was  with  the  eye,  throat,  nose,  and  ear,  but  I  also  had  nervous 
cases.  I  have  never  had  any  cases  of  paralysis  agitans.  I  have  had  cases 
of  locomotor  ataxy.  I  had  a  case  of  violent  mania  a  long  time  ago  in 
America.  I  had  a  case  of  locomotor  ataxy  in  January  of  this  year.  With 
regard  to  the  Mr.  MacSweeny,  whom  I  mentioned  yesterday,  I  never  saw 
him. 

He  says  in  his  letter  that  he  has  received  your  "  Home  Remedy 

151 


Hawley   Harvey  Crippen. 

Hawley  Harvey  Crippen 

Book."        Did  you  publish   a    "Home  Remedy  Book"? — He  refers    to 
Munyons'. 

Did  you  know  what  he  was  suffering  from? — Yes,  he  was  suffering 
from  nervous  debility.  His  letters  are  not  all  there. 

Do  you  know  one  way  or  the  other  of  your  own  practice  whether  in 
the  cases  of  the  diseases  I  have  mentioned — paralysis  agitans,  locomotor 
ataxy,  violent  mania,  cerebral  excitement,  or  epilepsy — hyoscin  is  pre- 
scribed?— In  cases  where  there  is  cerebral  excitement  it  is  administered 
by  hypodermic  injection,  but  in  the  class  of  cases  that  I  dealt  with,  that 
is  nervous  debility  or  nervous  irritation,  it  is  given  in  very  minute  doses, 
infinitesimal  doses,  for  relieving  the  irritable  condition  of  the  nerves. 

And  then  hypodermically  ? — No,  by  the  mouth. 

The  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE  (to  the  jury) — I  think,  gentlemen,  that  this 
rather  shows  that  this  question  of  hypodermically  or  by  the  mouth  does 
not  become  so  important  after  all. 

(The  prisoner  then  returned  to  the  dock.) 

Mr.  TOBIN — I  do  not  know  whether  your  lordship  will  think  it 
proper  to  look  at  a  book  I  have  here,  which  has  only  this  moment  been 
handed  to  me. 

The  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — Certainly,  I  will  look  at  it.  (A  book 
handed  to  his  lordship.)  This  is  not  the  book  mentioned  by  the  prisoner 
yesterday  ? 

Mr.  TOBIN — No,  my  lord. 

The  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE  (after  reading  the  book) — This  book  certainly 
does  seem  to  show  that  in  some  cases  of  hydrophobia  with  maniacal 
fexcitement,  acute  pneumonia  with  wild  delirium,  cardiac  disease  with 
wandering  delirium,  and  attempts  to  get  out  of  bed,  chronic  Bright' s 
disease  with  refusal  to  take  food,  and  acute  double  pneumonia  with  delirium 
100th  of  a  grain  of  hyoscin  is  given  subcutaneously — that  is  hypodermic- 
ally.  On  another  page  it  is  said  that  the  preparation  of  hyoscin — which, 
I  presume,  is  the  same — may  be  given  subcutaneously  or  by  the  mouth. 
The  writer  says  that  his  own  experience  is  decidedly  in  favour  of  adminis- 
tration under  the  skin,  which,  besides  being  more  practicable,  and  perhaps 
the  only  method  with  delirious  patients,  is  the  more  effective.  This 
seems  to  establish  that  these  minute  doses:  of  hyoscin  are  known  to 
medical  men  to  be  given  in  these  diseases  either  by  the  mouth  or  under 
the  skin.  You  can  look  at  the  book,  Mr.  Muir.  It  is  a  minor  incident 
in  the  case,  although  it  has  been  referred  to  by  Mr.  Tobin  quite  rightly. 
It  only  shows  that  the  particular  question  that  was  asked  by  the  jury  was 
answered  too  positively  by  Dr.  Willcox. 

Mr.  MUIR — Dr.  Willcox  was  only  talking  of  his  experience. 

The  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — It  is  quite  plain,  but  it  is  a  very  minor 
point.  Will  you  give  me  the  title  of  the  book? 

^  Mr.    TOBIN — It  is  Braithwaite's   "  Retrospect    of   Medicine."        The 
article  I  referred  your  lordship  to  is;  written  by  Dr.  Mitchell  Bruce,  con- 
sulting physician  to  the  Charing  Cross  Hospital. 
152 


Closing  Speech  for  the  Crown. 


Closing  Speech  for  the  Crown. 

Mr.  MUIR  addressed  the  jury  for  the  Crown.  He  said  that  he  should 
not  have  thought  it  necessary  for  any  one  who  had  observed  the  demeanour 
of  the  jury  during  the  progress  of  the  trial  to  address  to  them  any  words 
seeking  to  enforce  upon  their  minds  the  gravity  of  the  task  which  they 
had  undertaken;  but  his  learned  friend  had  thought  it  right  to  drag  out 
of  the  limbo  in  which  it  had  rested  for  many  years  an  old  forensic  bogey  in 
order  to  suggest  to  their  minds  that ( they  ought  to>  be  cautious  and  certain 
before,  in  a  case  involving  life  and  death,  they  found  a  verdict  of  "  guilty." 
There  were  cases  in  the  books,  said  his  learned  friend,  which  showed  that 
men  had  been  tried  for  murder,  convicted,  and  hanged,  and  then  their 
supposed  victims  had  turned  up  alive.  There  were  such  cases  in  books.  Sir 
Matthew  Hale,  who  died  in  1676,  mentioned  two  such  cases,  which  were  old 
cases  in  his  time.  The  world  had  contracted  since  then  for  the  purpose  of 
finding  absent  persons.  Steamships,  railway  trains,  electric  telegraphs, 
and  newspapers  had  made  a  vast  difference  to  the  administration  of  justice 
since  Sir  Matthew  Kale's  time.  But  it  was  thought  necessary  to  flutter 
before  their  eyes  that  ancient  bogey,  as  if  they  were  not  grown  men,  and 
as  if  they  would  be  afraid  to  go  home  in  the  dark  because,  according  to 
their  consciences,  they  had  done  their  duty.  No  caution  was  necessary  for 
the  jury  to  be  as  careful  as  men  could  be,  and  as  certain  as  in  the  affairs 
of  this  life  they  could  be;  and  he  should  have  thought  an  attempt  to 
frighten  them,  as  if  they  were  little  children  in  the  nursery,  was  out  of 
place.  They  would  do  their  duty  according  to  the  ancient  custom  of  the  law 
of  this  country,  which  resolved  all  doubtful  questions  in  favour  of  the  prisoner 
upon  his  trial.  If  doubt  there  were,  he  was  entitled  to  be  acquitted.  There 
was  not  any  question  of  benefit  at  all;  the  law  was  that  the  Crown  must 
prove  it  beyond  doubt.  If  they  did  not  prove  it  beyond  doubt,  they  had 
failed  to  prove  the  case  at  all.  That  was  the  law  that  they  were  called  upon 
to  administer;  and  who  was  going  to  suggest  that  they  were  going  to  find 
a  verdict  of  "  guilty  "  in  this  case  if,  in  their  consciences  and  minds,  they 
thought  the  evidence  was  not  sufficient  ? 

One  other  topic  his  learned  friend  dwelt  upon,  which  neither  in  opening 
the  case  nor  now  did  he  deem  worth  wasting  their  time  to  say  a  word  upon. 
The  suggestion  that  their  minds  would  be  prejudiced  by  anything  they  had 
heard  outside  the  jury  box  was  a  suggestion  he  would  not  insult  their 
intelligence  by  making ;  and  he  only  mentioned  it  now  because  his  learned 
friend  said  that  the  newspapers,  in  publishing  reports  of  this  case,  had 
published  one  side  only.  Why  had  they  published  one  side  only?  Because 
the  prisoner  chose  to  keep  his  mouth  closed ;  because  he  did  not  choose  to 
go  before  the  coroner ;  because  he  did  not  choose  to  go  into  the  witness-box 
before  the  magistrate;  because  he  chose  to  reserve  those  precious  medical 
witnesses  until  this  trial — those  witnesses  who,  if  they  had  gone  into  the 
witness-box  at  the  Police  Court,  would  have  sworn  something  totally 
different  from  what  they  swore  in  the  witness-box  here.  That  being  the 

153 


Hawley  Harvey  Crippen. 

Mr.  Hulr 

fact,  his  learned  friend  had  thought  it  right  to  complain,  on  behalf  of 
the  prisoner,  that  the  newspapers  had  only  published  one  side  of  the  case. 
They  were  asked  throughout  the  cross-examination  of  witness  after 
witness,  throughout  the  two  speeches  of  his  learned  friend,  to  discount  or 
to  discard  plain  facts,  because  the  prisoner  was  too  kind-hearted  a  man 
to  have  done  the  deed  of  which  he  stood  accused.  Let  them  examine  the 
foundation  for  that  $heory.  The  prisoner  had  admitted  that  over  a  long 
series  of  months  he  led  a  life  of  studied  hypocrisy,  utterly  regardless  of  the 
pain  which  the  lies  which  he  was  telling  and  was  acting  would  inflict  upon 
friend  or  sister  of  his  wife.  Letters  full  of  grief  of  a  bereaved  husband  were 
written  to  Mrs.  Martinetti,  to  Dr.  Burroughs  to  be  seen  by  Dr.  Burroughs's 
wife,  to  Mrs.  Mills,  the  half-sister  of  Cora  Crippen.  There  was  that  letter 
of  his  carrying  the  sobs  of  the  bereaved  husband  across  the  ocean  to 
harrow  the  feelings  of  his  wife's  relations.  He  put  on  mourning,  wrote  on 
black-edged  paper,  mocked  the  grief  of  his  wife's  dearest  friends,  who 
thought  they  were  sympathising  with  him,  when  they  wished  to  lay  a  last 
tribute  of  love  upon  the  far-off  grave  of  their  dead  friend.  He  said,  "  A 
wreath  is  no  use ;  she  is  not  being  buried,  she  is  being  cremated ;  her  ashes 
will  soon  be  here" — and  then  with  his  tongue  in  his  cheek — "you  may 
have  your  little  ceremony  then."  Ashes  to  be  fetched  across  the  sea  !  They 
were  asked  to  say  then  that  he  was  too  kind-hearted  to  have  done  this  deed. 
The  man  who  could  mock  the  mourners  had  not  sufficient  control  over  his 
nerve,  if  he  had  done  this  thing,  to  conceal  the  fact  that  he  had  done  it, 
in  office  hours?  Let  the  jury  act  on  the  plain  facts;  let  them  deal  with  the 
man  as  they  saw  him  in  the  evidence  of  Mrs.  Martinetti  and  in  that  of  Mrs. 
Smythson,  in  the  letter  he  wrote  to  Mrs.  Mills.  If  they  were  going  to 
acquit  him,  would  it  be  upon  the  ground  that  he  was  too  kind-hearted? 
For  days  sitting  in  that  dock  they  had  had  opportunities  of  judging  what 
manner  of  man  he  was;  for  hours  standing  in  that  witness-box,  they  were 
the  judges  of  whether  the  prisoner  had  the  nerve  to  conceal  his  feelings. 
What  were  they  to  say  of  all  that  hypocrisy  and  of  all  those  lies?  They 
were  told  to  cover  up  a  scandal.  For  whose  sake  ?  For  the  sake  of  the  wife 
who  had  betrayed  him,  who  put  on  a  fair  face  to  the  world  and  made  her 
most  intimate  friends  believe  she  was  a  bright,  happy-natured  woman,  but 
to  him  indifferent,  bad-tempered,  extravagant,  a  person  having  no  affection 
towards  him  at  all.  A  living  lie  he  would  have  them  believe  his  wife  was ; 
deserted  him  for  another  man ;  and  it  was  to  cover  up  the  scandal  attaching 
to  her  name  when  she  deserted  him  without  cause  that  he  told  all  those  lies 
and  acted  all  that  hypocrisy.  He  believed  she  was  unfaithful  to  him ;  that 
her  love  was  fixed  on  Bruce  Miller;  she  living  in  the  same  house  with  this 
man,  Bruce  Miller,  in  America.  They  had  never  cast  eyes  on  each  other 
for  eix  years;  but  she  was  the  unfaithful,  bad-tempered  wife,  and  he  the 
kind-hearted,  considerate  husband !  They  had  seen  Bruce  Miller.  It  was 
an  odd  jury  of  twelve  men  that,  whatever  topic  was  being  discussed  before 
them,  did  not  contain  one  or  more  who  thoroughly  understood  it.  There 
was  a  freedom  of  manner  between  actors  and  actresses  on  the  music  hall 
stage  which  did  not  exist  in  their  conventional  life.  It  was  suggested  that 
she  had  been  unfaithful  with  Bruce  Miller.  Bruce  Miller  had  travelled 
across  the  ocean  to  contradict  it.  If  he  was  a  liar  he  would  not  have 
154 


Closing  Speech  for  the   Crown. 


Mr.  Muip 


admitted  what  he  did  admit — the  sending  of  the  letters  "  with  love  and 
kisses  to  Brown  Eyes."  That  would  have  meant  so  much  if  a  letter  had  been 
sent  to  a  wife  in  their  class  of  life;  and  it  might  mean  so  little  between 
persons  on  the  music  hall  stage.  Was  it  likely  that  he  would  have  admitted 
that — admitted  the  kisses — if  he  was  a  liar?  And  the  man  who  brought 
those  accusations  against  his  wife  was  the  man  who  was  himself  carrying 
on  an  intrigue  with  Ethel  Le  Neve,  extending  over  three  years,  and  who  said 
in  the  witness-box  that  he  believed  his  wife  knew  nothing  about  it. 

It  was  said  that  there  was  no  adequate  motive  shown  for  the  murder. 
When  was  an  adequate  motive  shown  for  any  murder?  His  learned  friend 
had  put  upon  the  case  for  the  Crown,  which  he  represented,  the  suggestion 
that  the  only  motives  put  forward  by  them  were  the  motive  to  get  the  £600 
in  the  bank  and  the  motive  to  marry  Ethel  Le  Neve.  Neither  of  those 
motives  was  suggested  by  him  in  his  opening  as  the  immediate  cause  of  the 
murder.  The  motive  that  was  suggested  was:  the  establishment  of  closer 
relations  with  Ethel  Le  Neve;  to  substitute  for  those  clandestine  meetings 
in  the  daytime  a  permanent  cohabitation  of  the  two.  What  did  he  care 
whether  he  married  Ethel  Le  Neve?  What  was  the  necessity  of  it?  The 
man  who  within  a  fortnight  of  the  announcement  of  his  wife's  death  pre- 
tended to  his  partner  that  he  had  married  another  woman  was  no  stickler 
for  ceremony.  But  was  the  motive  the  establishment  of  closer  relations 
with  Ethel  Le  Neve?  On  1st  February,  according  to  him,  his  wife  was  alive 
and  well  between  two  and  three  in  the  morning.  According  to  him,  on 
the  night  of  2nd  February  he  took  Ethel  Le  Neve  to  sleep  at  39  Hilldrop 
Crescent.  That  was  his  story.  The  date  did  not  agree  with  Mrs.  Jackson's; 
but  let  that  pass.  No  motive?  Love — if  they  dignified  it  by  that  name; 
lust — if  they  gave  it  its  true  appellation — one  of  the  most  powerful  motives 
actuating  the  thoughts  of  men.  Money  to  gratify  that  lust.  Immediately 
on  2nd  February  the  wife's  jewels  were  pawned,  £80  was  raised;  and  it 
was  suggested  that  there  was  no  motive !  A  man  who  did  that  was  a  man 
absolutely  callous  to  the  feelings  of  others,  as  he  suggested  he  had  proved 
by  hjs  own  admissions  and  by  his  conduct  to  his  wife's  friends.  There  was 
no  sign  of  alarm — it  was  suggested  by  his  learned  friend,  and  he  made 
the  best  suggestions  that  were  possible  on  the  facts — or  of  agitation.  It 
was  true  he  showed  none.  Some  men  had  marvellous  control  over  their 
inner  feelings.  Some  men  could  look  almost  happy,  certainly  at  their  ease, 
in  circumstances  which  would  absolutely  break  down  the  average  man ;  and 
they  had  had  opportunities  of  judging  to  which  of  those  two  classes  the 
prisoner  belonged.  There  was  no  sign  of  alarm ;  he  was  going  about  his 
business  in  the  ordinary  way,  with  a  smiling  face,  a  calm  manner,  the 
index,  it  was  suggested,  of  a  clear  conscience.  He  had  nothing  to  fear, 
because  he  had  done  nothing  wrong ;  therefore  a  calm,  ordinary  demeanour. 
Had  he  something  to  fear  when  Inspector  Dew  arrested  him  on  the  river 
St.  Lawrence?  Had  he  something  to  fear  when  he  travelled  across  the 
Atlantic  with  the  inspector?  He  was  calm  and  cheerful  from  the  day  of 
hia  arrest  till  yesterday.  But  it  was  said  that  because  he  appeared  to  be 
calm  and  cheerful  he  could  not  have  done  this. 

It  was  beyond  the  limits  of  human  belief,  it  was  said,  that,  if  the 
prisoner  murdered  his  wife  on  1st  February,  as  was  suggested,  before  he 

155 


Hawley  Harvey  Crippen. 


Mr.  Huir 


left  for  business  on  that  day — if  he  went  to  business  on  that  day — he  could 
have  invited  Ethel  Le  Neve  to  sleep  with  him  at  Hilldrop  Crescent  on  the 
2nd.  In  the  first  place,  the  statement  that  Ethel  Le  Neve  slept  the  night 
ot  2nd  February  at  Hilldrop  Crescent  rested  entirely  upon  the  prisoner's 
word.  He  never  said  so  before  yesterday  in  cross-examination  in  the 
witness-box.  His  recollection  was  that  his  learned  friend  Mr.  Tobin  did 
not  open  that  as  a  fact,  though  he  saw  the  power  of  it  as  an  argument  when 
he  came  to  sum  up  the  case.  It  rested  on  the  uncorroborated  statement  of 
Crippen  in  the  witness-box.  It  was  for  the  jury  to  say  what  weight,  if  any, 
they  attached  to  any  statement  of  Crippen's  uncorroborated.  But,  if  it 
was  true,  there  was  plenty  of  time  from  the  morning  of  1st  February  to  the 
night  of  2nd  February  to  have  got  rid  of  the  remains  of  his  wife.  Mrs. 
Jackson  said  that  it  was  in  the  month  of  February  that  Ethel  Le  Neve  first 
stayed  away  from  her  lodgings  one  night.  The  effect  of  her  evidence, 
though  she  spoke  of  no  date,  was  that  it  was*  later  in  the  month  of  February 
than  the  2nd. 

He  came  to  matters  which  were  still  more  important — the  question  of 
the  identity  of  those  remains.  It  was  said  by  his  learned  friend  that  the 
Crown  must  establish  two  things — first,  that  the  remains  were  those  of  a 
woman;  and,  secondly,  that  they  were  the  remains  of  Belle  Elmo  re.  With 
respect  to  his  learned  friend,  there  was  some  confusion  of  thought  there. 
The  one  was  a  step  in  the  proof  of  the  other.  The  Crown  must  prove  to 
the  satisfaction  of  the  jury  that  those  were  the  remains  of  Belle  Elmore,  or 
it  must  fail.  But  that  did  not  mean,  as  his  learned  friend  had  suggested 
to  the  jury,  that  they  must  be  satisfied  that  somebody  looking  at  those 
remains  was  able  to  say,  "  I  recognise  them  with  my  eyesight  as  the 
remains  of  Belle  Elmore."  If  that  were  a  necessity  of  either  fact  or  law, 
many  of  the  worst  crimes  would  go  unpunished.  They  could  conceive  a 
case  in  which  a  man  reduced  the  remains  of  his  victim  to  a  few  charred 
bones  which  no  human  being  could  recognise,  and  still  conceive  that  the 
evidence  might  be  overwhelming  that  the  bones  were  those  of  the  missing 
victim.  And  so  here  the  facts  which  went  to  establish  that  those  human 
remains  were  the  remains  of  Belle  Elmore  were  the  whole  facts  of  the  case, 
from  the  fact  of  the  date  of  1st  February  at  half-past  one  in  the  morning, 
when  the  prisoner  and  she  were  left  alone  in  their  house,  through  all  the 
months  down  to  13th  July,  when  those  human  remains  were  found  buried 
in  the  prisoner's  cellar  mixed  up  with  the  prisoner's  pyjama  jacket. 

Those  were  the  facts  upon  which  the  Crown  asked  the  jury,  exercising 
all  the  caution  which  it  was  their  duty  to  exercise,  to  say  that  the  facts 
proved  beyond  all  reasonable  doubt,  and  that  those  remains  were  the 
remains  of  Belle  Elmore.  There  were  two  ways  of  approaching  the  ques- 
tion of  identity.  "  Find  something  which  shows  me  that  the  remains  here 
are  the  remains  of  Belle  Elmore,"  that  was  one  way.  The  other  way  was, 
"  See  if  there  is  not  something  in  those  remains  which  shows  that  they  are 
not  the  remains  of  Belle  Elmore."  His  learned  friend,  who  needed  to  be 
under  no  misgivings  that  any  lack  of  vigilance  or  skill  on  his  part  had 
deprived  his  client  of  any  assistance  that  legal  aid  could  give  him,  did  not 
point  to  any  single  item  in  all  the  items  in  that  grave  for  the  purpose  of 
saying,  "  There  is  a  thing  which  shows  that  those  remains  cannot  be  the 
156 


Closing  Speech  for  the  Crown. 


Mr.  Muir 


remains  of  Belle  Elmore."  Not  one!  A  man's  handkerchief,  and  a  man 
put  them  there.  A  man's  pyjama.  jacket;  yes,  and  the  prisoner's  pyjama 
jacket.  Take  away  those  items  suggestive  of  a  man.  No  question  was  put 
to  any  medical  man  for  the  Crown  or  for  the  defence,  "  Do  you  find  upon 
those  remains  any  indication  at  all  of  the  male  sex?  "  Therefore  the  only 
things  found  in  that  grave  suggestive  of  a  man  were  suggestive  of  the  man 
who  put  the  remains  into  it. 

He  desired  to  say  again  that  no  medical  man  could  say  with  certainty 
on  anatomical  grounds  that  those  remains  were  the  remains  of  a  woman. 
Anatomical  grounds  were  the  only  grounds  on  which  as  medical  men  they 
would  be  justified  in  forming  any  opinion  at  all.  There  was  failure 
of  affirmative  proof  on  that  point,  but  what  followed?  Hinde's  curlers 
with  a  woman's  hair  mixed  up  with  those  remains.  How  did  they  get 
there  unless  they  came  from  a  body  from  which  those  remains  were  all 
that  were  left?  The  colour  of  the  hair  was  dark  brown  naturally, 
bleached  to  a  lighter  colour.  Belle  Elmore  had  dark  brown  hair  bleached 
to  a  lighter  shade.  It  was  true  that  other  women  had  dark  brown  hair 
bleached  to  a  lighter  colour,  but  there  was  no  suggestion  that  any  woman 
with  hair  of  that  sort  was  missing  in  London  within  the  limits  of  the  time 
which  were  involved  in  that  case.  There  was  the  undergarment  such  as 
Belle  Elmore  wore.  Mrs.  Harrison,  one  of  her  oldest  friends  in  this 
country,  who  had  known  her  for  twelve  or  thirteen  years,  and  had  often 
seen  her  dressing,  spoke  of  the  hair  as  being  like  the  hair  of  Belle  Elmore, 
as  she  saw  it  in  the  morning  before  Belle  Elmore  dressed.  Mrs.  Harrison 
spoke  of  the  undergarments  as  being  such  as  Belle  Elmore  wore,  and 
asked  in  cross-examination,  "  And  such  as  thousands  of  other  women 
wore?  "  she  answered,  "  Yes,  but  Belle  always  wore  them."  The  flesh 
which  had  been  produced  before  them — he  observed  how  bravely  they  did 
their  duty  in  regard  to  that  ghastly  relic — that  piece  of  flesh,  perhaps  the 
most  important,  certainly  one  of  the  most  important  things,  was  it  a 
piece  of  the  body  of  Belle  Elmore?  It  was  said  by  the  witnesses  for  the 
Crown  to  be  a  piece  of  the  lower  abdominal  wall,  and  bearing  an  old  scar; 
and  Belle  Elmore  had  been  operated  upon  in  that  region  in  the  year 
1892  or  1893. 

It  was  disputed  by  his  learned  friend  in  opening  that  this  was  part 
of  the  abdominal  wall  at  all,  and  he  suggested  to  the  jury  that  his  medical 
evidence  would  leave  their  minds  in  such  doubt  on  the  point  that  they 
would  be  bound  to  acquit  his  client.  The  evidence  upon  this  branch  of 
the  case  could  be  summarised  in  a  few  sentences.  Mr.  Pepper,  a  surgeon 
of  the  greatest  experience,  who  had  himself  performed  hundreds  of  opera- 
tions, had  seen  a  healed  scar  caused  by  his  own  operation  which  was  just 
such  a  scar  as  this.  Dr.  Willcox,  a  surgeon  of  great  experience,  and  Dr. 
Marshall,  the  police  surgeon,  all  saw  the  thing  when  it  was  fresh;  both 
agreed  that  it  was  a  scar.  On  the  other  hand,  there  was  the  evidence 
of  Dr.  Turnbull  and  Dr.  Wall,  who  at  first  said  that  the  piece  of  flesh 
did  not  come  from  the  abdominal  wall  at  all,  but  from  the  buttocks,  and 
who  now  had  been  obliged  to  admit  in  the  witness-box  that  they  were 
absolutely  mistaken.  Those  were  the  two  men  who  did  not  scruple  to 

N  157 


Hawley  Harvey  Crippen. 


Mr.  Hulr 

give  a  report,  after  a  twenty  minutes'  examination  of  a  piece  of  the  human 
body,  to  the  effect  that  three  distinguished  colleagues  had  been  talking 
nonsense  in  the  witness-box  on  oath.  Now,  they  had  recantations  in 
the  witness-box,  recantations  and  confessions  of  incapacity  or  the  grossest 
carelessness  and  rashness.  And  those  two  men  who  had  so  recanted  and 
so  confessed  were  the  two  men  on  whose  evidence  the  jury  were  asked  to 
say  that  Mr.  Pepper,  with  his  vast  experience,  and  Dr.  Willcox,  acting 
for  the  Home  Office,  who  had  probably  conducted  more  inquiries  than 
any  other  living  man  except  perhaps  Dr.  Luff,  were  absolutely  mistaken. 
All  Dr.  Turnbull  could  do  in  answer  to  him  was  to  say  that  a  person 
unaccustomed  to  the  use  of  the  microscope  might  make  a  mistake.  Did 
he  mean  to  suggest  in  that  innuendo  that  Dr.  Spilsbury  was  unaccustomed 
to  the  use  of  the  microscope?  Was  that  the  suggestion?  He  hoped  not. 

The  mistakes  Dr.  Turnbull  made  were  these.  He  was  wrong  as  to 
the  part  of  the  body  from  which  this  flesh  came.  He  was  wrong  as  to 
its  not  having  the  characteristic  aponeurosis  upon  the  abdominal  wall. 
He  was  wrong  as  to  the  absence  of  the  tendon.  And  he  was  wrong  as  to 
the  absence  of  the  transverse  muscles.  All  those  mistakes  he  had  to 
confess  in  the  witness-box.  It  was  for  the  jury  to  judge  between  the 
evidence  for  the  Crown  and  for  the  defence  which  they  considered  most 
worthy  of  belief.  And  as  to  Dr.  Wall,  he  never  heard  anything  more 
extraordinary  in  his  life.  Being  asked  his  reasons  for  thinking  it  was 
not  a  scar  he  said,  "  If  it  were  a  scar  I  should  expect  to  find  something 
different  from  what  I  did  find."  Nothing  more  than  that  to  put  against 
the  reasoned  evidence  of  Mr.  Pepper,  Dr.  Willcox,  and  Dr.  Spilsbury. 
Was  that  a  piece  of  the  lower  abdominal  wall  of  a  human  being?  The 
answer,  he  submitted,  must  be  yes.  Had  it  got  a  scar  on  it?  Was  it  part 
of  the  body  of  a  woman?  The  evidence  of  Mr.  Pepper  was  emphatic.  Then 
if  a  woman,  if  a  scar,  if  from  the  lower  part  of  the  abdomen,  from  whose 
body  did  it  come?  His  submission  was  that  there  was  only  one  answer 
possible.  It  came  from  the  body  of  a  woman  who  was  seen  alive  in  the 
house  at  half -past  one  in  the  morning  of  1st  February,  whose  remains  were 
dug  up  from  the  cellar  on  13th  July,  and  who  between  those  two  dates  waa 
never  seen  alive  or  heard  from. 

The  suggestion  of  his  learned  friend  in  opening  the  case  was — why 
should  the  prisoner,  during  his  four  and  a  half  years'  tenancy,  have 
suspected  there  were  remains  there  at  all  when  Inspector  Dew,  digging 
with  the  heel  of  his  boot,  could  not  tell  that  the  floor  had  been  disturbed 
for  years  and  years?  But  they  now  knew  that  within  a  much  shorter 
period  than  that  those  remains  were  buried.  They  were  buried  with  the 
pyjama  jacket,  having  upon  it  the  name  of  Jones  Brothers,  Holloway, 
Limited,  a  company  which  was  not  formed  until  1906,  after  Crippen  became 
tenant  of  the  house.  The  jacket  was  bought  by  Jones  Brothers  in  Novem- 
ber or  December,  1908,  sold  by  them  between  December  and  January, 
1908-9,  and  money  collected  for  it  from  the  address,  39  Hilldrop  Crescent. 
Who  in  that  period  could  have  buried  it  in  tihat  house?  Who  was  missing 
who  could  be  buried  in  it?  Nobody  but  Belle  Elmore. 

It  was  said  the  prisoner  had  not  the  opportunity  or  the  skill  necessary 
158 


Closing  Speech  for  the  Crown, 


Mr.  Mulr 


for  the  burial  and  the  mutilation  of  those  remains.  On  that  point  counsel 
referred  to  the  evidence  of  the  diploma,  signed  by  the  professor  of  anatomy 
or  surgery  of  the  prisoner's  medical  school  in  the  United  States,  the 
prisoner's  own  statement  that  before  he  took  his  degree  he  attended  hos- 
pitals in  London  for  the  purpose  of  witnessing  operations,  and  the  endorse- 
ment upon  his  diploma  showing  that  he  practised  in  America  in  different 
States  under  the  authority  of  that  diploma,  together  with  the  statement 
of  Mr.  Pepper,  that  once  having  learned  how  this  thing  was  done  it  would 
not  matter  whether  one  had  practised  it  for  ten  years  or  whether  he  had  not. 
This  was  no  delicate  dissection  which  required  constant  skill  and  practice 
in  order  to  do  it  with  accuracy ;  but  it  did  require  some  medical  knowledge 
and  some  degree  of  dexterity  such  as  would  be  gained  in  going  through  the 
medical  school.  On  the  other  hand  they  had  the  evidence  of  the  prisoner 
and  nothing  else.  Somebody  in  Crippen's  house,  while  Crippen  was 
tenant,  carved  up  the  body  which  he  suggested  was  proved  to  be  the  body 
of  Cora  Crippen.  Who  could  do  this  thing  in  Crippen's  house  since 
November,  1908,  but  the  man  who  was  now  upon  his  trial? 

What  became  of  Belle  Elmore?  Did  she  ever  leave  that  house  alive 
after  the  Martinettis  left  at  half -past  one  in  the  morning  of  1st  February? 
No  one  ever  saw  her  alive,  ever1  had  a  letter  from  her.  Her  property 
was  left  behind;  she  had  no  money,  so  far  as  could  be  found.  Before 
the  flight  it  was  said,  quite  truly  upon  the  prisoner's  own  version  of  the 
matter,  why  should  he  inquire  where  she  was  gone?  There  was  some- 
thing to  be  said  for  the  proposition,  why  should  he  inquire  after  his  arrest? 
The  most  obvious  inquiries  neglected — the  tradesmen  who  would  come  to 
the  door,  the  neighbours  who  would  see  her,  or  the  cabman  who  would  take 
her  luggage.  Here  was  a  man  defended  by  a  London  solicitor  whose 
defence  was  that  his  wife  was  alive,  and,  as  far  as  the  defendant  knew, 
not  a  tradesman,  cabman,  or  steamship  owner  questioned  to  find  what  had 
become  of  her.  Was  that  fact  explicable  upon  any  hypothesis  except  one, 
that  Crippen  knew  her  remains  were  buried  in  that  cellar,  and  that  any 
inquiries  for  her  would  be  absolutely  fruitless  and  futile?  She  had  friends 
at  home  in  England,  friends  in  America,  relatives  in  America.  Any  inquiry 
made  at  them?  None,  either  before  or  after  the  flight.  But  the  friends 
were  persistent.  "  What  has  become  of  your  wife? "  they  asked. 
"  Where  is  she?  "  He  told  them  lies,  and  they  found  them  to  be  lies. 
They  wanted  to  know  the  spot  she  died,  the  place  where  she  was  cremated. 
They  were  not  friends  to  desert  a  woman  whom  they  loved,  and  she  was 
not  the  woman,  whatever  her  quarrels  with  her  husband  might  have  been, 
to  cut  herself  adrift  from  her  friends  in  that  way.  The  newspapers  of 
two  continents  were  ringing  with  this  case.  The  police  had  circulated 
descriptions. 

It  was  suggested  at  this  moment  that  Belle  Elmore  might  be  alive, 
that  murders  had  been  committed,  or  supposed  to  be  committed,  and 
persons  wrongly  convicted  and  hanged,  and  the  supposed  victims  had 
reappeared.  Was  it  not  asking  them  to  behave  like  children  in  a  nursery 
listening  to  fairy  tales  to  expect  men  to  act  on  such  a  suggestion  as  thatt 
The  jury  were  grown  men,  business  men.  If  ever  a  fact  was  preyed 

159 


Hawley  Harvey  Crippen. 

Mr.  Muir 

beyond  reasonable  doubt  to  business  men,  courageously  applying  their 
minds  to  a  difficult  and  a  painful  task,  was  not  the  fact  proved  that 
Belle  Elmore  was  dead,  and  that  the  prisoner  knew  it? 

How  did  she  die?  She  died  of  hyoscin  poisoning,  and  the  poison 
hyoscin  was  found  in  the  remains  of  Belle  Elmore.  How  did  it  get  there? 
Crippen  bought  hyoscin  on  19th  January — five  grains  of  it.  He  had 
never  bought  it  before  or  since.  Two  and  a  third  grains  he  said  he 
dispensed  in  medicines  used  in  extremely  rare  and  difficult  cases — not  the 
kind  of  cases  ordinarily  dealt  with  through  the  post — but  not  a  patient 
called  who  ever  got  a  pilule  with  hyoscin  in  it.  A  grain  and  two-thirds 
was  left  in  his  possession.  Where  was  it?  Measures,  test  tubes,  and 
paraphernalia  of  that  kind  had  been  produced,  but  no  hyoscin.  He  said 
it  was  there  in  a  cupboard  in  his  office  when  he  went  away.  What  had 
become  of  it?  More  than  half  a  grain  found  in  the  dead  body ! 

He  could  not  help  regretting  that  his  learned  friend  allowed  himself 
to  say  that  it  was  unfortunate  that  Dr.  Willcox  knew  before  he  found 
the  hyoscin  that  the  prisoner  had  purchased  hyoscin.  What  did  that 
mean,  if  not  that  Dr.  Willcox,  the  senior  analyst  to  the  Home  Office,  was 
going  to  be  dishonest  enough  to  say  that  a  substance  was  hyoscin  when 
it  was  not,  because  it  suited  the  case  for  the  prosecution?  That  was 
the  suggestion  in  all  its  naked  absurdity,  and  he  was  sorry  his  learned 
friend  ever  made  it.  What  else  had  he  got  to  set  up  against  Dr. 
Willcox  and  the  other  medical  witnesses  for  the  Crown?  Scientific 
witnesses,  so  called,  sometimes  made  sorry  spectacles  of  themselves  in  the 
witness-box,  but  was  there  ever  a  sorrier  spectacle  than  was  presented 
by  Mr.  Wynter  Blyth?  Having  had  read  to  him  this  passage  from  his 
own  book,  "  Further  research  has  conclusively  shown  that  at  present  no 
ptomaine  is  known  which  so  closely  resembles  a  vegetable  poison  as  to  be 
likely  in  skilled  hands  to  cause  confusion,"  he  said  that  since  he  had 
been  instructed  in  this  case  he  had  altered  that  opinion.  He  referred  to 
the  tests  which  were  applied  to  discover  whether  the  poison  was  hyoscin 
or  not,  and  submitted  that  the  suggestion  of  any  confusion  between 
atropine  and  hyoscyamin  fell  to  the  ground.  It  was  undoubtedly  hyoscin 
which  was  found  in  those  remains. 

That  is  the  case  for  the  Crown.  Ask  yourselves  in  this  most 
important  case  these  questions.  Where  is  Belle  Elmore?  Is  your  answer 
to  be  that  she  is  dead?  Then,  whose  remains  were  those  in  the  cellar? 
Is  your  answer  to  be  Belle  Elmore's?  If  not  Belle  Elmore's,  what  con- 
ceivable explanation  is  there?  None  in  the  world.  Who  mutilated  her 
body  and  put  these  remains  there?  Who  but  the  prisoner  had  the  oppor- 
tunity, the  skill,  the  access  to  the  pieces  of  pyjama  jacket  which  were 
found  in  the  grave?  How  did  she  die?  Is  your  answer  to  be  of  hyoscin 
poisoning?  If  not,  how  did  that  person  die?  No  sign  upon  the  internal 
organs  which  were  left,  no  sign  on  .post-mortem  examination,  of  any  cause 
of  death  at  all  except  hyoscin  poisoning.  If  your  answer  is  to  be  that  she 
died  of  hyoscin  poisoning,  where  did  she  get  it  and  who  administered  it? 
Crippen  bought  it — it  was  not  much  known — on  19th  January,  and  Belle 
Elmore  disappeared  from  this  world  on  1st  February.  Remember  always 
160 


Closing  Speech  for  the  Crown. 


Mr.  MuiP 


that  it  is  for  the  Crown  to  make  out  their  case.  Do  not  act  upon  anything 
against  the  prisoner  unless  you  are  satisfied  as  reasonable  men  beyond 
all  reasonable  doubt.  But  if  you  are  so  satisfied,  determine  that  thia 
murder,  if  it  be  a  murder,  shall  not  go  unpunished.  You  are  grown  men, 
citizens  of  London.  You  are  here  to  do  your  duty,  to  perform  a  difficult 
and  painful  task.  From  that  duty  a,  jury  of  the  City  of  London  will  not 
shrink. 


Charge  to  the  Jury. 

The  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — Gentlemen  of  the  jury,  the  last  two  stages 
of  this  great  and  important  case  have  now  arrived,  the  stage  of  my 
discharging  my  duty  in  directing  you  on  the  facts  and  on  the  law;  yours, 
that  in  the  consideration  of  what  your  verdict  should  be  when  you  come 
to  retire  and  consider  this  case.  This,  gentlemen,  is  no  place  for  com- 
pliments, but  I  cannot  resist  the  temptation  of  saying  that,  speaking  both 
of  the  conduct  of  the  prosecution  and  the  conduct  of  the  defence,  the 
conduct  of  the  learned  counsel  is  a  model  of  what  it  should  be  in  the 
conduct  of  criminal  cases.1  There  has  practically  nothing  been  said 
which  might  not  fairly  be  said  for  the  prosecution  and  might  not  fairly  be 
said  for  the  defence.  The  weight  of  certain  observations  made  on  the 
one  side  and  the  other  must  of  course  be  criticised,  and  ought  to  be 
criticised,  but,  speaking  of  the  conduct  of  the  case,  it  leaves  nothing  to  be 
desired. 

Gentlemen,  you  were  properly  warned,  both  by  Mr.  Tobin  and  in  his 
last  speech  by  Mr.  Muir,  against  allowing  anything  which  has  been  said 
or  published  outside  this  Court  to  influence  your  judgment.  I  know  the 
juries  of  the  City  of  London  too  well — again  I  scorn  the  idea  of  suggesting 
a  compliment,  but  I  say  this,  that  I  am  sure  that  you  know  what  your 
duty  is,  and  that  you  intend  to  discharge  your  duty,  and  that  is,  to 
decide  this  case  upon  the  sworn  testimony  that  you  have  heard  in  this 
Court;  and  if  anything  has  been  said  or  written  for  or  against  this  man 
(and  much  has  been  said  and  written  on  both  sides)  you  will  disregard 
it.  It  is  one  of  the  unfortunate  incidents  of  our  present  life  that  this 
public  discussion  of  criminal  cases  takes  place  beforehand.  But  I  am 
thankful  to  say  that  in  the  administration  of  justice,  judges,  counsel,  and 
juries  are  able  to  disregard  those  influences  and  discharge  their  duty. 

As  regards  the  obligations  in  this  case,  they  have  been  correctly 
stated  by  both  counsel.  They  need  only  my  confirmation  in  a  few 
sentences.  It  is  for  the  Crown  to  make  out  their  case.  And  if  you  have 
any  reasonable  doubt  as  to  whether  the  Crown  have  made  out  their  case 
you  must  give  the  prisoner  the  benefit  of  the  doubt.  It  is  the  law  of 
England,  and  you  will  do  so.  But  you  will  have  to  decide  the  case  upon 
the  whole  evidence,  and  you  must  not  allow  what  I  may  call  doubts  aa 
to  whether  minor  points  have  been  established  to  influence  your  judgment, 
if  upon  the  whole  of  the  evidence  you  have  no  doubt  as  to  the  result. 

1  See  Introduction. — ED. 

161 


Hawley  Harvey  Crippen. 

Lord  Chief  Justice 

Mr.  Tobin  in  his  speech  to  you,  to  which  I  know  you  paid  the  greatest 
attention,  used  two  or  three  times  the  expression,  "  Certainty."  Rightly 
understood,  it  is  not  a  misleading  word ;  but  if  by  that  it  is  to  be  supposed 
that  juries  are  not  to  act  upon  the  evidence  unless  it  puts  them  in  the 
position  of  having  actually  seen  the  thing  done,  it  is,  of  course,  a  mis- 
leading expression.  You  are  to  be  satisfied  upon  the  whole  of  the  evidence 
that  you  have  no  reasonable  doubt  as  to  your  verdict,  that  you  have  no 
more  doubt  than  you  would  have  in  any  important  question  of  your  life 
upon  which  you  have  to  take  action  one  way  or  another.  You  must  be 
satisfied  upon  the  evidence  that  the  Crown  have  made  out  their  case;  if 
they  have  not,  then  the  prisoner  is  entitled  to  be  acquitted. 

Something  has  been  said  in  this  case  (I  refer  to  it  because  I  want, 
if  I  can,  to  get  away  from  generalities  that  do  not  touch  the  important 
matters  in  this  case)  about  Dr.  Crippen  not  having  given  evidence  either 
before  the  magistrate  or  before  the  coroner.  I  do  not  agree  in  the 
observations  made  by  Mr.  Tobin  that  it  is  a  prudent  thing  for  an  innocent 
man  in  any  case  to  do  what  is  called  "  reserve  his  defence."  I  think  it 
is  an  error  into  which  legal  advisers  have  fallen  for  many  years,  as  the 

)  result  of  an  old  practice,  and  the  sooner  it  is-  recognised  that  the  sooner 
;  an  innocent  man  gives  his  evidence  and  his  statement  the  better  for  his 
case,  there  will  be  less  difficulty  and  doubt  in  dealing  with  his  case.  But 
I  do  agree  with  Mr.  Tobin  that  in  this  oa.se  it  does  not  make  any  material 
difference.  Therefore  I  shall  ask  you  to  dismiss  from  your  minds  the  fact 
that  he  did  not  give  his  evidence  either  before  the  Police  Court  or  before 
the  coroner.  As  to  what  he  did  say  on  certain  other  occasions  it  is,  of 
course,  most  important,  and  the  reason  why  I  advise  you  not  to  attach 
too  much  weight  to  that  argument  or  that  suggestion  is,  that  the  Crown 
were  in  possession  of  what  would  be  the  case,  or  must  be  the  case,  if  I  may 
use  the  expression,  for  Dr.  Crippen  (apart  from  the  medical  evidence,  which 
is  entirely  different)  when  he  made  the  statement  to  Inspector  Dew  upon 
8th  July.  Therefore,  with  regard  to  what  I  may  call  the  facts  of  the  case, 
apart  from  the  medical  testimony,  or  testimony  which  is  that  of  opinion 
based  upon  the  conditions  of  the  remains  found,  the  Crown  had  the  oppor- 
tunity of  investigating  it,  and  they  most  properly  availed  themselves  of 
that  opportunity  by  investigating  as  far  as  they  possibly  could  the  truth 
of  the  story  when  told.  And  they  suggest  to  you  that  that  story  is  not 
true. 

Gentlemen,  you  know  what  the  crime  of  murder  is.  It  means  the 
causing  the  death  of  another  intentionally  and  by  your  wilful  act.  I  need 
not  in  this  case  discuss  other  forms  of  the  crime  of  murder.  That  is  the 
crime  of  murder  charged  here  against  Dr.  Crippen,  that  he  wilfully  and 
intentionally  killed  his  wife,  poisoned  his  wife,  and  that  he  mutilated  the 
body,  and  buried  the  remains  in  the  cellar  at  39  Hilldrop  Crescent  in  order 
to  conceal  hia  crime.  From  the  first  word  Mr.  Muir  uttered  in  opening  this 
case  up  to  the  last  sentence  in  his  speech  to  you  a  few  moments  ago  he  has 
not  wavered  from  that  position.  There  is  no  question  here  of  suggesting 
that  by  some  other  means,  or  by  some  other  method,  or  by  some  other 
agency  Dr.  Crippen  caused  the  death  of  his  wife.  The  Crown  have  from 
162 


Charge  to  the  Jury. 


Lord  Chief  Justice 


the  first  stated  their  case  and  adhered  to  it,  and  that  is  the  case  which  you 
have  got  to  try.  You  need  not  consider  any  other. 

It  involves,  of  course,  two  questions,  not  really  independent,  but,  still, 
the  evidence  upon  them  ought  to  be  considered  somewhat  separately.  The 
first  question  is,  were  the  remains  found  at  39  Hilldrop  Crescent  the 
remains  of  Cora  Crippen?  If  they  were  not,  there  is  an  end  of  this  case. 
If  you  find  that  they  were  the  remains  of  Cora  Crippen,  then  you  have  got 
to  ask  yourselves,  was  her  death  occasioned  by  the  wilful  act  of  the  defendant 
Crippen  1  If  not,  again  the  defendant  is  entitled  to  be  acquitted.  Those  are 
the  two  issues  that  you  have  got  to  consider,  and  those  are  the  issues  upon 
which  I  shall  ask  you  in  a  short  time  to  concentrate  your  attention. 

It  is  open  to  a  prisoner  in  any  case  to  say  to  the  Crown  or  the  prosecu- 
tion, "  You  have  not  made  out  your  case;  I,  through  my  counsel,  say  the 
evidence  for  the  Crown  does  not  substantiate  the  crime  that  you  have 
charged  against  me."  And  in  many  cases,  as  no  doubt  you  know,  that 
course  has  been  adopted  with  perfect  wisdom,  perfect  prudence,  perfect 
justice,  and  prisoners  have  been  acquitted.  It  is  not  saying  too  much 
to  say  that  in  this  case,  had  that  course  been  adopted,  Mr.  Tobin's  task 
would  have  been  more  difficult  than  it  is  at  present.  And  therefore  he 
recognised  that,  and  in  his  opening  statement  his  first  words  to  you  were, 
"  As  soon  as  I  have  sat  down,  my  client  Dr.  Crippen  will  go  into  the  box, 
and  I  will  call  medical  testimony  to  rebut  the  statements  of  opinion  and 
the  statements  of  fact,  so  far  as  they  are  facts  based  upon  opinion,  which 
the  medical  witnesses  for  the  Crown  have  put  forward."  Therefore, 
gentlemen,  in  this  case  there  is  imported  into  the  case,  quite  properly,  not 
what  I  will  call  a  third  issue,  but  a  defence  which,  if  made  out,  exonerates 
the  defendant  altogether.  The  defendant  has  not  contented  himself  with 
saying,  "  You  have  not  satisfied  the  jury  that  these  remains  are  the  remains 
of  Cora  Crippen."  He  has  not  satisfied  himself  with  saying,  "  You  have 
not  satisfied  the  jury  that  Cora  Crippen,  or  the  woman  whose  remains  are 
found,  died  from  hyoscin  poisoning."  He  says,  "  I  will  tell  you  what  has 
happened  to  the  woman  so  far  as  I  can ;  she  is  not  dead.  As  far  as  I  know, 
she  left  me  of  her  own  accord  some  time  after  between  one  and  two  o'clock 
or  two  or  three  o'clock  on  1st  February  and  six  and  seven  o'clock  in  the 
evening  when  I  returned  to  my  house  on  that  evening."  That  is  the  defence 
put  forward  by  Dr.  Crippen,  which  you  must  carefully  consider.  If  made 
out,  you  need  not  trouble  any  more  about  whose  the  remains  were.  He 
could  not  be  indicted  in  this  case  for  being  connected  with  the  murder  of 
a  woman  unknown.  If  the  body  in  that  cellar  was  not  the  body  of  Cora 
Crippen,  but  of  some  other  person,  Dr.  Crippen  is  entitled  to  go  out  of 
this  Court.  And  therefore  his  defence  is  a  matter  to  be  examined  by  you, 
and  as  carefully  by  the  counsel  for  the  Crown,  as  the  other  defences  raised 
in  this  case.  In  addition,  as  you  know,  gentlemen,  he  says,  "  Even  if 
you,  the  jury,  do  not  believe  my  story  about  my  wife  leaving  me  on  the 
morning  of  the  day  of  1st  February,  I  am  going  to  say  that  it  is  not  my 
wife's  body,  and  the  person  whose  body  it  is  was  not  killed  by  poison." 

Now,  gentlemen,  whatever  may  be  your  ultimate  view  in  this  case,  we 
must  all  agree,  or  I  suggest  to  you — let  me  say  once  and  for  all,  that  if 
in  the  course  of  my  summing  up  I  say  anything  which  leads  you  to  think 

163 


Hawley   Harvey   Crippen. 

Lord  Chief  Justice 

that  I  am  expressing  an  opinion,  please  disregard  it;  it  is  my  duty  to  direct 
you  on  the  facts ;  it  is  your  duty  to  form  an  opinion  as  to  what  those  facts 
establish.  Therefore  you  must  not  think,  in  any  matter  that  I  am  putting 
before  you,  if  in  the  mode  of  my  expression  I  indicate  a  certain  view  to 
you,  that  I  am  doing  more  than  submitting  it  to  you.  But  you  will 
probably  come  to  the  opinion  that,  whatever  be  the  truth  in  this  case,  the 
defendant  is  an  extraordinary  man.  If  he  is  guilty,  as  you  may  think, 
he  is,  of  course,  an  extraordinary  man.  He  has  committed  a  ghastly  crime ; 
he  has  covered  up  that  ghastly  crime,  or  endeavoured  to,  in  a  ghastly  way, 
and  he  has  behaved  with  the  most  brutal  and  callous  indifference  after 
the  crime  has  been  committed.  If  he  is  an  innocent  man,  it  is  almost 
impossible,  as  you  may  probably  think,  to  fathom  his  mind  or  his  char- 
acter, again  absolutely  indifferent  to  the  charge  made  against  him  of 
murder;  having,  according  to  him,  I  will  not  say  a  ready  means,  but  at 
any  rate  the  means  of  doing  his  utmost  to  establish  his  innocence,  no  step 
taken  of  any  sort  or  kind  by  him.  And,  although  defended  by  an  able 
solicitor,  who,  it  must  be  assumed,  and  will  be  assumed,  would  have  done 
everything  to  endeavour  to  have  established  the  innocence  of  his  client  that 
he  could  fairly  and  properly  do,  no  step  taken,  as  far  as  the  evidence  before 
you  is  concerned,  to  support  and  establish  by  other  evidence  the  case  made 
by  Dr.  Crippen  in  the  box.  I  shall  have  to  point  out  to  you  in  detail  in 
the  course  of  this  case,  upon  certain  parts  of  it,  that  there  is  evidence  not 
forthcoming  which  ought  to  be  forthcoming  if  the  defence  is  supposed  to 
be  made  out — I  mean  the  defence  of  Mrs.  Crippen  having  left  on  that  day. 

Inasmuch  as  in  my  judgment  that  is  one  of  the  most  important  parts 
of  the  case,  and  it  is  an  answer  conclusive  to  everything  else,  I  propose  to 
examine  the  evidence  upon  that  with  you  first.  And  I  think  it  necessary 
to  do  so  for  the  reason  I  have  already  given  you,  which  I  think  it  right  to 
repeat.  You  are  to  draw  no  conclusion  whatever  against  Dr.  Crippen  unless 
you  are  satisfied  that  the  remains  in  the  cellar  are  the  remains  of  his  wife, 
and  that  he  in  fact  murdered  his  wife  in  the  way  suggested.  You  may  think 
in  the  course  of  this  case  possibly,  if  the  evidence  does  not  satisfy  you  of 
that  which  Mr.  Muir  says  it  does,  that  these  are  the  remains  of  another 
woman ;  therefore  I  must  tell  you  that  you  must  draw  no  inference  what- 
ever against  Dr.  Crippen  if  you  are  not  satisfied  that  the  mutilated  remains 
are  those  of  Mrs.  Crippen.  He  is  not  here  on  any  other  charge  than 
that  of  murdering  his  wife.  Therefore  you  will  see  that,  having  elected 
not  simply  to  criticise  the  evidence  or  answer  what  may  be  said  to  be 
the  medical  part  of  the  case,  or  the  part  of  the  case  which  is  based  upon 
what  the  remains  show,  he  goes  into  the  box  and  he  says,  "  My  wife  simply 
left  me  on  the  morning  or  some  time  between  two  o'clock  and  six  o'clock 
on  1st  February  last.  That  is  my  answer  to  this  case."  And,  if  established, 
it  is  a  perfectly  clear  answer.  Do  not  think  that  I  mean  that  that  in  any 
way  relieves  the  Crown  from  the  onus1  of  proving  on  the  whole  case,  that 
Crippen  did  murder  his  wife.  I  only  refer  to  it  because  it  is  entirely  a 
separate  incident  in  this  case;  it  is  an  incident  which  the  defendant  has 
raised ;  he  is  entitled  to  do  so,  as  all  men  before  conviction  are  entitled 
to  have  any  questions  they  put  fully  considered. 

In  order  really  to  grasp  the  probabilities  of  the  truth  of  that  story,  it 
164 


Charge   to  the  Jury. 


Lord  Chief  Justice 


is  necessary  to  examine  with  some  little  care  the  life,  the  position,  and, 
as  far  as  we  can  tell  it,  the  character  of  the  people  concerned.  Of  course, 
you  cannot  have  sat  in  that  box  long  in  the  course  of  this  case  without 
probably  coming  to  the  conclusion  that  if  it  is  a  simple  question  of  oath 
against  oath,  or  statement  against  statement,  you  cannot  rely  upon  the 
mere  statement  made  by  Dr.  Crippen.  He  has  on  his  own  confession  lied 
for  his  own  purpose,  and  was  prepared  to  lie,  if  necessary,  for  the  purpose 
of  his  own  advantage.  Even  when  he  was  purporting  to  tell  the  truth, 
certain  things  were  false,  and  false  to  his  own  knowledge,  though  he  was 
asserting  the  truth.  Now,  here,  again,  let  me  caution  you.  This  is  not 
a  Court  of  morals,  this1  is  a  Court  of  law.  The  fact  that  Mrs.  Crippen,  or 
Belle  Elmore,  was  an  immoral  woman  at  some  time,  the  fact  that  the  man 
confessedly  is  a  very  immoral  man,  and  has  been  living  under  improper 
circumstances  with  Ethel  Le  Neve,  isi  a  matter  that  you  may  regret  in  your 
own  minds;  but  you  must  not  visit  him  or  find  against  him  the  charge  that 
is  to  be  proved  because  he  is  an  immoral  man  or  because  he  is  a  liar.  What 
you  are  entitled  to  do  is  to  take  into  consideration  those  circumstances 
where  they  have  a  direct  bearing  upon  the  question  of  fact  which  you  are 
considering.  It  is  quite  obvious,  from  the  speeches  both  of  Mr.  Tobin  and 
of  Mr.  Muir,  that  the  fact  that  Dr.  Crippen  has  lied  on  material  points 
in  this  case  is  a  very  important  matter  for  your  consideration.  I  will  tell  you 
why.  I  put  it,  as  I  think  it  my  duty  to  do,  not  in  the  game  words,  but  in 
the  same  way  as  it  has  been  put  a  few  minutes  ago  by  Mr.  Muir.  You 
have  got  to  consider  it.  It  is  said  by  the  Crown  that  Crippen's  conduct, 
Crippen's  lies,  Crippen's  life  from  1st  February  until  8th  July,  was  an 
impossibility  if  there  was  any  risk  of  his  wife  reappearing.  What  Mr.  Muir 
put  to  him,  what  Mr.  Muir  has  quite  properly  from  the  Crown's  point  of 
view  pressed  upon  you,  is  that  the  story  that  his  wife  left  him  on  that  1st 
of  February  cannot  be  true,  because  of  the  things  that  were  done  by  Crippen 
after  that  1st  February  and  down  to  8th  July.  It  therefore  becomes  very 
material,  for  you  have  got  now  to  deal  with  the  whole  case — the  evidence 
for  the  defence  as  well  as  the  evidence  for  the  Crown.  You  have  got  to 
say  whether  upon  the  whole  of  that  evidence — because  the  Crown  may  use 
any  part  of  it—the  Crown  have  made  out  their  case,  and  it  becomes  most 
material  to  examine  with  some  little  care  whether  the  arguments  of  Mr. 
Tobin  and  Mr.  Muir  on  the  one  side  or  on  the  other  are  well  founded  or 
not.  Mr.  Tobin  says,  "  Belle  Elmore  may  be  alive."  Mr.  Tobin  says, 
"  Sometimes  people  have  been  convicted  of  murder  when  the  supposed 
murdered  person  was  walking  about  the  world ;  this  may  be  one  of  those 
cases;  be  careful  how  you  act" — a  perfectly  proper  caution.  Mr.  Muir 
saysi,  "  The  life  of  this  man  after  2nd  February  was  such  that  it  was  an 
absolute  impossibility  unless  he  knew  the  wife  could  never  appear  again." 

Now,  what  wasi  the  character  of  the  woman?  Her  character,  her 
history,  and  her  habits  are  not  disputed  by  Dr.  Crippen  or  by  his  counsel ; 
a  woman  who  had  had  a  past,  who  had  married  and  lived  with  this  man 
for  eighteen  years,  who,  on  Dr.  Crippen's  statement' — there  again  you 
must  be  a  little  careful  how  you  act  upon  it,  though  it  is  possibly  true — • 
had  not  cohabited  with  him  since  they  went  to  Hilldrop  Crescent  in 
September,  1905 ;  a  woman  making  warm  friendships,  very  popular,  very 

165 


Hawley   Harvey  Crippen. 


Lord  Chief  Justice 

vivacious,  and  in  a  position  to  her  which  was  a  position  of  very  con- 
siderable comfort,  not  wanting  in  money,  having,  according  to  Dr.  Crippen, 
plenty,  having  a  most  remarkable  amount,  not  of  mere  tawdry  jewellery, 
but  of  valuable  jewellery — not  only  have  you  had  some  of  the  articles  pro- 
duced before  you,  but  you  know  that  the  pawnbrokers  lent  him  money 
upon  them,  advanced  him  no  less  than  £80  upon  one  part  and  £115  upon 
another  part,  and,  according  to  Crippen's  statement,  he  had  £90  worth  of 
diamonds  upon  him  still  when  he  was  arrested;  in  other  words,  it  was 
jewellery  such  as  a  person  in  that  class  of  life  would  be  very  fond  of. 
The  woman,  you  have  heard,  was  very  fond  of  clothes,  always  beautifully 
dressed,  spick  and  span;  therefore  she  was  in  a  position  that  many  women 
of  that  rank  of  life  would  aspire  to  have;  the  wife  of  a  man  who  was 
reputable,  at  any  rate  to  the  public  eye,  with  a  perfectly  respectable 
and  honest  business,  living  comfortably  and  happily  in  Hilldrop  Crescent 
for  nearly  five  years — more  than  four  years — before  she  disappears.  True, 
they  kept  no  servant,  but  it  is  not  in  the  least  an  uncommon  circumstance 
in  life  that  people  in  that  position,  especially  where  there  are  no  children, 
have  no  servant,  but  do  some"  of  the  house  work  with  the  assistance  of  a 
charwoman.  It  is  in  evidence  before  you,  and  uncontradicted,  that  she 
cooked  the  dinner  on  that  night  of  31st  January,  and  they  all  seem  to 
have  enjoyed  themselves1;  therefore  the  fact  that  she  had  no  servant 
does  not  seem  to  throw  any  light  upon  thisi  matter  on  one  side  or  the 
other.  She  is  the  treasurer  of  the  Music  Hall  Ladies'  Guild,  a  very 
useful  institution  for  the  purpose  of  providing  for  music  hall  artistes.  She 
attends  regularly  every  Wednesday.  She  was  seen  on  all  the  Wednes- 
days in  January  up  to  the  26th ;  in  fact,  the  last  time  that  she  was  seen 
alive  by  many  of  the  witnesses  was  at  the  meeting  of  the  Music  Hall 
Ladies'  Guild  on  26th  January.  She  was  obviously  popular.  The  wit- 
nesses who  have  been  called — there  are  a  good  many  of  them — I  will 
merely  run  through  the  names,  and  you  will  remember  their  evidence — 
Mrs.  Martinetti,  Miss  May,  Mrs.  Harrison,  Dr.  Burroughs,  and  Mr. 
Rylance — those  are  quite  sufficient  for  the  purpose  of  indicating  what  I 
mean — they  speak  of  this  lady  as  being  a  vivacious  and  lively  person, 
and  a  person  with  keen  friendships'. 

It  is  not  immaterial  to  remember  that  according  to  the  statements 
made  in  some  of  the  documents  in  evidence  before  you,  particularly  that 
letter  of  2nd  April,  it  is  said  that  she  was  in  the  habit  of  corresponding 
with  her  friends  on  any  important  events;  and  it  appears  from  the 
evidence  of  Mrs.  Martinetti,  which  you  will  remember,  that  when  she 
heard  of  her  going  to  America,  she  said  at  once,  "  What  a  strange  thing 
that  she  should  go  without  telling  me." 

That  is  the  life  of  a  woman  who  leaves,  on  the  defendant's  statement, 
upon  1st  February,  without  saying  anything  more  to  him  than  "  I  will  have 
an  end  of  it;  I  am  going  to  leave  you";  according  to  the  defendant's 
story,  having  been  angered  with  him  for  this  perfectly  ridiculous  and 
trivial  suggestion  that  because  Mr.  Paul  Martinetti,  who  wanted  to  go  up- 
stairs to  a  lavatory,  went  out  of  the  room — a  visitor  at  his  house,  according 
to  Crippen,  every  other  week;  he  says  he  came  to  their  house  and  he 
went  to  theirs  about  once  a  week — after  he  had  gone  his  wife  says  that  is  the 
reason  for  her  leaving  him — nothing  to  do  with  another  man  so  far. 
166 


Charge  to  the  Jury. 


Lord  Chief  Justice 


Then  the  suggestion  made  by  Dr.  Crippen  is  that  she  left  to  go  to 
Bruce  Miller.  Now,  again,  we  are  not  here  to  consider  what  her  relations 
with  Bruoe  Miller  were.  It  is  perfectly  true,  as  Mr.  Muir  has  told  you, 
that  people  in  that  classi  of  life  probably  use  more  warm  expressions  or 
more  vigorous  expressions  than  some  other  people  would  do.  On  the 
other  hand,  Mr.  Tobin  is  quite  entitled  to  say,  of  a  man'  who  has  never 
seen  Dr.  Crippen,  who  admits  visiting  the  wife  up  to  the  year  1904,  that 
that  sort  of  communication  might  mean  a  great  deal  more.  You  have 
nothing  in  the  world  to  do  with  the  immoralities,  if  they  were  immorali- 
ties, of  Belle  Elmore,  any  more  than  you  have  to  do  with  the  immoralities 
of  Dr.  Crippen,  except  in  so  far  as  they  help  you  to  come  to  a  judgment 
on  the  other  factsi  of  the  case.  Mr.  Bruce  Miller  has  come  here,  and 
has  said  that  he  has  never  seen  that  lady  for  the  last  six  years;  that  he 
wrote  to  her  at  Christmas  and  the  New  Year,  and  that  sort  of  thing; 
that  she  never  came  to  him  in  the  year  1910,  and  that  he  has  never  seen 
her,  as  I  have  said,  for  the  last  six  years.  Of  course,  one  most  extra- 
ordinary thing  will  probably  .strike  you — that  if  Crippen  honestly  believed 
that  the  woman  had  gone  to  Bruce  Miller  at  Chicago  when  he  made  that 
suggestion  that  I  shall  have  to  refer  to  later  to  Mr.  Dew  on  8th  July — you 
would  have  thought  that  there  was  one  channel  at  least  whereby  inquiries 
might  be  made  of  a  most  important  character;  and  probably  the  thought 
has  occurred  to  you,  if  Dr.  Crippen  believed  that  his  wife  had  gone,  either 
for  a  moral  or  immoral  purpose,  to  visit  Bruce  Miller,  among  her  own 
friends,  how  is  it  that  no  inquiry  was  made  by  Dr.  Crippen  of  Bruoe 
Miller? 

That  is  all  one  can  say  with  regard  to  the  probabilities'  of  the  case  so 
far  as  they  rest  upon  the  character  of  Belle  Elmore  herself.  All  the 
witnesses  called  for  the  prosecution  who  knew  her,  and  were  members  of  the 
guild,  expected  to  see  her  upon  2nd  February,  that  is  to  say,  upon  the 
Wednesday;  they  all  say  so;  and  you  will  remember  that  that  was  known 
to  Dr.  Crippen;  because  in  the  letters,  which  I  need  not  read  again — 
I  shall  refer  to  them  in  a  moment  in  passing — he  says  that  she  is  not 
able  to  go  there  because  of  the  sudden  engagement  taking  her  to  America. 
The  letter  is  written  by  Dr.  Crippen,  you  will  remember,  and  he  sends  back 
the  cheque  book  and  asks  them  to  appoint  another  treasurer. 

Now,  something  has  occurred  which  in  the  morning  of  2nd  February 
makes  it  necessary  for  Dr.  Crippen  to  make  a  communication  on  Belle 
Elmore's  behalf.  You  will  remember  that  he  takes  down — either  writes 
at  the  place  or  takes  down  to  Albion  House — two  letters  of  2nd  February 
which  were  handed  by  Miss  Le  Neve  according  to  his  statement  (and 
I  think  Mrs.  Martinetti  says  so),  one  to  the  secretary  and  one  to  a 
member  of  the  committee. 

What  next  happens  which  you  must  consider?  On  that  2nd  February 
Crippen  pawns  jewellery  to  the  value  of  upwards1  of  £100,  and  gets  £80 
for  it.  You  will  have  to  ask  yourselves  that  question  which  Mr.  Muir 
has  put  to  you — not  only  why  should  this  woman,  fond  of  dress,  take 
practically  no  clothing  away  with  her,  but  why  did  she  not  take  her 
jewellery?  So  far  as  she  was  concerned,  it  was  hers;  she  had  enjoyed 
it.  It  may  be,  aa  Dr.  Crippen  suggested  to  you,  that  he  originally 
bought  it,  and  therefore  he  claimed  to  sell  it,  and  on  some  dispute  between 

167 


Hawley   Harvey   Crippen. 

Lord  Thief  Justice 

the  husband  and  wife  some  question  of  the  kind  might  have  arisen;  but 
Belle  Elmore  when  she  left,  according  to  Dr.  Crippen,  on  1st  February, 
would  regard  that  jewellery  as  hers.  You  must  ask  yourselves  the  question 
if  it  is  true  that  that  woman  left  on  1st  February,  if  it  is  true  that  she 
went  away,  why  did  she  leave  the  bulk  of  her  jewellery  behind  her;  why 
did  she  leave,  as  far  as  one  can  tell,  the  bulk  of  her  fine  clothes  behind 
her — not  only  the  furs  which  might  keep  her  warm — for  they  are  expensive 
furs — but  furs  which  were  pretty  valuable — and  women,  of  course,  know 
the  value  of  furs  of  that  kind.  It  is  a  very  remarkable  incident  in  this 
case,  and  I  thought  it  right  to  put  this  to  Dr.  Crippen  myself,  "  Can  you 
tell  me  of  anything  which  she  took  away?  "  All  he  could  say  was  that 
on  the  evening  of  1st  of  February  when  he  came  back  the  room  was  in 
confusion.  "  Can  you  tell  me  of  any  trunks^which  were  taken  away?  '* 
"  I  believe  one  trunk  wag  taken  away."  It  is  a  very  serious  matter,  and 
you  must  consider  it.  Can  you  believe  that  statement  of  Belle  Elmore 
leaving  the  house  under  those  circumstances  on  1st  February,  when  she  was 
due  at  the  meeting  of  the  Music  Hall  Ladies'  Guild  on  the  2nd,  with  the 
only  excuse  given  that  suggested  by  Dr.  Crippen — leaving  practically  all 
her  jewellery,  and,  as  far  as  one  can  tell,  all  her  clothes  behind  her. 
This  attracts  attention  at  once;  because  you  will  remember  that  Mrs. 
Martinetti  said  that  when,  knowing  the  habits  of  the  woman,  she  asked 
Crippen  what  she  had  taken  away,  he  said  he  thought  she  had  taken  one 
basket,  whereupon  Mrs.  Martinetti  said,  "  That  won't  be  enough  for 
Belle  " ;  the  reply  from  Crippen,  "Oh,  she  can  buy  some  more  clothes  " — 
I  think  he  said — "  in  New  York,"  it  does;  not  matter  where  for  this  pur- 
pose— in  America. 

Now,  gentlemen,  on  the  2nd  you  have  got  to  ask  yourselves  this 
question,  what  is  the  reason  that  this  man  is  suddenly  found  pawning 
jewellery  for  £80,  and  on  the  9th  pawning  jewellery  for  £115?  And 
here  I  come  to  the  first  two  points  upon  which  oorroboration,  if  this  story 
had  been  true,  would  have  been  very  valuable.  It  is  not  in  the  least 
the  duty  or  necessity  of  the  defendant  to  call  corroborative  evidence  if  he 
is  only  criticising  the  evidence  of  the  Crown ;  but  if  he  is  establishing  as 
part  of  his  defence  an  affirmative  story,  you  are  entitled  to  ask,  par- 
ticularly knowing  what  sort  of  a  man  he  is,  where  are  the  persons  to 
whom  he  gave  away  that  money?  He  says  he  paid  away  part  of  it  for 
advertisements;  he  says  he  paid  away  part  of  it  to  advertise  some  new 
medicine  later  on,  later  in  the  month  of  February  or  early  in  March. 
The  suggestion  was  made  by  the  prosecution  quite  properly  to  you,  where 
was  that  money  spent?  what  was  it  wanted  for? — if  wanted  for  the  purpose 
of  enjoyment  with  Ethel  Le  Neve,  or  if  wanted  for  the  legitimate  purposes 
of  his  business.  Of  course  in  the  latter  case  there  would  be  no  difficulty, 
or  ought  not  to  be  any  difficulty,  in  giving  some  corroborative  evidence 
about  it.  It  rests  entirely  upon  the  statement  made  by  Dr.  Crippen, 
nnd  by  nobody  else. 

I    am    not  going   through  all   these   lying   letters.     I    agree    in   one 

sense  with  the  observation  made  by  Dr.  Crippen  in  the  box  when  he  said 

to  Mr.    Muir,    "  What   is  the   good  of  your  asking   me  these   questions, 

because  I  admit  it";  and  therefore  there  is  nothing  to  be  gained  so  far 

168 


Charge  to  the  Jury. 


Lord  Chief  Justice 


as  you  are  concerned  by  reading  these  letters  to  you  again.  It  is  the 
most  remarkable  set  of  statements  that  has  ever  come  to  my  notice, 
beginning  by  saying  that  his  wife  has  been  taken  ill  at  St.  Louis  in 
America;  going  on  with  the  statement  that  it  was  pleuro-pneumonia ;  and 
then  that  he  had  received  a  telegram  that  she  was  very  ill,  and  that  he 
had  received  letters  from  her  in  which  she  was  trying  to  make  out  that 
she  \vas  better;  and  finally,  on  24th  March,  sending  that  telegram  to  Mrs. 
Martinetti,  "  Poor  Belle  died  yesterday;  please  tell  Annie."  Nothing 
is  to  be  gained  as  far  as  your  consideration  and  mine  are  concerned  by 
going  through  the  details  of  it.  They  are  established  by  the  Crown; 
they  are  not  disputed  by  Dr.  Crippen;  in  fact,  he  says  they  are  part  of 
his  scheme  for  covering  up  the  scandal.  I  do  not  repeat  what  has  been 
said  by  the  counsel  for  the  prosecution — what  the  scandal  was  it  is  difficult 
to  see.  The  importance  of  it  is  this,  that  this  misrepresentation  went  on 
for  a  period,  practically  speaking,  of  nearly  six  months — from  1st 
February  until  8th  July — not  quite  six  months.  I  do  not  refer  to  his 
going  to  the  ball  and  all  that  kind  of  thing.  Certainly  the  letter  of  llth 
April,  the  one  that  was  produced  here  for  the  first  time,  written  to  "  My 
Dear  Louise  and  Robert,"  is  a  most  remarkable  letter — giving  every 
detail,  that  she  would  not  take  proper  care  of  herself,  and  how  the  disease 
began  with  a  cold,  and  she  got  worse;  next,  of  his  getting  a  cable  that  she 
was  dangerously  ill — culminating  with  the  telegram  to  Mrs.  Martinetti, 
"  Belle  died  yesterday,"  and  the  advertisement  or  announcement  in  The 
Era  of  the  "  Death  of  Belle  Elmore,  Mrs.  Crippen." 

The  question  you  have  got  to  ask  yourselves  is  that  which  has  been 
put  to  you  more  than  once  in  the  course  of  this  case  by  the  counsel  for  the 
prosecution ;  I  only  repeat  it  because  I  cannot  see  any  better  way  of  putting 
it  to  you ;  was  that  possible  except  with  the  knowledge  that  the  wife  could 
not  appear?  Friends  in  America,  gone  to  America,  friends  at  home  making 
inquiries;  put  off,  hoodwinked — we  need  not  care  about  the  dates,  but 
hoodwinked  in  a  disgraceful  way  by  mourning  black-edged  paper,  and  so 
forth.  Do  not  consider  it  from  the  point  of  view  of  taste.  Consider  it 
from  the  point  of  view  of  upon  which  side  the  truth  lies.  If  you  come  t  j 
the  conclusion  that  the  game  was  so  enormously  dangerous  that  Dr.  Crippen 
could  not  have  possibly  carried  it  out  if  he  thought  his  wife  might  appear 
again,  you  will  ask  yourselves,  can  you  believe  the  story  that  his  wife  left 
him  on  1st  February. 

As  I  have  said,  the  case  is  not  a  pleasant  one;  on  the  contrary,  this 
case  is  painful  from  beginning  to  end.  There  is  nothing  to  be  gained  by 
recalling  the  lies  or  repeating  them  again ;  they  have  been  stated  to  you 
in  the  course  of  the  evidence;  the  letters  have  been  read.  If  you  care  to 
have  any  one  at  the  proper  time  you  shall  have  it.  But  the  broad  point 
you  have  to  consider  is  this,  in  the  case  of  the  Martinettis,  in  the  case 
of  Dr.  Burroughs,  in  the  case  of  Miss  May,  and  the  case  of  Mrs.  Harrison, 
and  the  case  of  others — letters  to  America — if  Belle  Elmore  is  in  the  living 
flesh  would  it  have  been  possible — would  even  the  defendant  have  had  the 
courage  to  do  what  he  did  ?  But,  then,  you  must  take  into  consideration 
in  connection  with  what  Mr.  Muir  has  perfectly  properly  said  to  you,  that 
nearly  five  months  have  passed  since  this  event.  The  newspapers  in  two 

169 


Hawley  Harvey  Crippen. 


Lord  Chief  Justice 

continents  have  been  full  of  the  case.  The  man  was  arrested,  as  you  know, 
in  consequence  of  the  agency  of  this  new  invention,  wireless  telegraphy; 
there  is  no  doubt  about  that;  it  is  a  matter  that  could  not  have  been 
established  but  for  that  invention;  that  part  is  common  knowledge;  he  is 
arrested  in  Canada,  and  then  the  story  is  known  all  over  the  world.  It 
is  a  very  serious,  suggestion  to  make  to  you,  as  it  is  made  by  the  counsel 
for  the  defence,  that  Belle  Elmore  may  be  alive.  If  Belle  Elmore  is  alive, 
is  it  possible  to  think  that  this  has  not  come  to  her  knowledge?  Does 
that  man  in  the  dock  mean  to  suggest  that  so  bad  is  this  woman  who  was 
his  wife  for  eighteen  years,  and  whom,  apart  from  her  being  angry  and 
bad  tempered,  he  does  not  make  any  serious  complaint  against — that  she  is 
so  mean  and  so  abominably  wicked  as  to  allow  this  man  to  stand  his  trial 
in  the  dock-  without  making  any  communication  or  anything  of  the  kind  ? 
That  is  what  you  have  got  to  consider  in  this  part  of  the  case.  That  has 
nothing  to  do,  as  I  have  told  you  already,  with  the  question  of  whether 
the  Crown  have  proved  their  affirmative  case.  In  order  to  answer  it  the 
defendant  has  elected  to  put  before  you  evidence  entirely  of  his  own,  but 
still  his  own  evidence,  in  which  he  says,  ' '  The  whole  thing  is  a  myth ;  I 
know  nothing  about  the  remains  in  the  cellar ;  I  do  not  pretend  to  give  any 
explanation ;  but,  as  far  as  my  wife  is  concerned,  it  was  an  ordinary  case  of 
a  woman  going  off  with  another  man;  she  left  me,  and  I  told  these  lies 
because  she  said  '  cover  up  the  scandal  as  best  you  can.' '  It  must  not  be 
forgotten  that  it  does  not  develop  into  a  charge  of  murder  until  the  month 
of  July.  I  am  a  little  anticipating,  but  you  will  have  to  ask  yourselves 
later  on,  when  you  come  to  see  what  the  defendant  was  doing  in  the  month 
of  July,  whether  or  not  it  is  quite  consistent  with  the  statement  that  he 
was  only  covering  up  the  scandal.  You  would  think,  or,  rather,  I  suggest 
to  you  that  you  may  think,  that  when  on  the  8th  of  July  it  was  suggested 
that  he  must  find  his  wife,  or  that  serious  trouble  would  come,  at  least  then 
the  sense  of  natural  preservation,  to  say  nothing  of  honesty,  would  lead 
him  to  take  steps  to  find  her. 

Now,  gentlemen,  I  have  left  that  part  of  the  case.  As  I  have  told 
you,  I  have  dealt  with  it  first  because,  if  you  believe  the  story  for  the  defence, 
it  is  a  conclusive  answer  to  this  charge,  and  you  need  not  trouble  about 
the  other  points.  You  ha,ve  heard  such  speeches  from  the  learned  counsel 
that  that  is  not  necessary ;  but  I  have  dealt  with  this  part  of  the  case  because 
it  is  a  separate  issut  altogether,  and  if,  upon  considering  the  whole  of  this 
case,  you  come  to  the  conclusion  that  you  are  not  satisfied  with  Crippen's 
account,  then  you  have  to  consider  with  me  whether  the  Crown  have  estab- 
lished their  case  upon  the  two  issues  of  Cora  Crippen's  remains  being  those 
found  in  the  house,  and  of  that  woman  having  been  poisoned  by  the  act  of 
the  defendant.  Of  course,  if  that  is  true,  it  is  a  further  contradiction  in 
terms  of  the  story  he  has  told  you;  but  I  felt  it  right,  as  this  case  has  been 
seriously  raised  by  the  defendant  and  insisted  upon  quite  properly  by  his 
counsel  who  represents  him,  to  .put  before  you  the  probabilities  on  the 
one  side  and  on  the  other  as  far  as  we  can  gather  them  from  the  evidence, 
and  you  will  have  to  ask  yourselves  can  you  believe  that  story,  that  the 
wife  went  away,  in  face  of  what  the  defendant  was  doing— impossible,  as 
170 


Charge  to  the  Jury. 

Lord  Chief  Justice 

Mr.  Muir  says,  unless  he  knew  that  the  wife's  mouth  never  could  be  opened 
to  answer  the  lies  falling  from  him.  Gentlemen,  it  will  be  convenient  to 
break  off  there. 

The  FOREMAN  OF  THE  JURY — One  of  my  fellow-jurymen  wants  to  know 
whether  your  lordship  will  allow  him  to  look  at  one  of  those  bottles  again — 
the  specimens  in  the  jar? 

The  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — I  am  coming  to  that  part  of  the  case.  I  will 
see  that  that  is  sent  to  you — I  will  deal  with  that  part  of  the  case  later. 

(Adjourned  for  a  short   time.) 

The  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — Gentlemen  of  the  jury,  I  shall  be  able  to 
condense  into  a  comparatively  short  space  of  time  the  observations  I  have 
to  make  upon  the  other  issues  in  the  case;  they  were  very  fully  considered 
by  Mr.  Tobin  for  the  defence  and  by  Mr.  Muir  for  the  prosecution,  and  I 
do  not  propose  to  go  over  the  same  points.  I  will  refer  to  them,  and  sum 
them  up  in  the  course  of  my  examination  with  you  of  some  of  the  material 
points.  I  assume  now  that  you  will  approach  the  case  from  the  point  of 
view  of  considering  whether  the  Crown  have  made  out  their  case,  and  not 
from  the  point  of  view  of  considering  whether  the  defendant's  story  of  the 
wife  having  gone  away  is  correct. 

Now,  the  first  and  important  question  is,  how  long  were  those  remains 
in  the  ground?  You  will  remember  that  from  the  29th  September — I  think, 
to  be  accurate,  the  21st  September,  1905 — this  house  in  Hilldrop  Crescent 
had  been  in  the  occupation  of  Dr.  and  Mrs.  Crippen.  It  is  a  small  semi- 
detached house,  with  the  ground  floor  rather  high  up — high  steps  going  up 
to  the  ground  floor;  a  kitchen  and  what  has  been  called  a  breakfast  room 
below,  two  rooms  on  the  ground  floor,  two  rooms  above,  and  two  rooms 
above  that.  Now,  nobody  has  been  there  since  September,  1905,  except 
Dr.  Crippen  and  his  wife.  Mr.  Muir  asked  Dr.  Crippen — it  was  only,  of 
course,  a  formal  question — whether  he  had  any  suggestion  to  make  as  to 
who  had  done  this,  or  who  could  have  put  those  remains  there,  and  he  could 
not  give  any  explanation.  He  is  not  in  the  least  bound  to  give  any  explana- 
tion, unless  you  think  there  is  affirmative  evidence  that  compels  him  to 
do  so.  Therefore  the  first  and  most  important  thing  is,  how  long  had  -the 
remains  been  there? 

Fortunately,  for  the  interests  of  justice,  there  are  certain  things 
which  may  enable  you  to  fix  that  pretty  accurately,  and  perhaps  the  most 
important  thing  is  the  pyjama  jacket.  I  apprehend  that  you  would  like 
when  you  retire  to  have  that  pyjama  jacket,  and  I  think  the  trousers, 
exhibit  48,  and  the  two  jars  with  the  jacket;  they  shall  be  in  your  room, 
so  that  you  can  examine  them.  You  shall  have  a  magnifying  glass,  so  that 
you  can  see  them.  You  are,  of  course,  to  act  upon  the  evidence,  but  you  may 
test  the  evidence  for  yourselves  in  any  way  you  like  by  fair  examination. 
The  Crown  say — two  witnesses  for  the  Crown  have  sworn  it — (and  it  ia 
very  remarkable,  as  Mr.  Muir  said  to  you  this  morning,  that  the  witnesses 
for  the  defence  do  not  contradict  it)  that  examining  the  piece  of  pyjama 
jacket  in  the  bottle  and  the  pyjama  trousers,  the  number  of  threads'  in  the 

171 


Hawley  Harvey   Crippen. 

Lord  Chief  Justice 

count  are  the  same.  At  any  rate,  you  can  see  that  the  pattern  is  the  same ; 
of  course,  that  -which  has  been  in  the  ground,  and  has  been  in  all  sorts 
of  spirits,  will  not  look  the  same,  but  they  say  you  can  trace.  There 
is  also  upon  the  piece  of  pyjama  jacket  undoubtedly — there  is  no  doubt 
about  that — the  identical  label,  "  Jones  Brothers,  Limited,  Holloway, 
N.,"  and  when  it  was  put  to  Dr.  Crippen  yesterday,  and  he  was  asked 
to  look  at  it,  he  said  they  looked  very  much  like.  I  am  not  sure  that  it 
was  put  to  any  other  witnesses  for  the  defence,  nor  does  it  matter,  because 
you  have  the  evidence  for  the  prosecution  on  the  one  side,  and  you  must 
be  satisfied,  of  course,  that  they  are  right.  We  have  now  got  beyond  all 
question  when  that  pyjama  jacket  was  bought  and  sold — "  Jones,  Limited," 
did  not  become  a  limited  company  until  1906.  That  takes  you,  of  course, 
far  back,  but  still  it  shows  that  it  is  during  Crippen's  tenancy  of  the  Hill- 
drop  Crescent  house.  In  addition  to  that,  it  is  now  established  that  three 
sets  of  pyjamas,  of  which  those  trousers  formed  one,  were  sold  on  the  5th 
January,  1909.  It  was  put  by  the  Crown  that  they  were  bought  by  the 
wife,  and  paid  for  by  the  wife.  I  do  not  think  that  that  is  established. 
What  is  established  is  that  they  were  delivered  and  17s.  9d.  paid  for  them 
at  39  Hilldrop  Crescent,  with  two  other  classes  of  articles,  on  the  5th 
January;  Mr.  Chilvers,  who  was  not  cross-examined,  establishes1  that  so 
far  as  his  evidence  goes,  if  you  believe  that  he  is  making  no  mistake.  There- 
fore, if  the  piece  in  the  jar  is,  on  the  evidence,  to  your  satisfaction  estab- 
lished to  be  of  the  same  material  as  the  trousers,  which  are  not  quite  the 
same  pattern  as  the  other  two,  that  establishes  the  fact,  or  is  evidence  on 
which  you  may  come  to  the  conclusion  that  what  was  found  in  the  grave 
was  a  jacket  belonging  to  that  third  set  of  pyjamas.  It  is  said,  and  said 
quite  truly,  that  the  trousers1  are  somewhat  worn.  We  have  not  heard 
anything  of  the  somewhat  interesting  account  given  by  Mr.  Tobin  as  to 
how  the  jacket  wears  out  and  the  trousers  do  not ;  I  really  know  nothing 
about  that;  I  did  not  quite  appreciate  it,  and  I  do  not  think  you  did,  and 
it  has  not  very  much  to  do  with  the  case,  because  we  have  to  deal  with  the 
evidence.  If  you  should  come  to  the  conclusion  that  the  pyjama  jacket 
bought  on  the  5th  January,  1909,  was  worn  off  and  on  during  tne  year 
1909,  and  that  those  trousers,  of  which  it  formed  part  when  they  were  sold, 
were  in  use,  then  you  get  this1  fact,  that  there  is  evidence  of  a  suit  of 
pyjamas  being  sold  on  the  5th  January,  1909,  worn  from  time  to  time 
during  the  year  1909,  and  the  jacket  of  that  suit  is  found  in  the  grave. 
If  so,  not  only  does  it  make  it  after  the  5th  January,  1909,  but  it  makes* 
it  so  long  after  the  5th  January,  1909,  that  the  trousers  at  any  rate  present 
a  worn  appearance.  Whether  or  not  that  stuff  in  the  bottle  which  has  been 
in  the  grave  was  also  worn  I  do  not  pretend  to  say,  and  I  do  not  think  it 
matters  very  much. 

Now,  gentlemen,  that  is  a  most  important  matter;  and  it  is  a  very 
unfortunate  thing  for  the  defence,  so  far  as  this  is  concerned,  that  no 
explanation  is  suggested  of  how  the  pyjama  jacket  bought  in  the  year 
1909,  if  it  be  the  same,  is  in  the  grave.  Of  course,  the  suggestion  of  the 
prosecution  is  that,  having  to  wipe  things  up,  or  to  wrap  things  up,  that 
jacket  was  used,  and  then  put  with  other  things1  into  the  remains,  it  never 
being  thought  that  they  would  come  to  human  eight  again.  The  evidence 
172 


Charge  to  the  Jury. 


Lord  Chief  Justice 

given  by  Dr.  Grippen  yesterday  I  do  not  think  is  much  worth  while  calling 
attention  to,  because  in  the  box,  as  out  of  it,  he  certainly  was  ready  to 
make  statements  which  he  afterwards  had  to  admit  not  to  be  true.  He 
at  first  said  with  great  confidence  that  his  wife  never  bought  pyjamas, 
that  he  always  preferred  to  buy  them  himself.  He  then  said  with  equal 
confidence  that  those  sets  were  part  of  two  which  he  bought  in  September 
of  last  year,  1909,  and  that  the  trousers  were  part  of  an  old  set  which 
he  bought  some  time  back.  When  he  was  further  pressed  by  Mr.  Muir, 
who  put  it  to  him  distinctly  that  they  were  bought  by  his  wife  at  a  sale  at 
J}ontes  in  January,  1909,  he  said  it  might  be  so;  and  when  I  pointed  out 
to  him  that  he  had  sworn  exactly  the  contrary,  and  that  his  wife  had  never 
bought  pyjamas  for  him,  he  said  he  had  been  too  confident  in  answering 
the  first  question.  You  must  judge  him,  you  have  heard  him,  and  I  can 
say  no  more.  No  explanation  is  offered  or  suggested  as  to  how  these 
pyjamas  got  there;  but  we  know  that,  if  this  evidence  is  true,  they  must 
have  been  put  there  considerably  later  than  January,  1909. 

Now,  the  witnesses  for  the  Crown  put  the  period  in  which  the  remains 
were,  or  might  have  been,  in  the  ground,  at  four  to  eight  months.  It  ia 
agreed  that  unless  you  see  the  remains  of  a  body  in  the  ground  pretty 
soon  after  they  are  removed  you  cannot  form  any  opinion  at  all.  I  am 
not  going  through  that  part  of  the  evidence.  You  have  heard  the 
evidence  of  the  doctor.  He  said  he  thought  at  first  a  much  shorter 
period,  but  when  he  found  the  amount  of  adipocere,  which  isi  the  softening, 
I  understand,  or  the  change  in  the  fatty  parts,  he  thought  it  must  have  been 
something  like  four  months,  and  from  the  small  putrefaction  of  other  parts 
he  considered  it  could  not  be  longer  than  eight  months.  Mr.  Tobin  haa 
read,  and  read  with  the  entire  approval  of  the  witnesses  for  the  prosecu- 
tion, extracts  from  a  medical  work  to  the  effect  that  it  is  difficult  to  tell 
for  what  period  a  body  has  been  buried;  that  one  body  will  remain 
unchanged  much  longer  than  another  buried  in  the  same  soil.  Gentle- 
men, it  is  for  you  to  say,  but  it  would  seem  a  very  small  matter  if  you 
come  to  the  conclusion  that  it  must  have  been  after  January,  1909,  because, 
as  has  been  truly  said  by  Mr.  Muir,  no  other  person  hasi  disappeared, 
and  you  have  got  to  account  in  some  way  or  other  for  the  presence  in  this 
grave  of  those  remains. 

Assuming  that  you  are  satisfied  that  they  had  been  in  the  grave 
within  such  a  time  as  is  consistent  with  Cora  Crippen's  disappearance, 
are  they  the  remains  of  Cora  Crippen's  body?  We  now  come  to  a 
question,  which  I  agree  with  Mr.  Muir  may  be  stated  in  two  ways,  are 
the  remains  the  remains  of  a  woman?  if  they  are  the  remains  of  a  woman, 
was  that  woman  Cora  Crippen?  Gentlemen,  that  they  are  the  remains  of 
a  woman  now  is  really  not  seriously  disputed.  It  is  perfectly  true  that 
with  regard  to  a  part  of  the  case  of  really  great  importance,  the  scar, 
which  I  will  come  to  in  a  few  moments,  Dr.  Willcox,  I  think  it  was  or  one 
of  the  witnesses  for  the  Crown,  said  with  very  great  candour  that  the 
scar  would  not  indicate  a  man  or  a  woman,  because  you  might  have  a 
scar  in  that  place,  the  middle  of  the  stomach,  upon  a  man,  for  certain 
operations  of  the  bladder  and  so  on,  or  at  the  back.  But  you  will  ask 
yourselves,  if  .some  person  was  for  some  purpose  murdered  and  had 
o  173 


Hawley  Harvey  Crippen. 

Lord  Chief  Justice 

interred  the  remains,  and  they  were  not  those  of  a  woman,  why  should 
the  body  be  clothed  in  a  woman's  vest?  why  should  there  be  a  woman's 
vest  with  lace  on  the  arms?  which,  of  course,  you  know  only  adorns  the 
garments  of  women  who  like  that  kind  of  adornment ;  why  should  there  be 
the  woman's  combinations?  and  why  should  there  be  one,  two,  or,  I  think, 
three  Hinde's  hair  curlers  with  hair  in  them,  not  disputed  by  any  witness 
for  the  defence  to  be  woman's  hair? 

Gentlemen,  I  think  I  may  pass  for  the  purpose  of  your  consideration 
from  the  question  of  whether  it  was  a  man  or  woman.  Of  course,  if  it 
was  a  man,  again  the  defendant  is  entitled  to  walk  out  of  that  dock. 

Now,  being  a  woman,  was  that  Cora  Crippen  or  not?  The  evidence 
here,  though  not  so  certain,  because  there  are  many  women  with  brown 
hair,  and  many  we  know  who  dye  their  hair,  is  not  unimportant.  The 
pieces  of  hair  were  shown  to  Mrs.  Harrison.  She  said  that  the  unbleached 
portions  that  she  could  see  corresponded  with  what  she  had  seen  in 
lifetime;  that  she  had  seen  Belle  Elmore'e,  Mrs.  Crippen's  hair  down, 
and  th_ere  were  portions  near  the  root  which  were  brown ;  and  Crippen 
in  his  evidence  admits  that  to  be  in  accordance  with  the  facts,  although 
he  says  that  you  could  only  see  the  brown  hair  near  the  roots,  which  would 
be  quite  natural  if  she  dyed  it  pretty  often,  because  Belle  Elmore  was 
very  particular  about  the  light-coloured  hair  being  seen.  That  is  an 
incident  in  this  case;  it  is  for  you  to  say  whether  it  is  true  or  not.  It 
has  not  been  cross-eiamined  on.  On  the  other  hand  it  may  not  have  been 
so  important,  but  you  must  consider  it.  One  witness  has  said  that  a 
certain  portion  of  the  hair  is  pubio  hair,  which  would  be 
dry;  that  was  brown  hair  corresponding  with  the  undyed  portion 
of  the  other  hair,  which  may  have  come  from  the  head.  Therefore 
there  is  that  piece  of  evidence  in  connection  with  the  identity  of  the 
remains,  supplemented  by  what  I  have  already  mentioned  to  you  in  another 
connection  in  point  of  time,  that  in  the  grave  is  found  the  pyjama, 
the  property  of  Crippen,  if  it  be  so  established,  and  the  parts  of  the 
dress  which  it  is  said  by  Mrs1.  Harrison  are  similar  to  those  which  were 
always  worn  by  Mrs.  Crippen. 

I  come  now  to  that  which  has  been  the  battleground  in  this  case, 
and  that  is  that  piece  of  flesh.  You  have  seen  it  more  than  once.  It 
hag  been  a  gruesome  task,  but  we  have  had  to  see  it;  we  have  heard  the 
evidence  upon  it,  and  I  am  not  going  through  it  again,  but  I  am  going  to 
remind  you  of  what  the  dispute  is.  For  that  purpose  I  will  very  briefly 
take  Mr.  Pepper's  evidence  and  Dr.  Turnbull's  evidence,  who  are  the  two 
rivals.  Mr.  Pepper  says  it  undoubtedly  comes  from  the  lower  part  of  the 
abdomen  of  a  woman.  It  is  not  to  be  forgotten — Mr.  Muir  did  not 
attach  any  too  much  importance  to  it — that  when  it  was  examined  into  at 
the  Police  Court,  on  the  report  of  Dr.  Wall  and  Dr.  Turnbull,  Mr.  Newton 
was  instructed  that  it  never  came  from  the  abdomen  at  all ;  and  you 
heard  in  Court  yesterday  by  Dr.  Turnbull  and  Dr.  Wall  the  reasons  for 
their  statement,  which  they  then  made  with  every  confidence,  that  as  there 
were  no  characteristic  aponeuroses  it  could  not  be  abdominal.  That 
they  stated  as  their  reason  for  the  report.  There  is  no  blame  to  Mr. 
Newton,  nor  to  the  defendant  for  this  purpose.  Mr.  Newton  waa  so 
174 


Charge  to   the  Jury. 


Lord  Chief  Justice 


instructed,  and  did  cross-examine — I  am  speaking  of  the  proceedings  at 
the  Police  Court — on  the  footing  that  it  was  not  abdominal  at  all. 

Now,  take  those  two  witnesses.  I  say  nothing  about  the  way  in 
which  they  gave  their  evidence.  It  is  always  unpleasant  to  criticise  expert 
witnesses.  You  saw  the  difficulty  they  were  in.  It  amounted  to  this, 
that  they  could  not  suggest  any  part  of  the  body  from  which  it  could  come, 
consistently  with  what  they  found  there,  except  the  lower  part  of  the 
abdomen,  and  the  characteristic  answer  was  given  by  Dr.  Turnbull,  which 
I  will  read  to  you  from  my  own  note.  "  The  aponeurosis  is  split  in  the 
way  it  is  found  in  the  lower  part  of  the  abdomen."  Mr.  Pepper  and 
the  other  witnesses  for  the  Crown  say  that  the  piece  which  they  examined 
has  got  the  aponeurosis  in  it,  and  further  say,  for  reasons  they  gave  you — 
and  I  am  not  going  through  that  agaljn — that  they  had  no  doubt  that  it 
came  from  the  lower  part  of  the  abdomen.  That  isi  not  now  disputed. 
It  turns  out,  though  I  daresay  Mr.  Tobin  did  not  mislead  me,  I  was  not 
so  far  wrong  in  thinking  that  the  cross-examination  was  directed  to  show 
that  it  came  from  another  part  of  the  body,  because  it  does  turn  out  now 
that  that  was  the  case  in  the  Police  Court.  Therefore  you  have  the 
evidence  before  you,  not  contradicted — nay,  acquiesced  in  by  the  defendant's 
witnesses,  that  it  came  from  the  lower  part  of  the  abdomen. 

Now  is  that  a  scar  or  not?  There  has  been  a  little  misunderstanding 
about  this  part  of  the  case,  and  I  want  to  make  it  plain  to  you.  It  is  not 
now  disputed  that  Belle  Elmore  had  a  soar  in  that  place  due  to  an  operation 
for  ovarotomy,  which  means  taking  out  the  ovaries.  It  extended 
roughly,  up  to,  or  near,  if  not  as  far  as  the  navel.  It  was  originally 
6  inches  long,  and  subsequently  contracted.  In  addition  to  the  suggestion 
made  about  the  poison,  and  having  heard  that  poison  had  been  found,  it 
was  also  suggested  that  before  these  gentlemen  made  their  examination 
they  knew  that  she  had  a  scar.  If  they  did,  it  was  perfectly  right  that 
they  should  know  it,  because  they  had  to  look  for  what  would  identify  the 
body,  and  I  cannot  understand  what  was  meant  by  the  suggestion  that  it 
was  "  unfortunate  "  that  they  knew  that  Belle  Elmore  had  a  scar. 

You  are  dealing  with  a  piece  of  flesh  which  is  very  different  from 
what  it  was  when  it  first  went  into  the  ground,  and  all  the  medical 
men  agree  that  it  would  have  been  much  easier  to  judge  if  the  piece  of 
flesh  had  been  seen  sooner.  The  medical  men  for  the  Crown  saw  it 
sooner,  but  not  much  sooner.  Mr.  Pepper  says,  and  he  is  supported  by 
Dr.  Spilebury,  Dr.  Marshall,  and  Dr.  Willcox,  "  This  is  a  scar  similar 
to  that  which  I  have  seen  over  and  over  again  on  the  stomach  or  abdomen 
of  a  woman  who  has  had  this  operation  done;  as  a  rule,  with  women 
it  is  wider  near  the  bottom  than  it  is  towards  the  top,  and  it  presents 
exactly  the  appearances  that  Belle  Elmore' s  operation  would  present." 
Further  than  that,  they  said,  "  I  examined  it  for  sebaceous  glands  and  for 
hair  follicles,  and  in  the  scar  properly  so  called  there  are  none."  Further, 
Dr.  Spilsbury  said  there  is  enclosed  (I  think  it  is  called)  in  the  scar  a  piece 
of  epidermis  that  has  come  from  the  side,  and  in  that  you  can  see  both 
the  sebaceous  glands  and  the  follicles,  because  they  correspond  with  the 
uncut  skin,  if  I  may  use  the  expression,  on  the  other  side. 

Remember  at  the  time  this  was  before  the  Police  Court  in  the 

175 


Hawley   Harvey  Crippen. 

Lord  Chief  Justice 

first  instance,  the  scar  was  unimportant  from  the  point  of  view  of  the 
defence,  because  their  case  was  that  this  was  not  the  abdomen  at 
all.  It  goes,  from  the  buttock  to  the  top  of  the  thigh,  or  it  is  somewhere 
else,  and  I  do  not  know  that  we  need  trouble  at  all  about  that.  When 
they  come  into  Court  here  they,  for  the  first  time,  develop  this  theory. 
They  say  if  you  examine  the  scar  you  will  find  in  the  scar  properly  so- 
called  one  sebaceous  gland  and  four  or  five,  I  think,  hair  follicles,  which 
was  the  thing  which  Dr.  Spilsbury  had  spoken  to  in  connection  with  the 
included  piece.  When  Dr.  Turnbull  is  cross-examined  as  to  the  possi- 
bility of  there  being  an  included  piece  of  epidermis  in  the  scar  he  says, 
"  I  have  read  of  this  happening,  but  I  have  never  seen  it."  The  witnesises 
for  the  Crown  tell  you  that  they  have  seen  it  repeatedly.  You  will  judge 
as  between  these  witnesses  which  is  right. 

It  is  frankly  admitted  by  the  Crown  that  if  in  an  ordinary  piece  of  scar 
there  are  sebaceous  glands  and  hair  follicles,  that  is  not  scar  proper,  but 
they  point  out  to  you  that  you  may  have  that  appearance  locally  in  a  part 
of  the  scar,  and,  rightly  or  wrongly — it  is  entirely  for  you — the  witnesses 
for  the  Crown  swear  that  there  are  no  sebaceous,  glands1  in  the  scar  proper, 
whereas  there  are  sebaceous  glands  on  either  side.  Gentlemen,  you  and  I 
had  a  further  examination  yesterday — of  course,  in  the  presence  of  the 
prisoner's  counsel.  There  was  one  remarkable  piece  of  evidence  given  not 
contradicted  by  Dr.  Turnbull,  although  I  do  not  say  he  assented  to  it, 
because,  of  course,  he  had  given  evidence  to  the  contrary.  Mr.  Pepper 
said,  you  can  see  under  the  magnifying  glass  in  that  scar,  practically 
speaking,  the  irregular  line  of  the  knife  from  top  to  bottom.  Now,  if  that 
is  so,  gentlemen  (you  will  be  able  to  judge  when  you  come  to  look  at  it 
again),  we  need  not  trouble  much  more  about  it.  Mr.  Tobin  made  a  point 
of  this — and  he  is  quite  entitled  to  ask  your  consideration  to  it — that  on 
that  piece  of  flesh  there  is;  no  navel.  The  witnesses  for  the  Crown  admit 
that  the  muscle  went  up  asi  far  as  the  navel,  and  probably  round  it,  but 
they  say  they  think  the  navel  has  been  removed  from  that  piece  of  skin. 
Mr.  Tobin,  I  think,  three  or  four  times  said  to  you  that  Mrs.  Martinetti 
said  she  saw  the  woman's  navel,  and  Crippen 's  evidence,  though  I  am 
afraid  you  must  take  it  with  some  reserve,  was  that  hi®  wife  had  a  navel. 
You  will  have  to  ask  yourselves,  if  a  woman  looks  at  another  woman's 
stomach  casually,  and  there  is  a  scar  which  excites  her  attention,  which 
cornea  up  to  the  position  of  the  navel;  navels  are  a  different  shape,  some- 
times there  are  projections1,  and  so  on — do  you  think  that  what  is  said 
to  have  been  seen  by  Mr®.  Martinetti  is  sufficient  to  contradict  the 
evidence  which  you  have  heard  on  the  other  side,  if  it  is  satisfactory  to 
you? 

I  do  not  propose  to  read  again  at  length  to  you  the  reasons  given 
by  the  defendant's  two  witnesses  for  saying  that  it  is  not  a  scar.  I  remind 
you  again  that  they  were  prepared  up  to  the  7th  October  to  say  that  there 
was  no  aponeurosis  at  all,  that  there  was  nothing  upon  the  skin  or  flesh 
which  would  enable  you  to  put  the  piece  of  flesh  into  its  place  upon  the 
body,  that  it  came  from  the  thigh  or  the  buttock.  When  they  are  cross- 
examined  they  entirely  abandon  that  position  and  say  that  the  best  opinion 
they  can  give  now,  with  all  their  examination,  is  that  it  came  from  the 
place  in  which  it  was  sworn  that  it  came  from  by  the  witnesses  for  the 
176 


Charge  to  the  Jury. 


Lord  Chief  Justice 


Crown,  namely,  from  the  lower  part  of  the  abdomen.  Gentlemen,  you 
will,  of  course,  consider  all  that  evidence,  but  you  must  regard  with  some 
reserve  the  evidence  of  a  man  who  has  given  such  positive  evidence  that 
it  was  not  the  abdomen,  and  has  abandoned  that,  and  has  fallen  back  upon 
there  being  no  scar.  If  the  appearance  of  the  one  sebaceous  gland  and 
the  five  follicles  of  hair  is  due  to  the  fact  that  there  was  an  included  piece 
of  epidermis,  the  whole  matter  is  explained  without  any  difficulty.  It  is 
entirely  for  you.  We  are  dealing  with  a  mark  which  is  some  6  inches  long 
— I  do  not  know  exactly,  but  that  is  near  enough — and  in  which  it  is  said 
by  the  witnesses  for  the  Crown  they  can  see  the  marks  of  the  knife.  If 
so,  it  is  a  very  remarkable  coincidence.  In  order  to  satisfy  you  that  it  is 
not  Cora  Crippen,  the  defence  must  have  satisfied  you  that  there  is  no  'scar 
there.  Coupled  with  the  pyjama  and  the  camisole  and  the  combinations 
and  the  vests,  you  have  to  ask  yourselves  have  you  any  doubt  that  that 
is  the  body  of  Cora  Crippen  ? 

Now,  I  must  for  one  moment  consider  the  theory  of  Dr.  Turnbull. 
I  wish  to  speak  with  great  respect,  and  it  is  not  for  me,  and  it  is  not  for 
you,  to  judge.  You  saw  him  in  the  witness-box.  You  saw  him  roll  that 
piece  of  flesh  over  twice.  They  account  for  the  left  side  of  the  horse  shoe, 
as  Mr.  Tobin  called  it,  by  saying  it  is  caused  by  a  fold,  and  in  order  to 
make  it  the  shape,  broader  at  the  bottom  and  narrower  at  the  top,  you 
have  to  fold  it  twice  over,  and  you  saw  yesterday  that,  with  the  piece  of 
flesh,  which  then  would  be  freshly  cut  from  the  body,  it  is  possible  either 
to  extend  it  or  to  fold  it  twice  over.  You  must  ask  yourselves  why  anybody 
who  was  burying  the  body  should  roll  it  over  twice.  One  cannot  understand 
why;  it  is  entirely  for  you.  If  you  think  it  possible,  of  course,  you  may 
attach  importance  to  the  theory  of  the  rolling  over.  But  observe  what 
you  have  to  deal  with.  You  have  got  a  mark  which  resembles  a  scar,  sworn 
by  the  witnesses  for  the  Crown  to  the  best  of  their  belief  to  be  a  scar  similar 
to  scars  they  have  frequently  seen,  sworn  by  the  witnesses  for  the  defence 
to  be  not  a  scar  at  all,  but  to  be  caused  by  a  fold.  Gentlemen,  it  is  entirely 
for  you.  If  you  come  to  the  conclusion  that  that  piece  of  flesh  was  the 
abdomen  with  the  scar  on  it,  the  mark  of  an  operation  for  ovariotomy — if 
you  come  to  the  conclusion  that  it  was  put  into  the  grave  with  hair  and 
hair  curlers,  the  hair  dyed  in  the  way  that  Cora  Crippen  dyed  hers,  corre- 
Bponding  with  the  undyed  part  of  the  hair  on  her  pubis,  and  buried  with 
the  pyjamas  and  the  other  garments,  it  is  for  you  to  say,  have  you  any 
doubt  that  that  is  the  body  of  Cora  Crippen? 

That  brings  me,  not  to  the  last,  but  to  the  last  point  but  one — the  last 
part  of  the  evidence  so  far  as  it  depends  upon  medical  testimony — what  was 
the  cause  of  death,  who  put  that  body  there,  was  it  the  same  person  who 
killed  her  or  not?  Well,  these  hypotheses  only  need  to  be  stated  to  be 
answered.  You  will  not  think,  probably,  that  there  was  more  than  one 
person  mixed  up  in  this,  and  probably  you  will  be  of  opinion  that  examining 
the  question  of  who  killed  her  answers  the  question  of  who  buried  her.  A 
great  deal  has  been  said,  not  unnaturally,  by  Mr.  Tobin  as  to  the  skill  of 
the  man  who  did  it.  It  has  been  sworn  by  the  witnesses  for  the  prosecu- 
tion that  a  man  who  had  studied  in  anatomical  schoolsi  and  had  seen  dis- 
section, and  had  a  knowledge  of  anatomy,  would  have  quite  sufficient 
knowledge  to  do  this.  Answer  by  Crippen,  not  that  he  has  not  sufficient 

m 


Hawley  Harvey  Crippen. 

Lord  Chief  Justice 

knowledge,  but  that  he  has  not  sufficient  practical  experience,  and  has 
never  done  a  post-mortem  examination  in  his  life.  Again,  it  is  entirely  for 
you,  but,  as  I  have  said,  in  all  probability  you  will  be  of  opinion  that  the 
person  who  caused  the  death  of  Cora  Crippen  took  steps  to  get  rid  of  the 
body.  That  ia  the  natural  thing  that  a  man  would  do  who  had  committed 
a  great  crime. 

Now,  was  she  poisoned  or  was  she  not?  That  is  entirely  for  you.  You 
have  got  evidence  that  every  organ  was  healthy,  and  you  have  got  evidence 
in  the  early  part  of  the  case  that  on  the  night  of  the  31st  January,  and  on 
the  26th  January,  and  for  weeks  before,  the  woman  was  in  perfect  health 
and  spirits,  no  suggestion  of  illness  or  ailment,  and  no  organ  shown  to  be 
affected.  Can  you  account  for  death  by  any  natural  cause?  And,  again, 
although  Mr.  Tobin  has  cross-examined  with  great  ability  as  to  whether 
the  Crown  were  right  in  specialising  hyoscin,  he  has  not  suggested  any  other 
cause  for  death  than  poisoning.  It  is  possible,  of  course,  that  the  woman 
may  have  been  stabbed,  or  shot,  or  something  else,  but  the  remarkable 
thing  is  that  there  is  no  wound  on  the  part  of  the  body  that  is  there, 
except  what  is  necessary  to  separate  it  from  surrounding  things,  showing  to 
a  certain  extent  some  medical  knowledge,  if  not  very  high  medical  know- 
ledge. The  doctors  said  that  there  was  no  wound  on  any  one  of  the  organs 
they  examined,  there  was1  the  heart,  liver,  and  the  kidneys,  and  one  or 
two  things  I  need  not  mention,  and  there  was  no  wound  except  what  was 
necessary  to  separate  it  and  take  it  out. 

Now,  the  Crown  start  with  their  examination.  Here  I  simply  endorse 
what  was  fairly  put  to  you  by  Mr.  Muir.  When  people  are  conducting 
an  examination  by  analysis,  the  result  of  which  could  only  be  established 
by  analysis,  I  do  not  think  it  ia  right  to  suggest  that  it  is1  "  unfortunate  " 
that  they  knew  that  the  man  had  bought  hyoscin.  They  were  looking  for 
several  things.  Mr.  Tobin  did  say  that  he  did  not  mean  to  pass  any 
imputation,  and  we  ought  to  make  great  allowance  for  Mr.  Tobin,  but  I 
do  not  think,  if  you  are  satisfied  with  Dr.  Willoox's  evidence,  that  you 
ought  to  come  to  the  conclusion  that  he  was  influenced  one  single  bit  by 
what  he  knew ;  he  has  sworn  he  was  not.  And  what  did  he  tell  you  ?  He 
said,  "  I  examined  the  remains;  I  took  parts  of  the  liver,  the  kidney,  and 
so  on;  I  went  through  a  process  which  lasted  a  fortnight  or  three  weeks. 
I  first  found  strychnine  and  another  poison ;  of  course,  I  disregarded  that ; 
then  I  tried  to  see  if  I  could  get  the  alkaloids,  and  I  was  able  to  distinguish 
it  as  being  a  vegetable  alkaloid.  As  far  as  my  medical  knowledge  goes, 
and  as  far  as  the  medical  knowledge  of  any  book  produced  up  to  the  present 
time  goes,  Vitali's  test,  which  ia  to  find  out  whether  an  alkaloid  is  a 
vegetable  or  an  animal  alkaloid,  is  only  operative  in  the  three  vegetable 
alkaloids — atropine,  hyoscyamin,  and  hyoscin ;  none  of  the  others  gives  a 
purple  colour."  Dr.  Willcox  says,  "  I  did  say  that  I  did  not  know  what  I 
was  going  to  find,  but  I  looked  to  find  a  vegetable  alkaloid,  and  I  found  it 
must  be  a  vegetable  alkaloid."  And  remember,  upon  the  question  whether 
it  might  be  animal  alkaloid,  the  result  of  putrefaction,  the  only  man  who 
has  ever  got  an  animal  alkaloid  at  all  from  any  body,  meat,  or  human 
flesh,  is  Dr.  Luff.  Therefore,  so  far  as  evidence  goes,  both  of  literature 
and  fact,  there  is  no  witness  who  has  pretended  that  an  animal  alkaloid 
has  been  found  to  respond  with  Vitali's  test.  Then,  said  Dr.  Willcox,  "  I 
178 


Charge  to  the  Jury. 


Lord  Chief  Justice 

had  to  distinguish  between  atropine,  hyoscyamin,  and  hyoscin.  I  applied 
the  bromide  test;  I  should  have  applied  the  heat  test  if  I  could,  but  you 
do  not  get  in  a  human  body  that  has  been  poisoned  enough  to  apply  the 
heat  testj  I  could  not  use  it."  It  is  not  as  if  he  said  he  did  not  know  of  the 
test,  or  did  not  think  it  a  good  test,  but  he  could  not  use  it.  "I  used 
the  bromide  test,  and  under  that  crystals  would  have  come  out  if  it  was 
atropine  or  hyoscyamin,  gummy  or  resinous  matter  would  be  produced  if 
it  was  hyoscin ;  I  found  the  gummy  matter.  I  tried  it  again  on  pure  matter, 
with  the  same  result."  He  also  said,  before  he  found  the  vegetable 
alkaloids,  he  found  that  all  four  of  the  solutions!  were  mydriatic,  that  is 
to  say,  they  affected  the  eye  by  paralysing  the  pupil,  and  that  was  not 
disputed  as  a  test  by  Mr.  Tobin.  Dr.  Willoox  further  said,  "  I  took  genuine 
specimens  and  applied  these  tests,  and  they  exactly  correspond  with  what 
I  found;  "  and  Dr.  Luff  said,  "  I  went  through  the  same  operations.  Dr. 
Willcox'a  tests  are  the  best  that  can  be  applied,  and  they  produced  the 
conclusions  that  he  has  vouched."  Not  one  single  witness  on  behalf  of 
the  defence  has  ventured  to  say  that  that  is  wrong.  Dr.  Wynter  Blyth, 
who  came  here,  said  that  he  quite  agreed  that  Vitali's1  test  identified  the 
vegetable  alkaloids,  so  far  as  present  knowledge  was  concerned,  but  he 
said  he  thought — either  on  the  faith  of  some  Italian  book  or  because  he 
had  changed  his  opinion — that  it  would  be  found  that  there  would  be  some 
animal  alkaloids  which  might  give  the  same  results.  Gentlemen,  it  is 
entirely  for  you.  You  have  got  to  act  upon  the  evidence,  you  must  ask 
yourselves :  have  you  any  doubt  that  the  evidence  of  Dr.  Willcox  and  Dr. 
Luff  is  right?  That  of  Dr.  Willcox  is  most  important  upon  this — that  he 
found  hyoscin  in  the  body — in  the  stomach,  kidney,  intestines,  and  liver. 

I  am  not  an  expert,  and  I  do  not  pretend  to  understand  these 
things,  but  what  I  assume  in  the  suggestion  is  this,  that  when  hyoscin  ia 
given  it  gets  into  the  blood,  and  by  the  blood  goes  into  the  various  organs, 
and  therefore  if  the  person  has  been  poisoned  you  would  expect  to  get  traces 
of  it  in  the  various  organs.  Dr.  Willcox  says,  "  In  the  whole  body  I 
calculate  that  there  was  aa  much  as  half  a  grain,  and  that  is  not  denied 
to  be  a  dangerous,  in  fact.  a.  poisonous  dose,  a  dose  that  never  ought  to 
be  given  to  any  human  being."  If  you  come  to  the  conclusion  that  hyoscin 
to  that  extent,  or  anything  like  it,  was  found  in  the  body,  you  will  have 
to  ask  yourselves,  have  you  any  doubt  that  that  woman,  by  whomsoever  it 
was  done,  was  poisoned  by  hyoscin?  If  the  cross-examination  of  Dr. 
Willcox,  very  properly  administered  to  him  by  Mr.  Tobin,  leada  you  to 
the  conclusion  that  he  was  mistaken,  or  anything  of  that  kind,  then,  of 
course,  you  may  reject  his  evidence,  but  for  your  own  satisfaction,  if  you 
are  going  to  do  something  of  that  kind,  you  probably  ought  to  have  some 
theory  of  your  own  as  to  what  else  caused  the  death.  Because,  again,  it  ia 
not  the  fault  of  the  defence — it  may  be  said  to  be  their  misfortune — healthy 
organs,  healthy  woman,  if  Cora  Grippen's  remains  buried  in  the  grave,  no 
cause  of  death  suggested.  The  one  test  as  to  whether  it  was  a  vegetable 
alkaloid  is  said  by  Dr.  Wynter  Blyth  to  have  been  the  right  test,  and, 
although  he  says  he  has  changed  hia  opinion,  he  has  never  himself  found 
an  animal  mydriatio  alkaloid  that  acted  in  the  same  way  under  Vitali'a 
test.  Given  that  it  ia  one  of  the  three  vegetable  alkaloids,  I  suppose  it 
makes  some  difference,  though  not  much ;  we  have  not  been  told  how  much 

179 


Hawley  Harvey  Crippen. 

Lord  Chief  Justice 

more  or  less  poisonous  atropine  is  than  hyoscin ;  it  does  not  matter,  because 
nobody  denies  that  if  you  cannot  get  enough  for  the  melting  point  test, 
the  bromid^  test  is  the  right  one.  You  must  make  up  your  minds  whether 
there  was  hyoscin  in  the  body,  and  whether  death  was  caused  by  it.  What 
ie  the  effect  of  hyoscin  poison?  How  can  it  be  administered?  It  has  a 
bitter  taste,  but  can  be  readily  given  in  beer,  etout,  or  coffee,  or  anything 
that  disguises  the  taste.  It  produces  pain  at  first,  delirium,  paralysing  of 
the  pupils,  drowsiness,  coma,  and  unconsciousness,  and  death  in  anything 
from  one  to  twelve  hours.  Therefore,  from  the  point  of  view  we  are  con- 
sidering, what  happened  in  that  house?  Some  one  gave  Belle  Elmore 
hyoscin,  and  she  became  unconscious,  comatose,  and  died,  and  there  was 
the  dead  woman  in  the  house. 

Where  did  that  hyoscin  come  from?  It  may  be  a  coincidence,  gentle- 
men. It  is  entirely  for  you.  Are  you  satisfied  with  the  account  the 
defendant  has  given  of  what  he  had  to  do  with  the  hyoscin  bought  on  19th 
January — never  bought  before  in  England  by  him,  never  bought  since ;  two- 
thirds  of  it  used,  made  up  into  hundreds,  if  not  thousands,  of  little  tabloids, 
little  pieces  of  sugar,  I  suppose,  or  something  of  that  kind,  put  into 
bottles,  kept  in  a  cabinet  in  hisi  room,  and  the  remainder  of  the  hyoscin 
left  in  his  room  when  he  went  away.  Where  are  those  bottles?  You  must 
ask  yourselves,  are  you  satisfied  with  that  account?  He  has  given  his 
account;  it  is  for  you  to  say  whether  you  believe  it;  but,  in  any  event, 
if  you  are  satisfied  that  hyoscin  was1  in  the  body,  where  did  it  come  from? 

Now,  one  of  your  body  asked  me  to  put  a  question  with  reference  to 
the  prescription,  as  to  whether  or  not  it  ever  was  given  through  the  mouth. 
In  all  probability  that  has  not  become  immaterial,  because  I  think  Dr. 
Willcox's  evidence  went  too  far ;  there  does  seem  to  be  evidence  from  the 
book  put  in  this:  morning  by  Mr.  Tobin  of  fifteen  years'  standing  that  in 
some  cases  of  mania,  and  that  kind  of  disease,  it  was  administered  by  the 
mouth  as  well  as  hypodermically.  But  before  I  leave  this  part  of  the  case 
there  is  another  question  you  must  consider,  and  that  is  this.  Crippen 
gives  his  evidence  himself.  He  says,  "  In  my  practice  chiefly  I  specialise 
in  the  eye,  the  ear,  the  nose,  and  the  throat,  or  for  any  of  those  except 
nervous  diseases."  It  is  quite  right  to  ask  yourselves,  if  you  are  not  satis- 
fied with  his  statement,  whether  or  not  he  would  have  had  some  evidence  as 
to  those  bottles  being  sent  out,  other  than  his  own  word.  Nothing  of  the 
kind  is  forthcoming.  You  will  have  to  ask  yourselves  whether  the  Crown 
have  satisfied  you  on  the  evidence  that  those  were  the  remains  of  Cora 
Crippen,  that  she  died  from  hyoscin  poison,  that  that  hyoscin  poison  was 
administered  by  the  only  man  who  was  in  the  house,  there  being  no 
suggestion  that  anybody  else  either  had  a  grudge  against  the  woman  or 
ever  was  there,  or  under  the  circumstances  could  be. 

One  word,  and  it  arises  upon  the  account  which  he  has  given  himself 
of  it.  Although  "  prescriptions  "  have  been  spoken  of,  it  may  be  that  he 
speaks  of  prescriptions  in  another  sense.  No  prescription  has  been  pro- 
duced, and  he  .says  that  what  he  meant  was  that  he  prescribed  for  patients 
by  giving  them  a  drug.  Now,  to  all  this  Mr.  Tobin  has  made  two  or  three 
broad  and  very  strong  answers — nothing  to  do  with  the  facts  of  the  case, 
but  based  upon  general  considerations.  He  says,  first  of  all,  if  he  killed 
Cora  Crippen  (speaking  of  the  1st  February,  or  the  afternoon  of  the  1st, 
180 


Charge  to  the  Jury. 


Lord  Chief  Justice 


or  any  time  upon  the  1st),  he  never  would  have  taken  Ethel  Le  Neve  to 
sleep  there  upon  the  2nd.  Secondly,  he  says,  a  kind-hearted  man  would 
not  do  that  kind  of  thing.  Now,  I  must  again  caution  you,  though  it  has 
been  already  pointed  out  by  Mr.  Muir — this  is  one  of  the  facts  which  are 
not  unimportant — it  is  by  no  means  clear  on  the  evidence  that  Ethel  Le 
Neve  did  go  to  sleep  there  on  the  night  of  the  2nd.  If  she  did,  it  is 
after  the  letters  have  been  delivered ;  still,  that  is  a  small  point.  It  is  not 
consistent  with  Mrs.  Jackson's  evidence,  which  was  that  only  during 
February  did  she  ever  sleep  away  at  all,  and  that  she  did  not  go  really 
thoroughly  away,  or  sleep  away,  that  is  to  say,  sleep  away  every  night, 
until  March.  This  is  one  of  the  matters  on  which  other  evidence  might 
have  been  given.  If  the  defence  were  going  to  rely  on  Ethel  Le  Neve's 
sleeping  there  on  the  2nd,  it  would  have  been  much  more  important,  having 
regard  to  the  character  of  Crippen's  evidence,  that  his  evidence  on  that 
fact  should  have  been  supported. 

Now,  gentlemen,  I  have  done  with  the  evidence  as  it  bearsi  directly 
upon  the  cause  of  death. 

I  have  now  a  very  few  words,  to  say  to  you  upon  a  most  important 
part  of  the  case,  and  that  is  the  conduct  of  the  accused.  From  the  2nd 
February  till  the  8th  July  he  lives  his  ordinary  life,  he  goes  about;  he 
does  not  change  his  habits.  There  is  some  suggestion  about  his  leaving 
his  house,  which  may  be  quite  accidental — I  should  attach  no  importance 
to  that  if  I  were  you — but  he  did  give  you  the  account  of  how  he  wanted 
to  leave  the  house  in  June.  On  the  8th  July  Dew  goes  to  him.  Now, 
you  have  had  Inspector  Dew's  statement  put  before  you,  and  you  heard  it 
read  more  than  once.  The  only  important  thing  in  Dew's  statement  for 
the  present  consideration  is,  not  the  lies  that  the  accused  told, 
which  he  admits  now  were  lies,  namely,  the  letters  and  all 
the  statements  about  his  wife  being  dead — but  the  things  he 
said  were  true  were  not  consistent  with  the  facts  as  proved. 
He  was  at  the  trouble  to  show  Inspector  Dew  the  jewels,  exhibits  7,  8,  9, 
10,  and  11 ;  you  will  remember  they  were  handed  up  to  you,  and  those  are 
the  same  that  were  found  sewn  in  his  undervest  when  he  was  arrested  at 
Quebec;  he  was  at  the  trouble  to  show  Dew  that  his  wife  must  have  taken 
the  other  jewels  with  her.  Now,  one  has  to  make  every  allowance  for  a  man 
in  a  difficult  position;  he  says,  "  She  had  other  jewellery,  and  must  have 
taken  that  with  her,"  but,  when  you  are  dealing  with  a  man  who  is 
supposed  to  be  speaking  the  truth,  and  who  is  asking  you  to  believe  that 
his  wife  had  gone  away,  you  cannot  forget  the  fact  that  he  had  pawned 
a  very  considerable  portion  of  that  jewellery  on  2nd  February,  the  day 
after  she  disappeared,  and  on  9th  February,  seven  days  afterwards.  He 
says,  "  I  have  never  pawned  or  sold  any  jewellery  belonging  to  her  before 
or  after  I  left  her."  He  says  afterwards,  "  I  thought  it  was  my  property." 
It  may  be  that  that  taken  by  itself  may  be  so  construed ;  it  may  be  so 
understood ;  but  the  important  thing  is  that  he  said  that  she  had  taken  it 
with  her  and  he  follows  that  up  by  the  statement  about  pawning.  Then 
he  says,  and  I  suggest  to  you  that  it  is  one  of  the  most  important  things, 
"  I  shall,  of  course,  do  all  I  can  to  get  in  touch  with  her  and  clear  this 
matter  up."  Gentlemen,  on  that  day  he,  with  the  assistance  of  Inspector 
Dew,  drafts  an  advertisement  offering  a  reward,  to  be  published  in  the 

181 


Hawley  Harvey  Crippen. 

Lord  Chief  Justice 

papers,  to  endeavour  to  find  Belle  Elmore.  He  never  sent  it.  If  he  believed 
that  his  wife  could  be  found,  why  should  not  he  have  sent  it  ?  His  answer  to 
me  yesterday  was,  "  I  thought  if  I  got  away  they  would  not  trouble  abovt 
me  any  more."  This  is  his  idea,  I  suppose,  of  English  justice. 

Now,  it  has  been  for  years  a  test  applied  in  these  Courts,  and  it  ouglt 
to  be  applied.  How  did  the  man  behave  when  the  charge  was  brought 
against  him]  You  have  heard  his  answers  to  Mr.  Muir,  and  to  his  ovn 
counsel,  and  to  me,  "  I  have  read  romances,  and  I  thought  I  might  be 
arrested  and  kept  in  jail  for  months  on  suspicion  because  of  my  wife's 
disappearance,"  his  story  being  that  she  had  left  him.  Gentlemen,  we 
are  not  children,  and  he  is  not  a  child.  Is  that  argument  satisfactory  to 
you?  You  have  it  that,  living  there  in  the  same  name,  carrying  on  his 
business,  consorting  with  Ethel  Le  Neve  for  practically  six  months,  the 
day  after  the  inspector  goesi  to  his1  house  he  alters  his-  name  and  flees — 
goes  to  Antwerp,  appears  under  the  name  of  Robinson,  induces  Le  Neve 
to  disguise  herself  as  a  boy,  passes  Le  Neve  off  as  his  son,  and  endeavours 
to  escape  to  Canada;  and  he  would  no  doubt  have  got  there  but  for  Inspector 
Dew  being  able  to  catch  him.  There  is  probably  not  much  importance 
in  what  he  said  to  Miss  Curnow,  "  If  anything  happens  to  me,  please  give 
what  you  have  there  to  Miss  Le  Neve,"  except  that  it  is  not  consistent  with 
his  going  off  with  Le  Neve  as  he  did.  This  conduct  is  for  you  to  take  into 
consideration;  only,  of  course,  if  you  are  of  opinion  that  the  Crown  have 
established  a  case  to  answer,  you  are  bound  to  take  it  into  jour  con- 
sideration. Gentlemen,  I  do  not  attach  very  much  importance  to  what 
he  said  at  Quebec,  but  there  is  certainly  one  expression  which  it  is 
very  difficult  to  reconcile  with  the  facts.  He  said  to  Inspector  Dew,  "  It 
is  only  fair  to  say  she  knows  nothing  about  it."  What  did  that  "  it'* 
mean?  Did  it  mean  his  statement  that  his  wife  had  gone  away,  and  that 
he  had  said  she  was  dead?  He  said  yesterday,  "  I  only  told  her  that  my 
wife  had  left  me,  and  that  she  was  dead."  The  comments  upon  that 
Ktatement,  gentlemen,  you  have  heard  made  by  the  learned  counsel ;  it  is 
for  you  to  stay  whether  you  believe  the  story  about  the  plot  with  the 
quartermaster,  which  you  ought  to  hesitate  to  believe  upon  his  statement 
alone.  It  will  be  for  you  to  say  whether  that  helps  him.  It  is  only  another 
attempt  to  fly  from  justice,  if  it  is  so,  because  his  own  story  is  that  he 
was  going  to  be  smuggled  out  of  the  ship  and  put  on  shore  secretly  at 
Montreal. 

Now,  gentlemen,  I  am  conscious  that  in  dealing  with  thia  case  I 
have  not  dealt  with  or  referred  to  every  passage  of  the  evidence.  After 
such  a  trial  as  we  have  gone  through,  and  the  attention  we  have  paid,  it 
would  be  ridiculous  to  suppose  that  any  summing  up  would  be  advanced  by 
reading  the  details  of  every  piece  of  evidence;  far  better  to  point  out  the 
issues,  and  to  show  the  portions  of  the  evidence  bearing  upon  the  issues 
which  the  jury  have  to  consider.  I  end  as  I  began.  If  you  are  of  the 
opinion  that  his1  story  of  his  wife's  going  away  on  the  1st  February  is  true, 
verdict  of  not  guilty.  If  you  are  of  the  opinion  that  the  Crown  have  not 
K\tisfied  you  that  these  were  Cora  Crippen'si  remains,  poisoned  by  hyoscin, 
buried  and  mutilated,  verdict  of  not  guilty.  But  you  ought  not  to  hesitate 
from  returning  a  verdict,  if  you  are  satisfied  upon  the  evidence,  by  any  fear, 
or  suggestion,  or  doubt,  as  to  what  might  occur  in  the  future.  There  haa 
182 


Charge  to  the  Jury. 


Lord  Chief  Justice 


been  ample  opportunity  for  getting  hold  of  Cora  Crippen  if  she  is  really 
alive.  You  cannot  proceed  with  the  case  upon  the  theory  that  she  is  alive 
unless  you  believe  the  defendant's  story.  You  will,  of  course,  as  I  have 
said,  look  to  the  fact  that  the  Crown  have  got  to  prove  their  case.  You 
will  give  the  benefit  of  any  doubt  to  the  prisoner  Crippen;  but,  if  the 
evidence  points  to  the  fact  that  he,  and  he  alone,  is  responsible  for  the 
death  of  his  wife,  Cora  Crippen,  you  will  not  hesitate  to  do  your  duty. 

[The  jury  retired  at  2.15,  and  returned  into  Court  at  2.42.] 

The  CLERK  OF  THE  COURT — Gentlemen,  have  you  agreed  upon  your 
verdict  ? 

The  FOREMAN  OF  THE  JURY — We  have. 

The  CLERK  OF  THE  COURT — Do  you  find  the  prisoner  guilty  or  not  guilty 
of  wilful  murder? 

The  FOREMAN — We  find  the  prisoner  guilty  of  wilful  murder. 

The  CLERK  OF  THE    COURT — And  that  is  the  verdict  of  you  all  ? 

The  FOREMAN — Yes. 

The  CLERK  OF  THE  COURT — Prisoner  at  the  bar,  you  stand  convicted  of 
the  crime  of  wilful  murder ;  have  you  anything  to  say  why  the  Court  should 
not  give  you  judgment  of  death  according  to  law? 

The  PRISONER — I  am  innocent. 

The  CLERK  OF  THE  COURT — Do  you  wish  to  say  anything  ? 

The  PRISONER — I  still  protest  my  innocence. 


Sentence. 

The  Usher  having  proclaimed  silence, 

The  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — Hawley  Harvey  Crippen,  you  have  been 
convicted,  upon  evidence,  which  could  leave  no  doubt  on  the  minds  of  any 
reasonable  man,  that  you  cruelly  poisoned  your  wife,  that  you  concealed 
your  crime,  you  mutilated  her  body,  and  disposed  piece-meal  of  her  remains ; 
you  possessed  yourself  of  her  property,  and  used  it  for  your  own  purposes. 
It  was  further  established  that  as  soon  as  suspicion  waa  aroused  you  fled 
from  justice,  and  took  every  measure  to  conceal  your  flight.  On  the 
ghastly  and  wicked  nature  of  the  crime  I  will  not  dwell.  I  only  tell  you  that 
you  must  entertain  no  expectation  or  hope  that  you  will  escape  the  conse- 
quences of  your  crime,  and  I  implore  you  to  make  your  peace  with  Almighty 
God.  I  have  now  to  pass  upon  you  the  sentence  of  the  Court,  which  is 
that  you  be  taken  from  hence  to  a  lawful  prison,  and  from  thence  to  a 
place  of  execution,  and  that  you  be  there  hanged  by  the  neck  until  you 
are  dead,  and  that  your  body  be  buried  in  the  precincts  of  the  prison  where 
you  shall  have  last  been  confined  after  your  conviction.  And  may  the 
Lord  have  mercy  on  your  soul ! 

The  CHAPLAIN — Amen. 

[The  prisoner  having  been  removed,  his  lordship  thanked  the  jury  and 
discharged  them.] 


183 


APPENDICES. 


Appendix  A. 


APPENDIX  A. 


CAPTAIN  KENDALL'S  MESSAGE. 


(From  the  Daily  Mail,  July  31,  1910.) 

THE  man  on  board  the  "Montrose,"  supposed  to  be  Crippen,  answers  all  the 
descriptions  given  in  the  police  report,  as  does  also  his  companion,  Miss  Le  Neve. 

I  discovered  them  two  hours  after  leaving  Antwerp,  but  did  not  telegraph  to 
my  owners  until  I  had  found  out  pood  clues.  I  conversed  with  both,  and  at  the 
same  time  took  keen  observations  of  all  points,  and  felt  quite  confident  as  to  their 
identity. 

They  booked  their  passage  in  Brussels  as  Mr.  John  Robinson  and  Master 
Robinson,  and  came  on  board  at  Antwerp  in  brown  suits,  soft  grey  hats,  and  white 
canvas  shoes.  They  had  no  baggage  except  a  small  handbag  bought  on  the 
Continent.  My  suspicion  was  aroused  by  seeing  them  on  the  deck  beside  a  boat. 
Le  Neve  squeezed  Crippen'e  hand  immoderately.  It  seemed  to  me  unnatural  for 
two  males,  so  I  suspected  them  at  once. 

I  was  well  posted  as  to  the  crime,  so  got  on  the  scent  at  once.  I  said  nothing 
to  the  officers  till  the  following  morning,  when  I  took  my  chief  officer  into  my 
confidence.  He  then  detected  the  same  suspicious  circumstances  as  myself.  I 
warned  him  that  it  must  be  kept  absolutely  quiet,  as  it  was  too  good  a  thing  to 
lose,  so  we  made  a  lot  of  them,  and  kept  them  smiling. 

During  lunch  I  examined  both  their  hats.  Crippen's  was  stamped  "  Jackson, 
Boulevard  le  Nord."  Le  Neve's  hat  bore  no  name,  but  it  was  packed  round 
the  rim  with  paper  to  make  it  fit.  Le  Neve  has  the  manner  and  appearance  of 
a  very  refined,  modest  girl.  She  does  not  speak  much,  but  always  wears  a  pleasant 
smile.  She  seems  thoroughly  under  his  thumb,  and  he  will  not  leave  her  for  a 
moment.  Her  suit  is  anything  but  a  good  fit.  Her  trousers  are  very  tight 
about  the  hips,  and  are  split  a  bit  down  the  back  and  secured  with  large  safety 
pins. 

You  will  notice  I  did  not  arrest  them.  The  course  I  am  pursuing  is  the  best, 
as  they  have  no  suspicion,  and,  with  so  many  passengers,  it  prevents  any  excite- 
ment. They  have  been  under  strict  observation  all  the  voyage,  as  if  they  smelt 
a  rat,  he  might  do  something  rash.  I  have  not  noticed  a  revolver  in  his  hip 
pocket.  He  continually  shaves  his  upper  lip,  and  his  beard  is  growing  nicely.  I 
often  see  him  stroking  it  and  seeming  pleased,  looking  more  like  a  farmer  every 
day.  The  mark  on  the  nose  caused  through  wearing  spectacles  has  not  worn 
off  since  coming  on  board. 

He  sits  about  on  the  deck  reading,  or  pretending  to  read,  and  both  seem  to  be 
thoroughly  enjoying  all  their  meals.  They  have  not  been  seasick,  and  I  have 
discussed  various  parts  of  the  world  with  him.  He  knows  Toronto,  Detroit,  and 
California  well,  and  eavs  he  is  going  to  take  his  boy  to  California  for  his  health 
(meaning  Miss  Le  Neve).  Has  in  conversation  used  several  medical  terms.  Crippen 
says  that  when  the  ship  arrives  he  will  go  to  Detroit  by  boat,  if  possible,  as  he 
prefers  it.  The  books  he  has  been  most  interested  in  have  been — 

"Pickwick   Papers." 

"  Nebo  the  Nailer  "   (S.  B.  Gould). 

"  Metropolis." 

"  A  Name  to  Conjure  With." 

And  he  is  now  busy  reading  "  The  Four  Just  Men,"  which  is  all  about  a  murder 
in  London  and  £1000  reward. 

When  my  suspicions  were  aroused  as  to  Crippen's  identity  I  quietly  collected 
all  the  English  papers  on  the  ship  which  mentioned  anything  of  the  murder,  and 

187 


Hawley   Harvey  Crippen. 

I  warned  the  chief  officer  to  collect  any  he  might  see.  This  being  done,  I  considered 
the  road  was  clear.  I  told  Crippen  a  story  to  make  him  laugh  heartily,  to  see  if  he 
would  open  his  mouth  wide  enough  for  me  to  ascertain  if  he  had  false  teeth.  This 
ruse  was  successful. 

All  the  "  boy's  "  manners  at  table  when  I  was  watching  him  were  most  lady- 
like, handling  knife  and  fork,  and  taking  fruit  off  dishes  with  two  fingers. 
Crippen  kept  cracking  nuts  for  her,  and  giving  her  half  his  salad,  and  was  always 
paying  her  the  most  marked  attention. 

During  the  evening  of  July  25,  which  they  spent  in  the  saloon,  enjoying  songs 
and  music,  he  was  quite  interested,  and  spoke  to  me  next  morning,  saying  how 
one  song,  "We  All  Walked  Into  the  Shop,"  had  been  drumming  in  his  head  all 
night,  and  how  his  boy  had  enjoyed  it,  and  had  laughed  heartily  when  they  retired 
to  their  room.  In  the  course  of  one  conversation  he  spoke  about  American 
drinks,  and  said  that  Selfridge's  was  the  only  decent  place  in  London  to  get 
them  at. 

On  two  or  three  occasions  when  walking  on  the  deck  I  called  after  him  by  his 
assumed  name,  Mr.  Robinson,  and  he  took  no  notice.  I  repeated  it,  and  it  was 
only  owing  to  the  presence  of  mind  of  Miss  Le  Neve  that  he  turned  round.  He 
apologised  for  not  hearing  me,  saying  that  the  cold  weather  had  made  him  deaf. 

One  night  he  did  not  appear  at  the  concert  in  the  saloon,  and  he  made  an 
apology  to  me  next  morning,  saying  he  wanted  to  come  but  the  young  fellow  did 
not  feel  well,  and  would  not  let  him  come,  and  he  did  not  like  to  be  left  alone. 
During  the  day  he  would  often  look  at  the  track  chart  which  shows  the  ship's 
position,  and  count  the  number  of  days  remaining  to  the  end  of  the  passage 

He  would  often  sit  on  deck  and  look  up  aloft  at  the  wireless  aerial,  and  listen 
to  the  cracking  electric  spark  messages  being  sent  by  the  Marconi  operator.  He 
said,  "  What  a  wonderful  invention  it  is  !  "  He  said  one  day  that,  according  to 
our  present  rate  of  steaming,  he  ought  to  be  in  Detroit  on  Tuesday,  August  2. 

At  times  both  would  sit  and  appear  to  be  in  deep  thought.  Though  Le  Neve 
does  not  show  signs  of  distress,  and  is,  perhaps,  ignorant  of  the  crime  com- 
mitted, she  appears  to  be  a  girl  with  a  very  weak  will.  She  has  to  follow  him 
everywhere.  If  he  looks  at  her  she  gives  him  an  endearing  smile,  as  though  she 
were  under  his  hypnotic  influence. 

Crippen  was  very  restless  on  sighting  Belle  Isle,  and  asked  where  we  stopped 
for  the  pilot,  how  he  came  off,  how  far  from  the  pilot  station  to  Quebec,  and  said 
he  would  be  glad  when  we  arrived,  as  he  was  anxious  to  get  to  Detroit. 

I  had  them  both  in  my  room  talking  over  various  things  connected  with  the 
United  States,  mostly  about  San  Francisco.  Crippen  says  he  does  not  suppose 
he  would  know  it  now,  as  he  had  not  been  there  since  he  was  eighteen  years  of 
age,  but  how  he  loved  California,  and  said  he  thought  of  settling  down  on  a  nice 
fruit  farm  there.  Throughout  the  whole  conversation  Le  Neve  never  spoke,  but 
gave  the  usual  laugh  of  response  to  anything  funny,  and  looked  as  though  she 
would  like  to  give  vent  to  her  feelings.  (Signed)  KENDALL,  Commander. 


APPENDIX    B. 


PUBLISHED   STATEMENT    OF    Da.    CEIPPEN. 


(From  the  Daily  Mail,   November  20,  1910.) 

"  ABOTJT  my  unhappy  relations  with  Belle  Elmore  I  will  say  nothing.  We  drifted 
apart  in  sympathy ;  she  had  her  own  friends  and  pleasures,  and  I  was  rather  a 
lonely  man  and  rather  miserable.  Then  I  obtained  the  affection  and  sympathy  of 
Miss  Le  Neve.  I  confess  that,  according  to  the  moral  laws  of  Church  and  State, 
we  were  guilty,  and  I  do  not  defend  our  position  in  that  respect.  But  what  I  do 
188 


Appendix  B. 


say  is  that  this  love  was  not  of  a  debased  and  degraded  character.  It  was — if  I 
may  say  so  to  people  who  will  not  perhaps  understand  or  believe — a  good  love. 
She  comforted  me  in  my  melancholy  condition ;  her  mind  was  beautiful  to  me ; 
her  loyalty  and  courage  and  self-sacrifice  were  of  a  high  character.  Whatever  sin 
there  was — and  we  broke  the  law — it  was  my  sin,  not  hers  .... 

"  In  this  farewell  letter  to  the  world,  written  as  I  face  eternity,  I  say  that 
Ethel  Le  Neve  has  loved  me  as  few  women  love  men,  and  that  her  innocence  of 
any  crime,  save  that  of  yielding  to  the  dictates  of  the  heart,  is  absolute.  To 
her  I  pay  this  last  tribute.  It  is  of  her  that  my  last  thoughts  have  been.  My 
last  prayer  will  be  that  God  may  protect  her  and  keep  her  safe  from  harm,  and 
allow  her  to  join  me  in  eternity. 

"  Surely  such  love  as  hers  for  me  will  be  rewarded.  However  vile  I  am, 
whatever  faults  I  may  have  committed,  surely  a  woman  whose  love  has  been  beyond 
all  womanly  loyalty,  who  though  the  world  has  condemned  me  believes  in  my 
innocence ;  who,  though  I  am  scorned  by  men,  holds  true  to  her  love  and  is  faithful 
to  the  last,  has  a  virtue  of  love  which  may  not  be  denounced  by  men  who  have 
not  been  so  happy  as  I  have  been,  or  by  women  whose  hearts  are  not  big  enough 
for  such  devotion.  Remember  that  she  has  faced  the  agonies  and  tortures  of 
being  charged  with  murder,  of  enduring  a  long  imprisonment,  of  facing  a  terrible 
prosecution  before  her  acquittal.  Yet  she  still  loves  me.  Never  once  has  she 
turned  against  me  for  all  that  unwillingly  I  have  made  her  bear.  Is  not  that  a 
wonderful  woman's  love? 

"  Facing  my  Maker,  very  close  to  the  hour  of  my  death,  I  give  my  testimony 
to  the  absolute  innocence  of  Ethel  Le  Neve.  She  put  her  trust  in  me,  and  what 
I  asked  her  to  do  she  did,  never  doubting.  When  I  asked  her  to  fly  with  me 
because  of  the  scandal  that  would  follow  the  discovery  of  Belle  Elmore's  disappear- 
ance, she  believed  the  words  I  spoke,  and  said  she  would  go  with  me  and  face  what- 
ever discomforts  might  follow.  When  I  suggested  the  boy's  disguise  she  adopted 
it  with  a  girlish  sense  of  amusement  over  which  there  was  no  shadow  of  guilt.  Poor 
child  !  Why  should  she  feel  guilty  ?  She  had  been  overwhelmed  with  surprise  to 
hear  that  Belle  Elmore  was  still  alive.  But  she  had  forgotten  my  first  and  only 
deception — the  story  of  the  cablegrams  announcing  Belle  Elmore's  death. 

"  Her  only  idea  was  that  we  were  getting  away  to  a  new  world  and  a  new 
life,  away  from  prying  eyes  and  gossiping  tongues.  She  was  willing  to  adventure 
all  for  that,  and  she  still  trusted  me.  I  believe  she  has  told  in  full  detail  the  story 
of  her  adventures  in  boy's  clothes,  and  although  I  have  not  been  permitted  to  read 
at  line  of  her  narrative,  I  know  that  every  word  is  true,  for  she  has  the  heart  of 
truth.  I  feel  sure  also  that  she  has  said  no  unkind  word  about  me.  .  .  . 

"  I  make  this  defence  and  this  acknowledgment — that  the  love  of  Ethel  Le 
Neve  has  been  the  best  thing  in  my  life — my  only  happiness — and  that  in  return 
for  that  great  gift  I  have  been  inspired  with  a  greater  kindness  towards  my  fellow- 
beings,  and  with  a  greater  desire  to  do  good.  We  were  as  man  and  wife  together, 
with  an  absolute  communion  of  spirit.  Perhaps  God  will  pardon  us  because  we 
were  like  two  children  in  the  great  unkind  world,  who  clung  to  one  another  and 
gave  each  other  courage. 

"  In  Rotterdam  and  Brussels,  and  during  the  voyage  across  the  Atlantic  on 
the  'Montrose,'  Ethel  had  no  suspicion  of  the  tragedy  that  awaited  her.  Always 
she  was  hopeful  of  the  future  and  full  of  expectation  of  the  adventures  to  come. 
Then  as  a  bolt  from  the  blue  came  the  arrival  of  Inspector  Dew,  with  the  appalling 
charges  made  against  us  both,  followed  by  our  dreadful  separation. 

"The  world  knows  what  happened  afterwards;  but  what  it  does  not  know 
is  the  agony  we  both  suffered,  the  frightful  torture  of  two  hearts  beating  one  for 
another,  yet  divided  by  the  most  cruel  barriers." 


189 


Hawley   Harvey   Crippen. 


APPENDIX   C. 


LETTER   FROM  DR.   CRIPPEN  TO  ETHEL  LE    NEVE. 


(From  the  Daily  Mail,  27th  November,    1910.) 

Nov.    22. 

How  can  I  find  the  strength  and  heart  to  struggle  through  this  last  letter?    God 
indeed  must  hear  our  cry  to  Him  for  Divine  help  in  this  last  farewell. 

How  to  control  myself  to  write  I  hardly  know,  but  pray  God  help  us  to 
be  brave  to  help  to  face  the  end  now  so  near. 

The  thoughts  rush  to  my  mind  quicker  than  I  can  put  them  down.  Time  is 
so  short  now,  and  there  is  so  much  that  I  would  say. 

There  are  less  than  two  days  left  to  us.  Only  one  more  letter  after  this 
can  I  write  you,  and  only  two  more  visits  —  one  to-night  before  you  read  this  letter, 
and  one  to-morrow. 

When  I  wrote  to  you  on  Saturday  I  had  not  heard  any  news  of  the  petition, 
and  though  I  never  at  any  time  had  hope,  yet  deep  down  in  my  heart  was  just  a 
glimmer  of  trust  that  God  might  give  us  yet  a  chance  to  put  me  right  before  the 
world  and  let  me  have  the  passionate  longing  of  my  soul. 

Your  letter,  written  early  Saturday,  came  to  me  last  Saturday  evening,  and 
<con  after  the  Governor  brought  me  the  dreadful  news  about  ten  o'clock. 

He  was  so  kind  and  considerate  in  telling  me,  in  breaking  the  shock  as  gently 
as  he  could.  He  was  most  kind,  and  left  me  at  last  with  '  God  bless  you  ! 
Good  night,'  so  that  I  know  you  will  ever  remember  him  most  kindly. 

When  he  had  gone  I  first  kissed  your  face  in  the  photo,  my  faithful,  devoted 
companion  in  all  this  sorrow. 

Oh,  how  glad  I  am  I  had  the  photo.  It  was  some  consolation,  although  in 
spite  of  all  my  greatest  efforts  it  was  impossible  to  keep  down  a  great  sob  and 
my  heart's  agonised  cry. 

How  am  I  to  endure  to  take  my  last  look  at  your  dear  face?  What  agony 
must  I  go  through  at  the  last  when  you  disappear  for  ever  from  my  eyes  !  God 
help  us  to  be  brave  then. 

When  I  received  your  letter  on  Sunday  evening  I  saw  that  you  did  not  then 
know  the  bad  news,  and  I  prayed  God  to  help  you  in  the  morning  when  you  did 
learn  it.  I  know  what  your  agony  will  be,  for  I  know  your  heart,  like  mine,  will 
be  broken.  God  help  us  indeed  to  be  brave. 

That  is  my  constant  prayer,  now  that  the  last  refuge  to  which  we  had 
looked  with  some  hope  has  fled.  I  am  comforted  at  least  in  thinking  that  through 
all  the  years  of  our  friendship  never  have  I  passed  one  unkind  word  or  given  one 
reproachful  look  to  her  to  whom  I  have  given  myself  entirely  for  ever. 

I  think  all  our  necessary  points  about  business  are  settled  ;  but  there  are 
•ne  or  two  things  I  want  to  say.  If  by  any  possibility  you  can  have  my  body, 
have  it  cremated,  and  dispose  of  the  ashes  as  you  wish.  I  know  you  will  be  the 
only  one  to  mourn  for  me,  which  I  know  will  please  you  ;  but  do  not,  dearest,  think 
I  expect  you  to  put  on  mourning  ;  that,  my  dearest,  I  leave  you  to  decide  on. 
It  may  not  be  well  for  you  to  do  it  in  going  to  Mrs.  H.,  and  I  know  that  not  even 
the  deepest  of  mourning  will  be  more  than  a  faint  indication  of  your  grief. 

You  have  friends  to  help  you.  You  have  at  least  sufficient  means  to  begin 
the  battle  of  life  not  destitute  nor  helpless.  How  shameful  to  be  hounded  in  our 
last  moments  secured  to  us  by  newspaper  men,  and  that  they  should  continue  to 
publish  lies.* 

The  Governor  was  so  kind  as  to  let  me  read  yesterday  afternoon  your  story 
and  my  statement.  I  am  indeed  thankful  to  have  been  permitted  to  do  so  at  the 
last. 

I  find  though  that  in  some  way  they  have  omitted  that  part  entirely  in  which 

*Thi»  refers  to  an  alleged  (and  fraudulent)  "confession"  published  by  a  certain  paper. 
190 


Appendix  C. 


I  criticised  the  Crown's  evidence  on  the  scar,  and  on  the  absence  of  a  navel.  My 
criticism  on  this  point  was  important,  and  I  hope  you  can  get  it  put  in  next 
Sunday. 

You  will  remember  that  the  case  for  the  Crown  depended  on  the  identity 
which  they  tried  to  prove  by  means  of  the  eo-called  scar  on  the  piece  of  flesh  and 
skin,  7  inches  by  6  inches.  Now,  on  this  piece  of  skin  were  found  two  grooves, 
one  as  distinctly  marked  as  the  other.  The  medical  witness  of  the  Crown  made 
no  assertion  with  regard  to  this  piece  of  skin  until  they  were  told  that  Belle  Elmore 
had  had  an  operation. 

Then  they  suddenly  discovered  one  groove  to  be  a  scar,  although  admitting 
the  other  groove  to  be  caused  by  a  fold  of  the  skin  which  had  been  under  great 
pressure,  notwithstanding  the  undoubted  fact  that  one  groove  was  absolutely  con- 
tinuous with  the  other  in  a  curved  line. 

The  medical  witnesses  for  my  defence  brought  forward  proof  to  support 
their  denial  that  the  groove  was  a  scar  by  demonstrating  that  there  were  certain 
structures  present  in  the  so-called  scar  which  could  not  be  present  if  the  mark 
had  resulted  from  an  operation. 

This  proof  showed  so  absolutely  that  the  groove  was  not  a  scar  of  an 
operation  that  the  Crown  could  only  squirm  out  of  their  false  position  by  bringing 
forward  at  the  last  moment  a  theory  that  the  presence  of  these  certain  structures 
was  to  be  accounted  for  by  the  supposition  that  the  edges  of  the  skin  had  been 
turned  under  and  brought  together  in  sewing  up  the  wound  of  the  operation — a 
most  unlikely  thing  to  have  been  done  by  skilled  surgeons,  who  specially  avoid 
such  an  occurrence  in  abdominal  operations. 

Another  point,  advanced  again  at  the  last  moment  by  the  Crown  when  they 
saw  their  case  weakening  with  regard  to  the  so-called  scar,  was  the  fact  that 
the  groove  was  widest/  at  its  lowest  point,  just  above  the  pubic  bone.  This  fact 
v  3s  emphasised  by  the  Crown's  witness  as  being  distinctive  of  a  stretched 
abdominal  scar,  but  for  the  defence  this  was  denied,  the  fact  being  that,  anato- 
mically considered,  the  tendinous  or  fibrous  attachments  of  the  abdomen  are 
actually  firmest  at  their  attachments  to  the  pubic  bone,  and  if  the  groove  had  been 
a  stretched  scar  its  widest  point  would  have  been  much  higher  up. 

Yet  despite  the  fact  having  been  annulled  by  my  medical  witnesses,  the 
judge  dwelt  upon  this  point  as  of  advantage  for  the  Crown. 

Finally,  at  Bow  Street  the  Crown's  witness  accounted  for  the  entire  absence 
of  the  navel  by  stating  that  it  had  been  cut  out  during  the  operation,  but  when 
another  Crown  witness  insisted  that  she  had  seen  the  navel  on  Belle 
Elmore's  abdomen,  any  reference  to  this  having  been  cut  out  was  most  carefully 
avoided  at  the  Old  Bailey. 

Now,  it  is  plain  to  every  one  that  if  there  exists  a  navel  on  Belle  Elmore's 
abdomen,  the  fact  that  no  navel  was  found  on  that  piece  of  skin  above  the  so-called 
scar  is  proof  beyond  any  possible  doubt  that  the  remains  found  at  Hilldrop 
Crescent  were  not  those  of  B.  E. 

Yet  the  judge  told  the  jury  to  accept  the  statement  of  the  witness  that  she 
saw  the  scar,  and  to  disregard  the  statement  that  she  saw  the  navel. 

I  write  these  things  in  the  hope  that  the  unreliability  of  the  case  brought 
against  me  may  be  understood  by  thoughtful  people.  But  I  want  you  not  to  go 
to  any  further  trouble  or  expense  in  trying  to  get  further  evidence  beyond  com- 
pleting what  correspondence  you  have  begun  with  medical  men  here,  and  with 
the  hospital  in  Philadelphia. 

I  want  my  dear  one  to  keep  for  her  own  use  all  that  can  be  realised  by 
the  sale  of  my  estate.  We  can  safely  leave  to  the  hand  of  a  just  God  the  produc- 
tion later  on,  if  necessary,  of  further  evidence. 

I  hope  so  greatly  that  you  have  heard  favourably  from  Mrs.  H.,  and 
that  you  may  soon  go  to  her,  where  you  will  be  comfortable  and  made  more 
cheerful  by  the  bright  sunshine,  and  be  free  entirely  from  the  newspaper  men  and 
their  lying  tales. 

I  feel  sure  my  troubles  and  worries  here  will  soon  be  ended,  as  I  shall  be 
to-morrow  in  God's  hands,  and  I  have  perfect  faith.  He  will  let  my  spirit  be  with 
you  always,  and  after  this  earthly  separation  is  finished  will  join  our  sonls  for  ever. 

There  will  be  no  time  for  letters  Wednesday  morning. 

The  rest  of  this  letter  shall  be  sacred  to  you  and  me.     .     .     . 

191 


Hawley  Harvey  Crippen. 


APPENDIX  D. 


THE  TRIAL  OF  Miss  LE    NEVE    AT  THE    OLD    BAILEY, 
On  Tuesday,  25th  October,  1910. 


THE  trial  of  Ethel  Le  Neve  on  the  charge  of  being  an  accessory  after  the  fact  in 
the  murder  of  Cora  Crippen  at  39  Hilldrop  Crescent,  for  which  Hawley  Harvey 
Crippen  was  sentenced  to  death,  took  place  at  the  Central  Criminal  Court  before 
the  Lord  Chief  Justice  of  England. 

Counsel  in  the  case  were — Mr.  R.  D.  Muir,  Mr.  Travers  Humphreys,  and  Mr. 
S.  Ingleby  Oddie,  for  the  Crown;  and  F.  E.  Smith,  K.C.,  M.P.,  and  Mr.  Barring- 
ton  Ward,  for  the  defence. 

Mr.  R.  D.  Muir,  in  opening  for  the  Crown,  said — The  prisoner  is  a  typist  by 
occupation,  some  twenty-seven  years  of  age.  She  is  charged  in  this  indictment, 
in  effect,  with  assisting  Hawley  Harvey  Crippen  to  escape  from  justice  at  a  time 
when  she  knew  that  he  had  been,  guilty  of  the  murder  of  his  wife.  The  facts  of 
the  case  are  for  the  most  part  undisputed.  My  learned  friend,  Mr.  F.  E.  Smith, 
does  not  rest  any  part  of  his  case  upon  there  having  been  no  murder  committed, 
or  upon  any  question  with  regard  to  Crippen  having  committed  the  murder,  or  the 
murdered  person  being  Crippen's  wife.  Therefore  the  great  part  of  this  case  rests 
upon  undisputed  facts.  The  issue  to  which  the  evidence  for  the  prosecution 
will  be  directed  will  be — what  was  the  state  of  knowledge  that  prisoner  had, 
and  what  was  her  intention  with  regard  to  the  acts  which  she  undoubtedly  com- 
mitted? Guilty  knowledge  and  guilty  intention  are  issues  in  this  case,  and  upon 
such  issues  a  jury  can  rarely  have  direct  evidence  at  all.  It  hardly  ever  happens 
that  the  state  of  a  person's  mind  can  be  judged  by  anything  but  that  person's 
actions,  and,  therefore,  you  will  look  at  the  facts  in  this  case  with  a  view  to  dis- 
covering what  was  the  knowledge  of  the  prisoner  at  the  time  that  the  acts  in 
question  were  done,  and  what  was  her  intention  with  regard  to  the  acts  which  she 
herself  did.  Bearing  in  mind  that  that  is  the  real  issue  to  which  you  must  direct 
your  attention,  I  will  state  very  shortly  the  facts. 

Crippen,  an  American  citizen,  was  carrying  on  business  in  this  country  in  a 
quasi-medical  capacity.  He  was  in  1909  and  1910  either  manager  to,  or  agent  for, 
a  firm  of  patent  medicine  vendors  called  Munyons,  and  their  business  was  carried 
on  a*  Albion  House,  New  Oxford  Street.  His  wife  had  been  on  the  music-hall 
stage,  and  was  known  by  the  name  of  Belle  Elmore  among  her  friends.  They  were 
living  together  at  one  time  on  perfectly  good  terms.  They  had  been  putting 
money  in  the  bank,  and  there  was  about  £600  on  deposit  either  in  their  joint  names 
or  in  Belle  Elmore's  name  at  the  Charing  Cross  Bank  in  December,  1909.  There 
seems  to  have  been  a  change  in  their  financial  position  about  that  time,  because 
notice  had  been  given  to  withdraw  the  £600  in  the  bank,  and  it  is  quite  clear  that 
at  the  end  of  January  and  the  beginning  of  February  Crippen  had  got  into  monetary 
difficulties,  and  was  in  urgent  need  of  money. 

Crippen  had  been  carrying  on  an  intrigue  with  the  prisoner  Le  Neve  extending 
over  some  three  years  or  so.  She  was  a  typist  in  his  employment,  or  in  the  employ- 
ment of  the  firm  for  which  he  worked,  she  being  a  woman  ten  years  younger 
than  Crippen's  wife.  It  is  quite  clear  that  the  prisoner  was  the  motive  for  the 
murder  by  Crippen  of  his  wife.  It  was  for  the  prisoner  that  he  committed 
that  murder,  in  order  that  he  might  possess  himself  of  her  to  a  greater  extent 
than  he  had  been  able  to  do  up  till  then,  and  in  order  also  that  he  might  possess 
himself  of  his  wife's  property  and  money,  and  be  able  to  keep  the  prisoner. 

Gentlemen,  you  will  have  to  be  satisfied — and  I  submit  there  will  be  no  difficulty 
on  that  point — that  Crippen,  in  fact,  murdered  his  wife.  They  had  been  living 
together  at  39  Hilldrop  Crescent  for  some  four  and  a  quarter  years  in  January 
of  this  year.  They  had  a  dinner  party  on  31st  January,  to  which  they  invited 

192 


Appendix  D. 


two  friends,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Martinetti,  and  the  party  lasted  till  half-past  one  the 
following  morning.  The  husband  and  wife  were  apparently  on  the  best  possible 
terms  when  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Martinetti  left.  Cora  Crippen  was  never  seen  alive  by 
any  person  outside  the  house  after  that  day.  Crippen  and  she  were  left  alone  in 
the  house,  and  the  next  that  was  found  of  Mrs.  Crippen  was  that  on  13th  July 
her  remains  were  dug  up  in  the  cellar  of  that  house,  mutilated  beyond  recognition 
by  any  ordinary  means — mutilated  with  a  skill  which  indicated  that  the  person 
who  had  done  it  was  trained  in  anatomy.  It  wag  found  upon  analysis  of  the 
organs  remaining  that  she  had  died  of  hyoscine  poisoning.  On  19th  January,  a 
fortnight  or  so  before  his  wife  disappeared,  Crippen  had  purchased  an  enormous 
quantity,  five  grains,  of  that  deadly  poison.  Upon  these  facts  being  proved  simply 
to  you,  and  those  facts  being  undisputed,  the  question  then  arises  as  to  the 
prisoner's  knowledge  of  that  matter. 

For  about  three  years  Le  Neve  had  been  connected  with  Crippen  in  an 
intimate  way,  meeting  him  in  the  daytime,  but  always  going  home  at  night  to  her 
lodgings  with  a  Mrs.  Jackson,  in  Camden  Town.  She  had  lodged  with  Mrs. 
Jackson  from  September,  1908,  until  March,  1910,  and  there  can  be  no  question 
that  as  between  Mrs.  Jackson  and  prisoner  there  was  real  affection,  and  that  the 
prisoner  looked  to  Mrs.  Jackson  as  a  daughter  would  look  to  a  mother,  and  Mrs. 
Jackson  as  a  mother  would  look  to  a  daughter.  That  is  a  very  important  fact 
when  you  are  considering  Mrs.  Jackson's  evidence.  Mrs.  Jackson  says  that  about 
January  last  prisoner  began  to  look  ill  and  troubled,  and  that  one  night  towards 
the  end  of  January,  or  in  the  beginning  of  February — she  did  not  fix  any  date — 
prisoner  came  home  very  ill.  She  would  take  no  supper,  and  went  to  bed.  Her 
appearance,  according  to  Mrs.  Jackson's  description,  was  the  appearance  of  some- 
body who  had  suffered  a  great  shock,  who  was  stricken  with  horror  at  something 
that  had  happened.  Prisoner  was  asked  for  an  explanation,  but  little  or  none  was 
forthcoming  that  night.  The  next  morning,  again,  this  young  woman  was  in  the 
same  condition.  She  was  practically  unable  to  eat  her  breakfast,  and  her  con- 
dition was  such  that  Mrs.  Jackson  saw  she  was  quite  unfit  to  go  to  her  work  as 
a  typist,  and  persuaded  her  to  remain  at  home. 

That  was  no  ordinary  illness.  It  was  something  which  seemed  to  strike  the 
prisoner  with  horror.  Whatever  it  may  have  been,  it  was  contemporaneous,  or 
nearly  contemporaneous,  with  the  murder  of  Mrs.  Crippen.  That  is  a  fact  which 
cannot  be  disputed.  She  was  pressed  to  explain  in  the  course  of  that  day,  and 
she  gave  one  or  more  explanations.  One  was  that  she  felt  her  position  in  regard 
to  Crippen  while  Mrs.  Crippen  was  the  lawful  wife,  and  that  she  could  not  bear 
to  see  Mrs.  Crippen  in  lawful  possession  of  the  man  for  whom  the  prisoner  had 
this  affection.  If  that  were  the  true  explanation  it  would  fix  the  date  of  this 
extraordinary  fit  of  horror  at  a  time  when  Mrs.  Crippen  was  alive.  It  speaks  of 
Mrs.  Crippen  as  if  she  were  then  alive ;  but  you  will  have  to  consider  whether 
it  is  a  true  explanation  or  an  adequate  explanation  of  the  state  of  the  prisoner  on 
the  night  and  the  morning  of  which  Mrs.  Jackson  speaks.  The  explanation, 
so-called,  of  this  extraordinary  state  of  horror  was  one  which  would  have  applied 
to  any  day  of  the  preceding  three  years  on  which  no  such  state  of  horror  existed, 
so  far  as  the  prisoner  is  concerned.  You  will  have  to  ask  yourselves  whether 
the  true  explanation  of  that  state  of  horror  was  that  the  knowledge  had  come  to 
her  in  some  way  or  other  that  Crippen  had  murdered  his  wife,  and  that  no  explana- 
tion such  as  she  offered  could  explain  such  a  state  of  things,  because  the  explanation 
refers  to  a  state  of  things  which  had  existed  continuously  for  some  three  years. 

Almost  immediately  after  that  another  change  takes  place.  The  prisoner 
becomes  cheerful.  She  says  that  "the  doctor  "  has  promised  to  marry  her.  She 
comes  home  wearing  Mrs.  Crippen'a  clothes  and  jewels,  and  makes  presents  to 
Mrs.  Jackson  of  enormous  quantities  of  the  clothing  that  Mrs.  Crippen  had  left 
behind  her.  She  says  that  Mrs.  Crippen  has  gone  to  America,  and  she  and  Crippen 
visit  Mrs.  Jackson  on  more  than  one  occasion.  She  also  had  the  knowledge  that 
Crippen  for  a  large  sum  of  money  had  been  pawning  some  of  Mrs.  Crippen's 
.jewellery.  You  must  ask  yourselves,  "  What  is  the  explanation  of  this?  "  Is 
it  likely  that  any  woman  would  suppose  that  the  wife  was  going  away  from  the 
husband  leaving  behind  her  furs,  jewels,  and  everything  practically  that  she  had 
in  the  world,  to  be  worn  by  any  woman  to  whom  Crippen  liked  to  give  them?  Is 
that  a  story  which,  in  your  judgment  as  men  of  the  world,  any  woman  would  be 

193 


Hawley   Harvey  Crippen. 

likely  to  believe?  That  is  the  story  which  the  prisoner  put  forward  as  the  one 
which  she  believed  as  explaining  the  absence  of  Mrs.  Crippen.  You  must  apply 
your  common  sense  and  knowledge  of  the  world  to  that,  and  say  whether  that  is  an 
explanation  which,  in  your  judgment,  any  woman  would  believe. 

According  to  prisoner,  Crippen  never  told  her,  so  far  as  she  could  remember, 
whether  Mrs.  Crippen  was  coming  back  or  not.  But  immediately  she  began  to 
wear  Mrs.  Crippen's  jewels  and  go  out  in  public  in  them — wearing  the  brooch  at  a 
dinner  and  ball  of  the  Music  Hall  Artistes'  Benevolent  Fund,  a  place  where  all 
Mrs.  Crippen's  friends  would  be  gathered  together.  You  will  have  to  ask  your- 
selves whether  there  was  not  in  her  mind  such  knowledge  that  Mrs.  Crippen  would 
never  come  back  as  this  indictment  imputes  to  her,  otherwise  she  never  would 
have  gone  about  with  Mrs.  Crippen's  husband,  wear  Mrs.  Crippen's  clothes  and 
jewels,  and  give  away  some  of  Mrs.  Crippen's  clothing  to  friends. 

On  12th  March  she  left  her  lodgings  to  take  up  her  residence  with  Crippen 
at  the  houseln  Hilldrop  Crescent ;  on  24th  March  she  went  with  Crippen  to  Dieppe, 
and  on  30th  March  she  returned.  It  was  then,  she  says,  that  she  first  learned 
that  Mrs.  Crippen  was  dead,  although  up  to  this  date  and  after  she  had  been 
acting  as  if  there  was  no  such  person  in  the  world.  The  friends  of  Mrs.  Crippen 
were  making  inquiries.  The  stories  Crippen  told  to  account  for  his  wife's  dis- 
appearance were  untrue,  and  they  had  found  them  untrue.  Inspector  Dew  went 
to  Hilldrop  Crescent  on  8th  July  and  found  the  prisoner  in  possession.  He  said 
he  had  come  to  make  inquiries  about  Crippen's  missing  wife.  The  prisoner,  after 
some  show  of  reluctance,  took  him  to  Albion  House,  where,  after  an  interview 
had  taken  pace  between  Crippen  and  the  inspector,  prisoner  made  a  short  state- 
ment to  the  inspector.  It  is  the  only  account  prisoner  has  ever  given  of  her 
connection  with  Dr.  Crippen,  or  with  his  subsequent  flight.  She  says :  "  I  am  a 
single  woman,  twenty-seven  years  of  age,  and  am  a  shorthand  typist.  My  father 
and  mother  reside  at  17b  Goldington  Buildings,  Great  College  Street,  Camden 
Town.  My  father  is  a  commercial  traveller.  Since  the  latter  end  of  February 
I  have  been  h'ving  at  30  Hilldrop  Crescent  with  Dr.  Crippen  as  his  wife.  Before 
this  I  lived  at  30  Constantino  Road,  Hampstead.  I  have  been  on  intimate  terms 
with  Mr.  Crippen  for  two  or  three  years,  but  I  have  known  him  for  ten  years.  1 
made  his  acquaintance  by  being  in  the  same  employ  as  he  was.  I  know  Mrs. 
Crippen,  and  have  visited  Hilldrop  Crescent.  She  treated  me  as  a  friend. 

"In  the  early  part  of  February  I  received  a  note  from  Mr.  Crippen  saying  Mrs. 
Crippen  had  gone  to  America,  and  asking  me  to  hand  over  a  packet  he  enclosed 
to  Miss  May.  About  four  p.m.  the  same  day  he  came  to  our  business  place, 
Albion  House,  and  told  me  his  wife  had  gone  to  America.  He  said  she  had 
packed  up  and  gone.  I  had  been  in  the  habit  for  the  past  two  or  three  years  of 
going  about  with  him,  and  continued  doing  so. 

"About  a  week  after  the  had  told  me  she  had  gone  to  America  I  went  to  Hill- 
drop  Crescent  to  put  the  i  place  straight,  aa  there  were  no  servants  kept,  but  at 
night  I  went  to  my  lodgings.  I  did  this  daily  for  about  a  fortnight.  The  place 
appeared  to  be  all  right,  and  quite  as  usual.  He  took  me  to  the  Benevolent 
Fund  dinner,  and  lent  me  a  diamond  brooch  to  wear.  Later  on  he  told  me  I 
could  keep  it. 

"After  this  he  told  me  she  had  caught  a  chill  on  board  the  ship  and  had  got 
pneumonia.  Afterwards  he  told  me  she  was  dead.  He  told  me  he  could  not 
go  to  the  funeral  as  it  was  too  far,  and  she  would  have  been  buried  before  he  got 
there.  Before  he  ever  told  me  this  I  had  been  away  with  him  for  five  or  six 
days  at  Dieppe,  and  stayed  at  an  hotel  with  him  in  the  namea  of  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
Crippen.  When  we  came  back  he  took  me  to  Hilldrop  Crescent,  and  I  remained 
there  with  him.  The  same  night,  or  the  night  after,  he  told  me  that  Belle  was 
dead.  I  was  very  much  astonished,  but  I  do  not  think  I  said  anything  to  him 
about  it.  I  have  not  had  any  conversation  with  him  about  it  since.  He  gave 
me  some  furs  of  hia  wife  to  wear,  and  I  have  been  living  with  him  ever  since  as 
his  wife.  My  father  and  mother  do  not  know  what  I  am  doing,  and  think  I  am 
a  housekeeper  at  Hilldrop  Crescent.  When  Mr.  Crippen  told  me  his  wife  had 
gone  to  America  I  don't  remember  if  he  told  me  she  was  coming  back  or  not.  I 
cannot  remember  if  he  went  into  mourning." 

That  statement  was  made  on  8th  July,  and  next  morning  Crippen  came  to  tne 
office  and  gave  instructions  to  a  man  named  Long  to  buy  a  quantity  of  boy's 

194 


Appendix  D. 


clothing.  Long  afterwards  found  that  the  boy'a  clothes  had  been  taken  away 
from  the  place  where  he  had  left  them  by  Crippen's  orders,  and  that  a  hat,  which 
he  recognised  as  having  been  worn  by  prisoner  at  some  time,  was  left  in  the 
office.  The  police  went  to  Hilldrop  Crescent  and  found  that  Crippen  and  prisoner 
had  disappeared.  On  13th  July  the  human  remains  were  found  in  the  cellar, 
and  a  hue  and  cry  were  at  once  set  up. 

It  is  plain  beyond  dispute  from  the  facts  that  I  am  about  to  state  that  Crippen 
and  prisoner  were  flying  from  justice.  They  went  to  Antwerp,  and  there  they 
left  for  Canada  on  20th  July  by  the  "  Montrose."  Between  9th  July — and 
certainly  between  15th  and  20th  July — the  newspapers  were  full  of  descriptions 
both  of  Crippen  and  the  prisoner,  and  their  photographs.  It  is  incredible  that 
accused  should  not  have  had  the  curiosity  to  look  at  the  English  papers  at  Antwerp 
and  have  seen  that  there  has  a  hue  and  cry  after  Crippen  and  herself.  They 
booked  on  the  "  Montrose  "  under  false  names,  and  disguised.  What  could  have 
induced  the  prisoner  to  take  those  steps  on  and  after  9th  July?  What  was  it  the 
prisoner  knew  which  induced  her  to  cut  off  her  hair  and  masquerade  as  a  boy, 
and  condemn  herself  practically  to  perpetual  silence,  because  she  dare  not  speak 
in  public  in  the  hearing  of  any  person  lest  her  voice  should  betray  her?  The 
explanation  which  lies  on  the  surface  of  those  facts  is  that  the  prisoner  knew  that 
Crippen  was  flying  from  justice  for  the  murder  of  his  wife.  What  other  explana- 
tion is  there?  Absolutely  none.  When  the  prisoner  was  charged  on  board  the 
"  Montrose"  with  being  a  party  to  wilful  murder  she  became  faint  and  made  no 
reply  to  the  charge.  She  also  said  she  had  neither  seen  nor  knew  anything 
about  the  letter  of  appeal  from  her  father,  published  in  the  newspapers. 

Prisoners  were  brought  back  on  the  "  Megantic,"  and  while  on  that  vessel 
Le  Neve  was  charged  with  murder  and  also  with  being  an  accessory  after  the  fact. 
All  she  said  then  was  "Yes,"  indicating  that  she  knew  what  the  nature  of  the 
charges  was.  Again,  at  Bow  Street  Police  Station  she  made  no  reply,  and  before 
being  committed  by  the  magistrate  for  trial  upon  the  present  charge  she  was 
given  the  opportunity  of  going  into  the  witness  box,  and  again  made  no  answer 
at  all.  Gentlemen,  is  there  any  explanation  which  she  can  offer,  except  that  she 
was  flying  from  justice  with  Crippen?  If  there  is  any  other  explanation,  why 
has  it  not  beeen  put  forward?  It  is  useless  to  speculate  whether  she,  being  a 
woman,  may  not  have  accompanied  this  man  for  some  other  reason.  Can  she, 
the  person  who  knows  whether  such  an  explanation  exists,  choose  to  let  oppor- 
tunity after  opportunity  go  by  and  leave  the  facts  unexplained  altogether? 

You  are  left  now  with  the  plain  explanation  lying  on  the  surface  of  those 
facts,  and  nothing  else.  Crippen  was  flying  from  justice  accompanied  by  the 
prisoner  at  the  bar,  she  assisting  him  to  evade  pursuit  by  disguising  herself.  For 
some  reason — it  matters  not  what — it  was  decided  that  Crippen  was  not  to  fly 
alone,  and  she  being  a  source  of  danger  to  him  unless  she  disguised  herself,  she 
made  the  sacrifices  involved.  She  cut  off  her  hair,  dressed  as  a  boy,  and  passed 
as  his  son,  with  a  false  name,  flying  to  a  foreign  country  by  a  circuitous  route. 
All  these  things  for  what  reason:  For  no  reason  that  she  offers  at  all,  and  I 
submit  that,  unless  and  until  you  get  from  her,  or  from  somebody  else,  some 
explanation,  the  only  interpretation  you  can  put  upon  these  acts  is  the  interpre 
tation  that  she  knev  of  Crippen's  crime  and  she  assisted  Crippen  to  escape. 

EVIDENCE  FOR  THE   PROSECUTION. 

Mr.  FREDERICK  LOWNDES,  examined  by  Mr.  HUMPHREYS — I  am  the  owner  of 
the  house  at  39  Hilldrop  Crescent.  Crippen  was  tenant  of  that  house  from 
September,  1905,  to  July,  1910.  I  knew  Mrs.  Crippen,  who  was  living  in  the 
same  house  with  her  husband,  but  I  did  not  know  the  prisoner. 

Dr.  J.  H.  BURROUGHS,  examined  by  Mr.  HUMPHREYS — I  am  a  registered 
medical  practitioner  at  169  City  Road.  I  have  known  Mrs.  Crippen  since  1902. 
I  last  saw  her  on  a  Wednesday  early  in  January.  I  also  know  Mrs.  Martinetti. 
I  have  attended  her  professionally.  I  saw  her  last  night.  She  is  suffering  from 
influenza,  with  high  :emperature,  and  is  quite  unable  to  attend  here  this  morning. 
She  has  been  ill  sines  last  Tuesday,  the  day  when  she  gave  evidence  in  this  case. 
The  first  I  heard  alout  Mrs.  Crippen  was  that  she  was  dead.  I  also  heard  at 
the  same  time  that  she  had  gone  away,  and  that  she  had  died  abroad. 

195 


Hawley  Harvey  Crippen. 

Chief  Inspector  DEW,  examined  by  Mr.  HUMPHREYS — I  was  at  Bow  Street 
Police  Court  when  Mrs.  Martinetti  gave  evidence.  She  afterwards  signed  the 
depositions,  and  I  now  identify  her  signature. 

Mr.  Humphreys  then  read  extracts  from  the  depositions  in  question  bear- 
ing on  the  present  case,  including  mention  of  the  dinner  party  at  Hilldrop 
Crescent  on  31st  January ;  also  the  statement  of  Mrs.  Martinetti  that  on 
20th  February  she  saw  prisoner  wearing  a  brooch  which  she  believed  Mrs. 
Crippen  had  worn. 

Mr.  Smith  next  read  the  material  passages  from  the  cross-examination  of 
Mrs.  Martinetti,  as  follows : — "  At  the  ball  I  did  not  speak  to  Miss  Le  Neve. 
Afterwards  we  sat  at  the  same  table,  with  Dr.  Crippen  between  us.  Other 
friends  at  the  gathering  knew  her  quite  well.  Miss  Le  Neve,  I  thought,  was 
very  quiet.  At  the  dinner  I  did  not  see  her  much.  The  brooch  she  was 
wearing  she  wore  without  any  attempt  at  concealment.  Miss  Le  Neve  would 
naturally  expect  to  meet  many  of  Mrs.  Crippen's  friends  at  the  dinner." 

Miss  MELINDA  MAY,  examined  by  Mr.  HUMPHREYS — I  am  secretary  of  the 
Music  Hall  Ladies'  Guild.  Meetings  of  the  committee  were  held,  every  Wednes- 
day at  Albion  House.  Mrs.  Crippen  was  a  member  of  the  guild.  Belle  Elmore 
was  present  at  the  meeting  on  26th  January.  The  next  meeting  was  on  2nd 
February.  She  was  not  then  present.  On  that  day  the  prisoner  came  to  me 
and  gave  me  the  pass-book,  cheque  book,  and  the  paying-in  book  in  an  open 
envelope.  She  also  gave  me  two  letters.  (Shown  a  quantity  of  jewellery,  a 
brooch,  a  pair  of  earrings,  and  six  rings.)  I  have  seen  Belle  Elmore  wearing  similar 
jewellery. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  SMITH — Did  you  hear  that  Belle  Elmore  had  gone  to 
America  and  had  died? — Yes. 

Was   there  talk  about  getting   a  wreath? — Yes. 
You  were  in  favour  of  sending  a  wreath? — Yes. 
Then  you  accepted  the  statement  that  she  was  dead? — Yes. 

Inspector  DEW  (recalled),  examined  by  Mr.  HUMPHREYS — Mr.  Nash  called  at 
Scotland  Yard  on  June  30,  and  from  that  date  inquiries  were  made  with  a  view  to 
tracing  Mrs.  Crippen.  On  8th  July  I  went  to  Hilldrop  Crescent.  I  asked  for  Dr. 
Crippen.  The  French  maid  opened  the  door  and  sent  Miss  Le  Neve.  1  told  her  I 
wanted  to  see  Dr.  Crippen,  and  she  told  me  he  was  not  in.  I  told  her  I  was  Inspector 
Dew,  and  asked  who  she  was,  and  she  said  she  was  the  housekeeper.  1  asked  if 
she  were  not  Miss  Le  Neve,  and  she  said  she  was.  I  told  her  I  wanted  to  see  Dr. 
Crippen  in  regard  to  Mrs.  Crippen's  disappearance,  and  she  said  she  would  tele- 
phone to  the  doctor.  After  some  demur  she  agreed  to  come  with  me  to  Albion 
House.  She  there  made  a  statement,  which  was  taken  dowr.  and  read  over  to 
her.  She  then  signed  it.  (Mr.  Humphreys  read  the  statement,  which  is  given  in 
Mr.  Muir's  opening  speech.)  Miss  Le  Neve,  Dr.  Crippen,  Serjeant  Mitchell,  and 
I  went  to  Hilldrop  Crescent.  Miss  Le  Neve  remained  in  the  kitchen  while  we 
went  round  the  house.  Except  that  some  things  were  packed  up,  the  place  was 
in  perfect  order.  While  in  the  house  Dr.  Crippen  showed  me  some  jewellery. 
Dr.  Crippen  had  a  rather  heavy  moustache.  He  was  vearing  gold-rimmed 
glasses.  The  next  day  I  circulated  a  description  of  Mrs.  Crippen.  On  llth  July 
I  went  to  Albion  House,  but  failed  to  see  Dr.  Crippen.  I  tlen  went  to  Hilldrop 
Crescent,  and  as  I  did  not  find  him  there  I  circulated  descriptions  of  Dr.  Crippen 
and  Miss  LPI  Neve.  These  descriptions  were  circulated  all  orer  the  world.  On 
13th  July  I  went  to  Hilldrop  Crescent  again.  On  digging  up  the  floor  of  the 
cellar  I  came  on  the  human  remains.  I  sent  for  Dr.  Marshall.  The  remains  were 
left  there  that  night,  and  the  next  day  were  removed  to  the  mortuary.  I  found 
some  clothes  in  the  house.  They  were  in  three  baskets  and  a  box.  I  identify 
the  furs  which  are  produced.  f  also  found  a  box  under  tha  bed  in  one  of  the 
rooms,  containing  two  suits  of  pyjamas  and  a  single  pair  of  pyjama  trousers.  I 
also  identify  Dr.  Crippen's  medical  degree  which  I  found.  Warrants  were  issued 
on  16th  July.  Subsequently  I  received  certain  information,  snd  went  to  Canada. 
On  31st  July  I  boarded  the  "  Montrose,"  and  arrested  Dr.  Crippen.  He  had 

196 


Appendix  D. 


shaved  his  moustache  and  had  discarded  glasses.  I  then  went  into  cabin  No.  5 
and  saw  Miss  Le  Neve.  She  was  dressed  in  a  brown  suit  of  boy's  clothes.  I  said 
to  her  "  Miss  Le  Neve?  "  and  she  replied  "Yes."  I  told  her  that  she  would  be 
arrested  and  charged  with  Dr.  Crippen  with  the  murder  and  mutilation  of  Mrs. 
Crippen.  She  made  no  reply.  Before  reading  the  warrant  to  her  I  cautioned 
her.  When  told  the  charge  she  became  faint.  I  then  went  back  to  Dr.  Crippen, 
and  when  he  was  searched  we  found  upon  him  two  cards  and  the  articles  of 
jewellery  which  he  had  shown  me  on  8th  July  at  Hilldrop  Crescent.  Cabin  No.  5 
was  also  occupied  by  Dr.  Crippen.  They  went  under  the  names  of  "  John 
Philo  Robinson"  and  "John  Robinson."  I  was  present  when  the  captain  spoke 
to  Miss  Le  Neve.  He  said  he  would  do  all  he  could  for  her.  He  asked,  "  Have 
you  not  seen  the  letter  from  your  father  in  the  papers?  "  She  said  "  No.  I 
have  not  seen  any  papers  since  I  left  London.  I  know  nothing  about  it.  If  I 
had  known  anything  about  it  I  should  have  communicated  at  once."  Later  on 
she  said,  "  I  assure  you,  Mr.  Dew,  I  know  nothing  about  it.  I  intended  to  write 
to  my  sister  when  I  got  to  Quebec."  On  21st  August  I  again  read  the  warrant  to 
her,  and  she  replied  "  Yes."  When  the  charge  was  read  over  at  the  police  station 
she  made  no  reply.  The  warrant  charged  her  with  murder  as  well  as  with  aiding 
and  abetting. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  SMITH — Have  you  inquired  about  her  past  life? — Yes. 
For  ten  years  she  has  been  a  shorthand  typist.  I  understand  that  she  has  not 
been  living  with  her  father  and  mother  for  some  years. 

What  is  her  father's  position  in  life? — He  is  of  the  lower  middle  class.  He  is 
a  canvasser  for  coal  orders. 

You  know  he  wrote  some  articles  for  a  paper  called  Answers'! — He  did,  but  1 
did  not  read  them.  On  8th  July  the  prisoner  showed  me  all  over  the  house.  She 
volunteered  the  suggestion  that  I  should  go  over  the  house  and  see  if  Dr.  Crippen 
were  there.  I  accepted  her  word  that  Dr.  Crippen  was  not  there. 

How  was  the  statement  at  Albion  House  made?  Did  you  ask  her  questions? — 
On  some  points,  and  her  answers  were  incorporated  in  her  own  words.  I  supplemented 
her  statement  in  this  way.  It  was  a  very  lucid  statement.  Dr.  Crippen  told  me 
that  the  prisoner  knew  nothing  about  it.  He  said,  "It  is  only  fair  to  say  that 
she  knows  nothing  about  it.  I  never  told  her  anything."  After  my  conversa- 
tion with  Dr.  Crippen  in  July  I  circulated  a  description  of  Mrs.  Crippen.  I  knew 
the  state  of  the  wardrobe  which  she  left  behind.  Although  I  knew  that  she  had 
not  carried  any  of  her  clothes  and  jewellery  away,  I  circulated  this  description. 
I  circulated  the  description  as  that  of  a  missing  person.  Dr.  Crippen  told  me  she 
had  taken  some  jewellery  and  a  basket  of  clothes. 

How  did  you  circulate  the  description? — We  do  it  consequently.  We  send  it 
round  to  all  the  metropolitan  police  stations,  so  that  the  attention  of  every  con- 
stable is  drawn  to  it.  Frequently  we  get  information  that  way.  We  do  not 
send  them  by  post.  We  have  a  system  of  our  own.  We  send  them  by  cart  to  the 
head  stations  and  they  are  then  circulated.  The  "  Montrose  "  left  Antwerp  on 
20th  July. 

Dr.  AUGUSTUS  JOSEPH  PEPPER,  examined  by  Mr.  Mum — I  am  a  Master  in 
Surgery  at  the  London  University  and  a  Fellow  of  the  Royal  College  of  Surgeone. 
I  was  called  to  39  Hilldrop  Crescent,  some  remains  having  been  found  there.  In 
addition  to  the  remains  there  were  some  Hinde's  curlers,  a  woman's  undervest, 
and  a  piece  of  a  pyjama  jacket.  I  found  all  the  organs,  except  those  of  sex. 
I  examined  the  organs  to  see  if  there  was  any  natural  cause  of  death,  but  could 
find  none.  The  head,  arms,  legs,  and  bones  had  been  taken  away.  I  found 
amongst  the  pieces  of  flesh  a  piece  with  a  scar  on  it  such  as  I  have  frequently 
seen.  The  remains  and  the  articles  found  were  put  in  jars  and  sealed  up.  1 
found  that  the  hajr  had  been  bleached.  The  remains  were  those  of  an  adult 
person  in  middle  life  and  rather  stout.  I  should  think  the  length  of  time  they 
had  been  in  the  ground  would  be  between  four  and  eight  months.  The  organs  of 
the  chest  had  been  removed  in  one  piece,  attached  one  to  the  other  as  they  would 
be  in  the  body.  That  indicated  considerable  skill  on  the  part  of  the  person  who 
removed  them. 

Mr.  HAROLD  KIRBY,  examined  by  Mr.  MUIR — I  am  an  assistant  of  Messrs. 
Lewis  &  Burrows,  and  I  knew  Dr.  Crippen  as  a  customer  of  the  firm.  On  19th 

197 


Hawley  Harvey  Crippen. 

January  Dr.  Crippen  purchased  five  grains  of  hyoscine  hydrobromide.  He  had 
never  or  since  purchased  hyoscine.  He  signed  the  poisons  register,  stating  that 
he  required  the  hyoscine  for  homcepathic  purposes.  Never  since  I  have  been  with 
the  firm  have  they  stocked  such  a  large  quantity  of  hyoscine. 

Dr.  WILLCOX,  examined  by  Mr.  ODDIE — I  am  senior  analyst  to  the  Home 
Office.  I  examined  the  viscera,  hair,  under-vest,  and  piece  of  pyjama  jacket  found 
in  the  cellar.  I  saw  a  piece  of  flesh  with  a  scar  on  it.  I  examined  the  organs  for 
poison  and  I  found  hyoscine.  A  quarter  to  half  a  grain  would  be  a  poisonous 
dose.  In  my  opinion,  death  was  caused  by  hyoscine  poisoning.  After  the  drug 
was  administered  death  would  take  place  probably  within  twelve  hours,  without 
any  recovery.  It  had  been  administered  by  the  mouth.  It  is  rather  bitter  in 
taste,  and  it  must  be  taken  in  something  with  a  pronounced  flavour,  such  as  beer, 
coffee,  or  sweet  tea.  (a  jar  was  produced,  from  which  witness  took  the  piece  of 
pyjama  jacket  which  was  found  with  the  remains.)  This  piece  of  pyjama  jacket 
is  similar  to  the  single  pair  of  pyjama  trousers. 

Mrs.  EMILY  JACKSON,  examined  by  Mr.  HUMPHREYS — I  am  Miss  Le  Neve's 
landlady.  Miss  Le  Neve  came  to  live  with  me  at  Constantino  Road,  Hampstead, 
in  September,  1908,  and,  except  for  a  break  between  March  and  August,  1909, 
stayed  at  that  address  until  12th  March,  1910.  She  had  a  bed-sittingroom.  I 
used  frequently  to  go  up  to  Miss  Le  Neve's  bedroom  and  talk  to  her  there.  During 
the  latter  part  of  January  I  observed  that  there  was  something  strange  about  Miss 
Le  Neve's  manner.  She  became  very  miserable  and  depressed.  Upon  one  occasion 
in  the  latter  part  of  January  Miss  Le  Neve  came  home  looking  very  tired  and 
strange.  She  was  greatly  agitated  and  went  to  bed  without  supper.  I  went  into 
the  bedroom  after  her.  I  could  see  that  her  whole  body  was  trembling,  and  that 
she  was  in  a  terrible  state.  I  asked  her  what  was  the  matter,  but  she  did  not 
seem  to  have  strength  to  speak.  I  asked  her  again,  and  she  said  she  would  be 
all  right  in  the  morning.  She  lay  down  in  her  bed  and  I  sat  beside  her  awhile, 
and  finally  left  her  when  I  thought  she  was  asleep.  That  was  about  two  o'clock 
in  the  morning.  Next  morning,  between  eight  and  nine,  I  took  her  a  cup  of  tea. 
The  next  time  I  saw  her  was  after  nine  o'clock.  She  was  then  dressed  to  go  out 
to  business.  She  had  only  eaten  a  sandwich.  She  tried  to  eat  but  she  could 
not.  She  appeared  very  ill  and  was  trembling.  She  picked  up  a  cup  of  tea  and 
tried  to  drink  it,  but  could  not.  I  said  to  her,  "  I  can't  let  you  go  to  Albion 
House  like  this.  There  is  something  the  matter  with  you.  I  will  go  and  tell 
them  you  are  unfit  to  go  to  business  to-day."  She  said,  "You  will  ring  up  the 
doctor,  won't  you?"  I  rang  up  Albion  House,  and  then  went  back  to  Miss  Le 
Neve  and  said  to  her  that  she  must  tell  me  what  was  the  matter.  I  said  to  her 
that  I  was  sure  there  was  something  dreadful  on  her  mind,  and  that  if  she  did 
not  relieve  her  mind  she  would  go  absolutely  mad.  She  said,  "  I  will  tell  you 
the  whole  story  presently."  A  little  while  afterwards  she  said,  "Would  you  be 
surprised  if  I  told  you  it  is  the  doctor?"  I  said,  "What  do  you  mean;  do  you 
mean  he  was  the  cause  of  your  trouble  when  I  first  saw  you?  "  She  said  "  Yes." 
I  said,  "  Why  worry  about  that;  it  is  past  and  gone:  "  She  burst  into  tears 
again,  and  said,  "It  is  Miss  Elmore."  Up  to  that  time  I  had  never  heard  the 
name  of  Miss  Elmore  in  my  life.  I  wondered  what  she  meant,  and  asked  her,  and 
she  said,  "  She  is  his  wife,  you  know.  When  I  see  them  go  away  together  it  makes 
me  realise  what  my  position  is."  I  said,  "My  dear  girl,  what  is  the  use  of 
worrying  about  another  woman's  husband?  "  and  she  said,  "  She  has  been  threaten- 
ing to  uo  away  with  another  man,  and  that  is  all  we  are  waiting  for,  and  when 
she  does  that  the  doctor  is  going  to  divorce  her  and  marry  me."  I  said,  "Are 
you  sure  he  will  marry  you?  It  seems  to  me  that  it  is  most  unfair  what  he  is 
asking."  I  said  to  her  when  she  spoke  of  realising  her  position,  "  Why  don't 
you  tell  him  what  you  have  told  me  as  regards  position."  She  said  she  would,  and 
she  afterwards  informed  me  she  had  told  the  doctor,  and  that  he  had  said  he  was 
very  glad  she  had  done  so.  I  don't  think  she  referred  again  to  her  illness  and 
agitation.  From  August,  1909,  Miss  Le  Neve  came  home  regularly,  excepting 
when  she  spent  the  week-end  away  with  her  sister.  She  began  to  stay  away  in 
the  early  part  of  February.  It  would  be  about  the  .second  week.  She  only  came 
hoilW  Hi  lllU  IHoYnTngS.  She  came  home  about  a  weet  after  the  illness  looking  very 
happy,  and  said  somebody  had  gone  away  at  last.  That  was  before  she  began  to 

198 


Appendix  D. 


stay  out  at  night.  She  said  she  had  been  at  Hilldrop  Crescent  searching  for  a 
bank  book.  In  the  course  of  the  search  certain  jewellery  had  been  found,  some 
of  which  had  been  sold  by  Grippen,  and  the  money  put  into  his  business.  I 
received  a  number  of  articles  of  clothing  from  prisoner.  Miss  Le  Neve  first 
began  to  bring  clothing  to  me  during  February,  and  continued  to  bring  me  articles 
till  the  time  she  left.  The  articles  included  a  fur  coat,  a  black  feather  boa,  a 
long  green  coat,  a  long  brown  coat,  a  long  black  coat,  blouses,  skirts,  nightgowns, 
hats,  stockings,  &c.  The  things  were  brought  in  cardboard  boxes,  excepting  on 
one  occasion,  when  Miss  Le  Neve  came  with  Crippen  and  brought  some  things 
in  a  dress  basket.  Miss  Le  Neve  left  my  house  on  12th  March.  I  visited  her  at 
Hilldrop  Crescent. 

Cross-examined  by  Mr.  SMITH — I  became  very  intimate  with  Miss  Le  Neve, 
and  we  were  on  quite  different  terms  from  the  ordinary  lodger  and  landlady. 
Miss  Le  Neve  called  me  "mother."  The  ordinary  routine  of  the  evening  was 
that  Miss  Le  Neve  came  home  at  six  o'clock,  had  tea  with  me  and  my  husband, 
sat  with  us  till  nine,  and  then  we  all  had  supper. 

By  long  and  frequent  conversations  with  her  you  acquired  an  intimate  know- 
ledge of  her? — Yes. 

Did  she  seem  to  you  to  be  of  a  gentle  and  retiring  nature? — Yes.  She  was 
lovable  and  affectionate  to  me  always. 

Her  character  generally  was  sympathetic  and   kind? — So  far  as  I  know. 

And  you  saw  a  great  deal  of  her? — Yes.  Miss  Le  Neve  suffered  from  neuralgia 
and  anaemia,  and  on  several  occasions  was  unable  to  go  down  to  business.  She 
suffered  at  irregular  intervals  considerable  pain  and  weakness. 

When  you  give  us  dates  it  is  a  matter  of  guesswork? — I  cannot  fix  dates. 

You  did  not  try  to  recollect  any  of  these  dates  till  July?  You  did  not  attach 
much  importance  to  them? — I  never  gave  them  another  thought. 

When  the  police  came  in  July  you  began  to  think  of  them? — Yes. 

You  had  read,  naturally,  every  word  of  the  Crippen  case? — I  had  not.  I  was 
overwhelmed  by  it.  I  had  not  finished  reading  the  paper  when  the  police  came. 
I  could  not  read  it.  It  seemed  too  horrible. 

You  had  mastered  the  fact  that  there  had  been  a  disappearance,  and  that 
remains  were  found  in  the  cellar? — Yes. 

Also  that  Belle  Elmore  had  not  been  seen  by  any  one  alive  since  1st  February? 
—Yes. 

When  the  police  came  you  began  to  try  to  recall  what  you  could  of  your  con- 
versation with  Miss  Le  Neve? — Yes. 

Who  saw  you  on  behalf  of  the  police? — Sergeant  Cornish. 

Did  he  ask  you  whether  you  had  ever  seen  anything  strange  in  her  manner 
about  the  end  of  January? — I  hardly  remember.  He  asked  me  whether  I  had  eeen 
anything  strange  about  her  manner. 

Are  you  prepared  to  tell  us  now,  definitely,  that  this  strangeness  of  manner 
which  you  have  described  did  not  extend  to  the  whole  of  January? — I  do  not  think 
she  became  strange  till  the  early  part. 

I  suppose  you  mean  the  5th,  6th,  7th,  and  that  kind  of  thing? — Something  like 
that. 

From  5th,  6th,  and  7th  January  you  began  to  notice  something  queer? — Sh« 
began  to  be  miserable  and  unhappy. 

Did  that,  as  far  as  you  can  recollect,  react  at  all  on  her  physical  health? — It 
made  her  look  very  ill. 

So  that  I  may  take  it  that  almost  the  whole  of  January  she  was  depressed  and 
looked  very  ill.  Did  you  notice  anything  about  her  eyes? — They  were  strange 
and  very  haggard. 

The  same  kind  of  look  as  you  saw  on  the  occasion  which  you  have  described 
her  as  being  very  ill? — Yes. 

Did  you  ask  her,  before  that  conversation  you  have  described,  what  was  the 
matter  ? — Yes. 

A  dozen  times? — Quite  a  dozen. 

What  did  she  say? — That  she  was  worried  with  the  accounts  in  the  office. 

For   all   you  know  she  may  have   been? — Yes. 

How  did  you  fix  the  date  of  this  occasion  on  which  you  say  she  was  very  ill? 
You  told  my  learned  friend  it  was  during  January — towards  the  latter  part.  Would 

199 


Hawley   Harvey   Crippen. 

you  be  prepared  to  say  on  oath  that  it  may  have  been  as  far  back  as  25th  January? 
— I  could  not  fix  a  date. 

The  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE — It  may  have  been  as  early  as  that? — It  may. 

Cross-examination  continued — You  have  stated  that  she  came  home  one  night 
more  "  pleasant "  than  you  had  seen  her  and  said  that  somebody  had  gone  to 
America.  If  it  ia  correct  that  she  came  back  and  said  this  at  the  beginning  of 
February,  it  would  suggest  the  other  conversation  when  she  was  so  agitated  would 
be  about  25th  January? — Somewhere  about  that. 

You  mean  she  was  in  high  spirits  at  the  beginning  of  February  when  you 
say  she  came  back  "pleasant  "? — Yes. 

No  trace  of  anxiety,  no  depression,   no  sign  of  physical  ill-health? — No. 

She  seemed  a  really  happy  woman,  and  oy  way  of  a  joke  you  asked  her  if 
some  one  had  died  and  left  her  money? — Yes. 

And  she   replied  that  some  one    had   gone    to   America? — Yes. 

Did  you  know  what  she  meant? — She  had  told  me  previously  that  was  what 
she  was  waiting  for. 

You  knew  that  Crippen  had  told  her  his  wife  had  been  threatening  to  go, 
and  it  did  not  surprise  you  very  much? — No. 

There  was  no  doubt  in  your  mind  that  she  was  genuinely  relieved? — No. 

You  will  not  in  any  way  bind  yourself  to  a  date? — No. 

Formal  evidence  was  given  as  to  the  pawning  of  jewellery  by  Crippen,  and 
his  insertion  of  the  advertisement  in  the  Era  of  Belle  Elmore's  death. 

WILLIAM  LONG,  who  was  Crippen's  dental  mechanic,  repeated  the  evidence  he 
gave  at  the  Crippen  trial  as  to  purchasing,  by  Crippen's>  orders,  a  boy's  suit,  tie, 
shirts,  &c. 

In  reply  to  Mr.  Smith,  witness  said  he  had  known  Miss  Le  Neve  for  nine 
years.  She  was  a  gentle  and  inoffensive  girl. 

This  concluded  the  case  for  the   Crown. 

Mr.  F.  E.  Smith  announced  that  he  did  not  propose  to  call  any  evidence  for 
the  defence. 

CLOSING  SPEECH  FOE  THE   CROWN. 

Mr.  MUIR  addressed  the  jury  on  behalf  of  the  Crown.  He  said — I  stated  the 
facts  of  this  case  to  you  so  short  a  time  ago,  and  the  evidence  has  occupied  so 
short  a  space,  that  it  will  be  quite  unnecessary  for  me  to  repeat  them,  except  in 
the  most  summary  fashion.  There  is,  first  of  all,  the  three  years'  intrigue  between 
the  prisoner  at  the  bar  and  Crippen,  the  murderer,  culminating  in  January,  or 
the  early  part  of  February,  BO  far  as  Le  Neve  is  concerned,  in  the  remarkable 
scene  in  her  bedroom,  as  described  by  Mrs.  Jackson.  Mrs.  Jackson  did  not,  and 
could  not,  fix  a  date ;  but  is  it  not  plain  that  about  the  time  this  murder  was  un- 
questionably committed,  namely,  somewhere  near  the  early  morning  of  1st  February, 
this  remarkable  attack  of  horror  and  prostration  seized  the  prisoner?  That 
was  the  state  of  things  that  Mrs.  Jackson  spoke  to.  Within  a  week  of  it  Le 
Neve  has  a  complete  change  of  demeanour.  She  comes  home  happy  and  relieved, 
bringing  Mrs.  Crippen's  jewels,  furs,  and  clothes,  going  about  with  Mrs.  Crippen's 
husband,  and  going  to  live  at  Mrs.  Crippen's  husband's  house. 

So  the  thing  goes  on.  She  went  to  Dieppe  with  Crippen,  and  came  back  and 
stayed  at  Hilldrop  Crescent  with  him,  and  was  there  found  on  8th  July  when  the 
police  came  to  inquire  about  the  missing  Mrs.  Crippen.  She  knows  what  the  object 
of  their  inquiry  is.  She  goes  with  them  to  Albion  House.  An  interview  takes  place 
between  Crippen  and  Chief  Inspector  Dew,  and  then  between  her  and  Chief  Inspector 
Dew.  She  knows  that  Chief  Inspector  Dew  is  inquiring  after  the  missing  woman. 
The  very  next  morning  she  and  Crippen  are  in  flight,  both  disguised,  both  under 
false  names.  Flying  from  what?  From  the  remains  which  are  buried  in  that 
cellar ;  from  the  accusation  against  Crippen  of  the  murder  of  his  wife.  Le  Neve 
was  arrested  on  31st  July.  She  was  told  of  the  charge  made  against  her — the 
charge  of  murder,  and  the  charge  of  being  accessory  after  the  fact.  She  made  no 

200 


Appendix  D. 


reply.  On  21st  August  on  her  way  homei  she  was  told  the  charge,  and  made  no 
reply.  On  27th  August,  at  Bow  Street  Police  Station  she  was  told  of  the  charge, 
and  made  no  reply ;  and  when  committed  for  trial,  with  every  opportunity  for 
making  a  statement  she  made  none. 

Gentlemen,  it  is  left  to  you  to  apply  your  common  sense  to  the  facts,  and  see 
whether  any  other  reason  than  knowledge  on  her  part  that  Crippen  had  murdered 
his  wife  can  account  for  her  silence.  I  do  not  think  I  should  be  justified  in  taking 
up  your  time  further.  It  is  for  you  to  say,  on  these  facts,  what  inference,  either 
for  or  against  the  prisoner,  you  will  draw  from  them. 

SPEECH  FOR  THE  DEFENCE. 

Mr.  F.  E.  SMITH,  addressing  the  jury  on  behalf  of  the  prisoner,  said — I  have 
not  had  an  opportunity  of  addressing  you  till  now,  and  it  will  be  necessary  for 
me  to  lay  before  you  the  circumstances  on  which  I  shall  rely  at  some  greater 
length  than  was  necessary  for  my  learned  friend  in  addressing  you  for  the  second 
time.  I  think  it  very  essential  that  you  should  clearly  understand  what  is  the 
nature  of  the  charge  here,  and  what  is  the  proposition — I  shall  venture  to  say 
before  I  finish  the  astounding  proposition — to  which  the  prosecution  in  this  case 
stands  committed.  It  is,  to  put  it  shortly,  that  in  this  murder  committed  by 
Crippen — a  murder  callous,  calculated,  cold-blooded,  a  murder  which,  I  say,  in 
the  whole  annals  of  crime  it  would  be  hard  to  match  for  cold-blooded  deliberation — • 
the  prisoner  in  the  dock  was  privy  to  that  murder,  that  she  became  privy  to  it 
after  its  commission  with  or  without  all  its  details.  That,  and  that  alone,  is  the 
issue  which  you  have  to  determine. 

Did  the  prisoner,  either  before  she  went  away  with  Crippen  or  at  the  time  she 
went  away  with  him,  become  aware  that  Crippen  committed  this  murder?  Let  me 
repeat  here  a  caution  that  is  very  familiar  to  those  of  us  who  practise  in  these 
Courts,  and  very  necessary  to  be  borne  in  mind.  It  is  not  sufficient  for  the  prose- 
cution to  come  here  and  say,  "  We  are  an  agency  for  eliciting  explanations.  We 
come  here  to  invite  explanations.  We  complain  that  explanations  have  not  been 
forthcoming."  It  is  for  the  prosecution  to  convince  you  beyond  all  reasonable 
doubt  of  the  truth  of  the  fundamental  proposition  to  which  they  are  committed, 
and  that  proposition  is  that  this  woman  became  aware  that  Crippen  had  killed 
his  wife.  It  is  for  my  learned  friend  not  to  invite  explanations  from  me,  not  to 
indicate  as  a  matter  of  interest  that  there  is  a  point  obscure  here,  or  a  detail  in 
regard  to  which  I  can  assist  him  by  offering  an  explanation.  It  is  for  him  to 
discharge  the  onus,  and  to  discharge  it  fully.  The  law  places  it  on  him,  and 
says,  "  You  shall  prove  that  this  woman  knew  that  Crippen  murdered  his  wife." 
It  is  for  you,  with  the  very  scanty  assistance  which  my  learned  friend  has  been 
able  to  give  you,  to  ask  yourselves  the  question  ,  "  How  far  have  the  prosecution 
proved  their  case?  "  And  in  a  case  in  which  knowledge  of  murder  is  concerned 
one  does  not,  I  apprehend,  expect  a  lower  standard  in  the  character  of  the  proof 
than  in  a  less  important  case.  Remembering  the  tremendous  character  of  the 
charge  here,  remembering  the  onus  which  the  prosecution  are  bound  to  discharge, 
I  ask  you  this  question :  "  Taking  the  case  as  a  whole,  how  far  has  my  learned 
friend,  in  the  course  of  his  two  speeches,  in  the  course  of  the  evidence  which  in 
any  way  affects  this  prisoner,  discharged  the  onus?  "  It  is  a  question  which 
cannot  be  answered  in  a  perfunctory  manner. 

I  suppose  no  observation  in  ethics  is  more  familiar  than  that  no  one  suddenly 
becomes  very  base.  Bearing  this  in  mind,  I  invite  you  to  consider  what  is  the 
evidence,  so  far  as  it  goes,  about  this  young  woman's  antecedents,  in  order  that 
you  may  have  some  guidance  when  you  consider  how  far  you  can  conceivably  accept 
the  suggestion  which  the  prosecution,  on  grounds  so  slender,  asks  you  to  accept. 
What  has  been  the  history  of  this  young  woman  before  she  came  into  the  dock? 
We  have  indications  here  and  there  in  the  inquiries  made  by  Inspector  Dew,  in 
the  evidence  given  by  Mr.  Long,  and  in  the  statement  by  Mrs.  Jackson  as  to  the 
life  which  Le  Neve  had  led  for  several  years  before  the  events  which  form  the 
subject  of  this  inquiry.  We  know,  for  instance,  that  ten  or  eleven  years  ago, 
at  the  age  of  sixteen  or  seventeen,  an  age  when  I  need  hardly  remind  you  young 
girls  in  happier  circumstances  are  going  to  a  finishing  governess,  it  became  necessary 
ifor  her  to  earn  her  own  living  as  a  typist. 

201 


Hawley  Harvey  Crippen. 

You  know  what  are  the  temptations  to  which,  under  normal  conditions  and 
with  normal  employers,  a  young  and  attractive  girl  is  exposed  going  to  the  city 
as  a  typist.  You  know  that  the  road  of  life  is  steep  and  dangerous  enough  for 
her  under  normal  circumstances.  What  was  the  misfortune  of  this  girl,  little 
more  than  a  child,  when  it  became  necessary  for  her  to  earn  her  living?  She  had 
the  extreme  misfortune  to  come  across  the  path,  at  the  age  of  seventeen,  of  one 
of  the  most  dangerous  and  remarkable  men  who  have  lived  in  this  century ;  a  man 
to  whom  in  the  whole  history  of  the  psychology  of  crime  a  high  place  must  be 
given  as  a  compelling  and  masterful  personality.  Carry  your  minds  back  ten 
years.  Conceive  to  yourselves  the  two  people  wno  became  acquainted.  Crippen, 
imperturbable,  unscrupulous,  dominating,  fearing  neither  God  nor  man,  and  yet 
a  man  insinuating,  attractive,  and  immoral.  That  is  one  of  the  two  people.  The 
other  was,  as  I  have  said,  a  schoolgirl  aged  seventeen,  an  age  when  most  of  you 
would  be  shielding  your  daughters  in  happy  homes  from  the  world.  She  was  the 
girl  who,  Mrs.  Jackson  was  able  to  tell  you,  years  afterwards  was  a  gentle,  retiring, 
sympathetic  girl. 

What  do  you  conceive  the  mutual  relations  of  those  two,  in  their  origin,  were? 
There  is  no  reason  whatever  to  suppose  that  the  intrigue  between  them  has  lasted 
more  than  three  years.  There  is  no  reason  to  suppose  she  was  other  than  chaste 
during  the  first  seven  years  of  her  struggle  with  the  world.  Then,  in  measuring 
the  moral  blame  which  you  rightly  assign  to  the  intrigues  which  were  undoubtedly 
carried  on  in  the  last  three  years,  you  would,  I  suggest,  be  doing  wrong  if  you 
excluded  from  your  consideration  the  circumstances  that  Crippen  was  the  one  really 
important  figure  looming  so  largely  in  her  life. 

He  was  the  doctor,  and  she  was  the  typist.  Their  relative  positions  were  very 
likely  those  of  the  centurion  in  the  Bible  who  said  to  his  servant,  "  Do  this, 
and  he  doeth  it."  Those  were  the  positions.  For  seven  years  she  was  under 
that  influence.  I  ask  you  to  think  of  the  seven  years,  and  now  they  were  spent, 
and  contrast  them  with  the  lives  that  you  give  to  your  daughters ;  seven  years 
of  drab  and  dreary  toil  by  day  as  a  typist ;  by  night  a  gloomy  lodging-house, 
and  this  in  the  very  dawn  of  womanhood  !  When  you  are  forming  your  judgment 
on  the  whole  of  the  case,  I  ask  you  not  to  lay  undue  weight  upon  the  circum- 
stances of  the  intrigue.  No  one  can  doubt  that  Crippen  soothed  her  conscience 
l)y  telling  her  either  that  his  wife,  Mrs.  Crippen,  did  not  love  him,  or  that  she 
loved  another  man,  and  was  threatening  to  go  away  with  another  man.  It  may 
be  true  or  false,  but  it  is  not  material.  Whether  true  or  false,  representations 
of  the  kind  must  have  been  made  by  Crippen,  and  they  might  have  been  reason- 
ably believed  by  her  at  this  time. 

I  come  to  the  time  during  which  Miss  Le  Neve  was  staying  with  Mrs.  Jackson. 
What  was  Mrs.  Jackson's  description  of  her?  That  she  had  an  attractive  dis- 
position, no  wickedness,  no  dissolute  habits,  no  levity  or  wantonness  of  conduct, 
so  far  as  she  saw,  with  the  exception,  of  course,  of  the  attraction  which  Dr.  Crippen 
had  for  her.  At  the  same  time  we  know  that  she  was  neuralgic,  delicate,  and 
a  little  hysterical.  Under  such  circumstances,  I  want  to  ask,  "  Is  it  the  prose- 
cution's case  that  Le  Neve  became  aware  immediately  after  the  murder  that  the 
murder  had  been  committed?"  Am  I  asking  too  much  when  I  say  that  the  prose- 
cution should  at  least  understand  their  own  theory,  and  at  least  tell  you  clearly, 
and  not  in  the  alternative,  what  their  theory  is?  I  cannot  for  the  life  of  me, 
having  heard  Mr.  Muir's  two  speeches,  tell  you  whether  the  Crown's  case  is  that 
Le  Neve  became  aware  of  the  murder  at  or  near  the  time  it  was  committed,  or 
whether  it  is  that  she  became  aware  of  it  immediately  before  she  fled.  There  is 
not  the  slightest  doubt  that  in  his  opening  speech  the  case  that  Mr.  Muir  intended 
to  make  was  that  this  woman  became  aware  the  murder  had  been  committed  at  or 
near  the  time  it  was  committed,  and  that  it  was  because  of  her  agitation  on 
receiving  that  horrible  news  that  Mrs.  Jackson  was  able  to  found  the  observations 
which  it  was  supposed  she  was  going  to  make  in  the  witness  box. 

When  I  contemplate  the  position  as  it  has  been  left  now  that  Mrs.  Jackson 
has  given  evidence  with  the  position  when  Mr.  Muir  opened  the  case,  and  the 
manner  in  which  he  has  perfunctorily  abandoned  it,  I  am  shocked  that  a  charge 
•of  that  character  should  be  brought  forward  and  proceeded  with.  You  have  had 
the  advantage  of  seeing  Mrs.  Jackson  in  the  witness-box.  She  has  told  you  that 
^iJmost  daily  during  January  she  noticed  the  same  signs  of  depression  and  physical 
ailment.  What  is  the  suggestion  my  learned  friend  makes  now  as  to  the  cause 

202 


Appendix  D. 


of  the  depression?  Why  did  not  my  learned  friend,  at  any  rate,  give  us  some 
little  guidance  on  this  point.  During  the  whole  of  January,  a  month  before  any- 
thing happened  to  Belle  Elmore,  and  during  which,  according  to  all  the  evidence, 
husband  and  wife  were  living  on  apparently  friendly  terms,  those  same  symptoms 
in  Le  Neve  had  been  diagnosed  by  the  kind-hearted,  officious,  and  somewhat 
garrulous  landlady,  who  for  the  whole  month  had  been  asking  questions  as  to 
what  ailed  Le  Neve. 

Mr.  Muir  has  said  it  would  be  wrong  to  claim  for  Mrs.  Jackson  exact  precision 
in  the  matter  of  dates.  That  observation  bears  very  much  more  on  the  case  for 
the  prosecution  than  on  the  case  for  the  defence.  Mrs.  Jackson  said,  not  only 
here  but  before  the  coroner,  that  it  was  in  February  that  the  prisoner  came  home 
looking  happier  than  she  had  for  some  time,  and  announced  that  "  somebody  had 
gone  to  America."  Mrs.  Jackson,  after  going  through  that  scene  with  Le  Neve, 
probably  thought  nothing  more  about  it  until  July.  She  was  then  interviewed 
by  the  police.  By  that  time  she  had  read  all  the  details  of  the  Crippen  case 
in  the  papers.  It  is  obvious  that  at  that  time  she  knew  what  was  the  critical 
part  of  this  case.  She  was  thoroughly  steeped  in  all  the  melodrama  and  the 
horror  of  it.  She  was  asked  this  question,  "Did  you  notice  anything  strange 
about  Le  Neve's  manner?  "  I  derived  the  impression  of  Mrs.  Jackon,  that  she 
is  a  lady  who  would  never  be  defeated  by  a  question  of  that  kind,  and  thereupon, 
in  answer  to  the  leading  question,  she  described  the  scene  which  there  is  every 
reason  now  to  believe  took  place  before  the  murder.  She  described  it  in  language 
by  no  means  inconsistent  with  the  view,  that  the  illness  of  Miss  Le  Neve  was 
largely  physical,  exaggerated  no  doubt  by  depression.  Unless  the  prosecution 
withdrew  Mrs.  Jackson's  evidence  altogether,  it  means  that  at  or  about  this  time 
Le  Neve  knew  that  Crippen  had  murdered  his  wife.  I  would  ask,  is  there  any 
one  of  you  who  is  absolutely  certain  whether  the  case  for  the  prosecution  is  that 
Le  Neve  knew  at  that  time,  and  if  so,  by  what  evidence  is  it  supported?  Is  there 
one  other  witness  except  Mrs.  Jackson,  or  one  other  shred  of  evidence,  to 
satisfy  you  that  Le  Neve  became  aware  of  the  murder  at  or  near  the  time  of  ite 
commission  ? 

How  could  Le  Neve  have  known  about  the  murder?  In  two  ways  only.  The 
first  would  be  that  she  fund  it  out,  and  the  second  that  Crippen  told  her.  No  one 
will  suggest  that  it  is  likely  that  she  found  out.  There  is  not  a  vestige  of  evidence 
that  she  could  have  done  so.  That  being  the  case,  the  prosecution  is  necessarily 
committed  to  the  view  that  Crippen  told  the  young  woman  that  he  had  killed  his 
wife. 

If  that  is  eo  he  must  have  told  her  either  in  broad  outline  or  with  a  wealth 
of  hideous  and  filthy  detail  which  has  occupied  this  Court  for  a  week.  A  more 
monstrous  and  stupid  suggestion  was  never  made  in  a  Court  of  justice.  What  is 
the  position  ?  Crippen  had  risked  his  neck ;  he  coolly  weighed  every  chance ; 
he  did  his  terrible  work  on  1st  February  with  no  accomplice,  no  witness,  and,  as 
he  fondly  thought,  leaving  behind  him  no  trace.  It  is  now  suggested  that  the 
man  who  had  done  all  this — who  with  fiendish  and  detailed  calculation  had  covered 
up  every  trace  which  might  reveal  and  betray  his  hideous  secret — told  this  young, 
nervous  woman  that  he  had  committed  the  murder.  In  other  words,  he  gave  this 
enormous  hostage  to  fortune — he  told  a  woman  that  he  had  killed  his  wife.  If 
the  teachings  of  human  psychology  have  any  value,  the  odds  are  prodigious  that 
any  young  woman  not  belonging  to  the  criminal  classes,  having  this  horrible 
statement  made  to  her,  would  receive  it  with  aversion,  revulsion,  and  disgust. 
Does  any  one  suggest  that  this  would  not  be  a  possibility  which  Crippen  would 
bear  in  mind ;  that  he  would  realise  that  a  woman,  innocent  up  to  now,  was 
to  be  asked  by  him  to  become  an  accomplice  to  a  crime  eo  horrible  that  to-day 
it  is  spoken  of  in  the  whole  world  almost  with  bated  breath? 

My  learned  friend's  case  is  really  this — that  Crippen  would  say  to  Le  Neve, 
"  This  is  how  I  treated  the  woman  who  last  shared  my  home,  and  I  invite  you  to 
come  and  share  it  with  me  now."  He  ran  such  risks  as  men  do  not  run  even 
on  the  wild  assumption  that  when  Le  Neve  was  told  of  the  crime  she  acquiesced 
and  agreed  to  remain  silent — a  wild  and  incredible  proposition.  But  even  suppos- 
ing that  Crippen  put  his  neck  at  the  hazard  of  a  woman's  constancy  and  self- 
control,  safe,  as  he  thought,  by  the  precautions  he  had  taken,  he  put  his  life  in 
the  hands  pf  a  nervous  and  hysterical  woman.  He  knew  her  temperament,  and 
yet  we  are"  asked  to  believe  that  he  put  his  life  on  the  chance  that  in  a  fit  of 

203 


Hawley   Harvey  Crippen. 

emotion,  in  her  sleep,  in  fright,  to  a  friend,  or  aghast  at  the  sheer  horror  of  it, 
she  might  have  told  something  of  the  dark  and  terrible  secret  which  Crippen 
kept  to  himself  and  to  himself  alone. 

From  first  to  last  not  a  single  inaccuracy  of  the  slightest  importance  has  been 
found  in  her  statement.  She  said  that  Crippen  had  told  her  early  in  February 
that  his  wife  had  gone  to  America,  and  it  is  asked  whether  it  is  to  be  supposed 
that  in  that  event  she  would  have  left  behind  all  her  clothes.  It  is  said  it  is 
impossible  that  she  believed  Mrs.  Crippen  had  gone  to  America,  and  yet  Inspector 
Dew,  an  experienced  police  officer,  a  man  of  the  world,  a  man  with  it  wide  know- 
ledge of  the  seamy  side  of  life  and  of  human  nature,  was  so  able  to  believe  it 
that  he  circulated  a  description  of  Belle  Elmore.  If  there  can  be  one  circumstance 
which  suggests  innocence  more  than  another,  it  was  the  way  in  which  prisoner 
dealt  with  the  clothes  and  jewellery.  It  is  incredible  that  if  she  had  known  of 
the  murder  she  could  have  gone  about  distributing  the  clothes  as  she  did.  If  she 
believed  that  Mrs.  Crippen  had  gone  away  with  another  man,  she  knew  perfectly 
well  that  Mrs.  Crippen  would  not  dare  to  come  back.  Is  the  suggestion  that  she 
wore  the  brooch  at  the  Benevolent  Fund  ball  consistent  with  the  suggestion  that 
she  knew  a  murder  had  been  committed?  If  she  had  known,  would  she  have 
gone  to  the  ball,  where  many  of  Mrs.  Crippen's  friends  were,  appeared  with 
Crippen,  and  worn  the  very  brooch  that  belonged  to  the  dead  woman? 

Now  I  come  to  the  last  point  made  by  the  prosecution,  the  point  insisted  upon 
by  Mr.  Muir,  that  Le  Neve  fled  in  disguise  with  Crippen.  What  do  you  suppose 
Crippen  said  to  her  before  she  went  away?  You  may  well  ask  yourselves  that. 
Not  only  have  the  prosecution  not  shown  that  she  was  told  before  she  went  away, 
but  I  have  shown  you  that  she  was  not  told  before.  The  prosecution  say  that 
if  she  was  not  tola  before  she  must  have  become  aware  of  it  when  she  fled  in 
disguise.  Before  you  can  draw  that  conclusion  you  must  satisfy  yourself  that 
there  was  nothing  else  which  Crippen  could  have  said  to  her  to  induce  her  to  flee  in 
disguise.  I  reject  in  toto  that  there  is  nothing  else  which  Crippen  could  have 
told  her  consistent  with  her  innocence  in  the  matter  which  would  have  been  of 
sufficient  weight  and  urgency  to  induce  her  to  go  away  with  him.  Consfder  the 
influence,  the  dominating  influence,  which  a  'character  like  Crippen's  would  exercise 
over  her. 

Suppose  Crippen  had  said  something  like  this  to  her:  "  Inspector  Dew,  as  you 
know,  has  asked  me  some  nasty  questions  about  my  wife.  She  had  gone  away, 
and  I  do  not  know  where  she  is,  and  if  she  does  riot  turn  up  it  may  be  very  awkward 
for  me,  and  I  may  be  liable  to  arrest."  Supposing,  for  the  sake  of  argument, 
that  Crippen  had  said  that.  Would  not  that  be  a  circumstance  in  which  one 
can  well  understand  an  inexperienced  girl  would  have  gone  away.  You  cannot 
consider  this  as  being  a  case  of  two  adults  of  equal  age  dealing  with  one  another. 
They  were  very  different  persons.  Crippen  had  acquired  this  enormous  power 
over  her,  and  she  was  utterly  ignorant  of  the  laws  of  England.  She  was  con- 
fronted with  the  problem  as  to  whether  she  would  stay  in  England  or  go  with 
him. 

Already  I  have  ventured  to  suggest  to  you  that  Crippen  had  not  told  her 
before,  and  now  I  ask  you,  if  I  am  right  in  saying  that  Crippen  had  never  told 
her  before,  would  he  tell  her  now  if  he  could  possibly  help  it  Must  not  the  answer 
here  be  precisely  the  answer  which  I  think  I  have  shown  you  must  be  the  answer 
to  the  first  question.  Would  it  have  made  him  safer,  even  if  she  had  been  willing 
to  become  his  accomplice  I  say  to  you  that  the  prosecution  have  not  even 
explained  what  is  their  theory  on  this,  which  is  the  very  fundamental  point  of 
their  case. 

If  she  was  aware  of  this  matter,  when  do  they  suggest  that  she  becan« 
aware  of  it  On  what  evidence  do  they  satisfy  themselves  that  she  was  aware 
of  it?  Consider  whether  or  not  they  have  satisfied  you.  They  will  have  to  give 
you  one  good  reason  why  Crippen  should  have  told  Le  Neve,  and  I  ask  you,  and 
I  am  content  that  my  case  should  be  judged  by  your  abilitv  to  give  an  answer  to 
this  question,  why  should  Crippen  tell  Le  Neve?  If  she  found  out,  then  I  quite 
agree.  But  there  is  not  a  vestige  of  proof  that  she  found  out.  If  she  had  not 
found  out,  then  why  in  the  name  of  conscience,  in  the  name  of  security,  should 
Crippen  have  told  her?  The  suggetion  is  so  grotesque  that  you  cannot  for  a 
moment  believe  it. 

Does    any  one  believe    that  the   girl    went  back  to  live    at  Hilldrop   Crescent 

204 


Appendix  D. 


towards  the  end  of  February,  the  month  that  this  murder  was  committed — went 
to  live  in  this  house  knowing  that  its  last  tenant  had  been  murdered  by  the  man 
she  was  going  to  live  with?  Such  is  the  suggestion  put  to  you.  Was  woman 
ever  known  so  wicked  and  so  abandoned?  I  say,  in  all  history  there  have  been 
very  few  women  capable  of  such  wickedness.  Every  vestige  of  evidence  that 
you  have  in  this  case  as  to  the  character  of  Le  Neve  shows  that  if  there  had  been 
such  women  in  history  she  is  not  one  of  them.  You  have  heard  her  described 
as  a  gentle,  sympathetic  girl.  A  defenceless  child,  she  maintained  herself  at  the 
age  of  seventeen  in  the  struggle  for  life  without  any  indication  of  moral  obliquity, 
and  you  are  asked  to  say  that  she  went  back  to  live  in  this  house  in  the  immediate 
contiguity  of  these  gruesome  remains. 

Another  point  of  evidence  is  the  statement  made  by  Crippen  to  Inspector 
Dew.  What  does  Crippen  say — "Miss  Le  Neve  knows  nothing  at  all  about  it; 
I  never  told  her  anything."  So  far  as  that  statement  made  by  Crippen  supported 
any  inference  in  his  own  case  it  was  against  him.  It  is  one  of  those  points  against 
Crippen  which  the  prosecuting  counsel  would  rely  upon.  He  knows  well  enough 
he  is  charged  with  murder,  and  yet  what  does  he  say  to  the  police  officer?  "I 
never  told  Le  Neve  anything  about  it."  Therefore,  it  is  against  himself,  as  it 
assents  partly  to  the  view  that  there  was  some  charge  which  could  properly  be 
brought  against  him  but  of  which  Le  Neve  did  not  know.  I  would  not  accept 
Crippen's  word  very  much  unless  there  were  other  reasons  supporting  it.  I  say 
there  are  other  reasons  in  this  case.  Crippen,  though  incriminating  himself, 
helped  Le  Neve. 

There  is  another  point.  On  the  "  Montrose  "  a  statement  was  made  by  Le 
Neve  to  the  captain  in  the  presence  of  Inspector  Dew.  The  captain  said,  "  Did 
you  not  see  your  father's  letter  in  the  newspaper?"  Le  Neve  says,  "I  have 
not  seen  any  newspapers  since  I  left  London."  My  learned  friend  says  she  could 
have  seen  English  papers  in  Antwerp.  Of  course,  you  can  see  English  papers  in 
Antwerp  if  you  know  where  to  get  them.  It  is  clear  that  if  she  did  not  see  the 
English  papers  she  did  not  know  about  it,  because  she  cannot  read  a  foreign 
language.  And  don't  you  think  Crippen  took  good  care  that  she  did  not  see 
any  English  papers?  " 

I  will  ask  you  to  picture  to  yourselves  what  her  life  has  been  for  the  last 
six  months  or  more.  Imagine  what  her  life  has  been — hunted,  harassed,  arrested, 
and  charged  with  the  crime  of  murder,  brought  face  to  face  with  the  full  details 
of  the  charge  formulated  against  Crippen.  From  that  day  to  this  her  life  has 
been  one  long  horror,  culminating  in  this1  trial  and  in  the  knowledge  that  the 
man  she  loved  and  trusted  committed  one  of  the  most  odious  and  bloody  murders 
in  the  history  of  crime.  Imagine  what  she  has  gone  through. 

The  prosecution  say  they  want  an  explanation.  That  is  a  wholly  novel  con- 
ception in  our  criminal  law.  It  is  for  the  prosecution  to  prove  the  fact,  and 
1  am  not  prepared  in  a  case  like  this — and  I  nave  the  full  responsibility  for  the 
decision,  which  ia  my  own — I  am  not  prepared,  I  say,  after  what  that  woman 
has  gone  through,  in  the  state  of  health  in  which  she  is,  to  submit  her,  on  facts 
like  these  and  on  evidence  such  as  that  which  has  been  presented,  to  the  deadly 
cross-examination  of  my  learned  friend.  It  would  be  different  in  a  case  in  which 
the  prosecution  had  brought  forward  massive  and  weighty  evidence,  but  I  have 
to  deal  here  with  this  case  and  with  this  prosecution,  and  I  say  that  they  have  not 
proved  their  case.  We  are  asked  to  infer  that  Crippen  must  have  told  her  about 
the  murder.  Never  in  the  history  of  our  law  has  a  prosecution  asked  a  jury  to 
draw  an  inference  so  crazy  and  so  cruel  on  such  facts. 

Knowing  that  ehe  is  a  young  and  inexperienced  woman,  without  any  know- 
ledge of  the  world,  that  she  is  dazed  and  shattered,  I  have  taken  the  responsibility 
upon  myself,  and  I  am  content  to  support  it.  When  she  leaves  this  dock  acquitted 
by  your  verdict  the  prospect  which  opens  out  to  her  is  not  one  of  happiness.  She 
will  be  known  all  over  London,  and  all  over  England,  as  one  who  has  been  the 
mistress  of  this  murderer.  When  she  leaves  the  dock,  in  any  event,  there  must 
be  a  most  unhappy  future  for  her.  Let  her  at  least  have  the  satisfaction  of 
knowing  that  she  leaves  it  with  the  assent  of  twelve  jurymen  who  have  heard 
this  case,  and  who,  though  not  blind  to  her  faults,  acquitted  her.  I  do  not  ask 
you  for  mercy.  I  only  ask  you  for  justice,  and  I  am  content  you  will  judge  her 
in  her  hour  of  agony  with  that  consideration  that  you  would  wish  shown  to  a 
daughter  of  your  own  if  ehe  were  placed  in  the  same  position. 

Q  206 


Hawley  Harvey  Crippen. 

SUMMING  UP. 

The  LORD  CHIEF  JUSTICE,  in  summing  up,  said — Gentlemen  of  the  jury,  I 
must  ask  you  to  listen  to  me  for  a  few  moments  in  this  case.  It  is  a  case  which 
you  must  approach  with  very  great  care.  We  have  just  listened  to  a  very  able 
speech  from  Mr.  Smith,  and  some  qf  his  arguments  you  must  consider  carefully. 
Let  me  caution  you  not  to  act  on  anything  except  evidence.  If  there  was  ever  a 
case  in  which  it  was  necessary  to  steel  your  minds  against  prejudice  it  ia  this 
case.  You  must  fix  your  consideration  upon  what  is  found  to  be  proved,  on  what 
will  leave  no  reasonable  doubt  in  your  own  minds.  If  there  is  any  doubt  in 
your  minds,  the  prisoner  is  entitled  to  the  benefit.  The  Crown  have  to  make 
out  their  case,  and  unless  in  your  judgment  they  have  made  it  out  beyond  all 
reasonable  doubt,  and  to  your  satisfaction  so  that  you  would  adopt  it  and  act 
upon  it,  in  an  event  in  your  own  lives,  then  the  prisoner,  Ethel  Le  Neve,  is 
entitled  to  have  your  verdict  of  not  guilty. 

The  only  matter  upon  which  you  have  to  concentrate  your  attention  is,  "  Did 
Ethel  Le  Neve  know  when  she  fled  with  Crippen  that  Crippen  was  a  murderer 
and  had  murdered  his  wife?"  You  are  not  to  judge  Ethel  Le  Neve  because  she 
was  his  mistress.  This  is  not  a  Court  of  morals ;  this  is  a  Court  of  law. 

You  are  not  to  judge  the  woman  because  she  has  fallen.  It  would  not  be 
right  for  any  one  to  judge  the  woman  from  the  standard  of  morality.  You  must 
consider  the  case  just  as  if  she  had  not  had  that  history  to  which  reference  has 
been  made.  In  so  far  as  immorality  and  misconduct  have  bearing  on  the  evidence 
you  must  consider  them,  but  you  are  not  to  allow  any  prejudice  to.enter  into  your 
minds  because  this  poor  woman  was  seduced,  and  was  the  mistress  of  this  man. 
Further,  you  are  not  to  assume  anything  against  this  woman  because  of  the 
wickedness  of  which  Crippen  has  been  guilty.  You  must  sweep  from  your  mind 
anything  in  the  nature  of  prejudice  arising  from  the  fact  that  she  was  an  immoral 
woman,  and  that  she  was  associated  with  Crippen. 

I  told  you  I  would  state  to  you  the  one  question  on  which  she  is  charged, 
and  I  repeat  it.  "  Did  she  know,  when  she  assisted  Crippen  in  his  flight,  that 
he  had  murdered  his  wife?  "  Now,  you  need  not  trouble  your  minds  as  to 
whether  she  assisted  in  the  flight.  That  is  not  seriously  disputed.  She  joined 
in,  so  far  as  she  disguised  herself,  so  that  she  might  pass  as  a  boy  instead  ot  as  a 
woman,  and  as  Crippen's  son.  Therefore,  if  you  think  she  knew  of  it,  you 
will  probably  have  no  doubt  that  she  did  in  fact  harbour  and  assist  Crippen.  Of 
course,  no  one  is  allowed  to  assist  the  flight  of  a  person  who  has  committed  a 
crime.  That  a  murder  was  committed  on  or  about  2nd  February  is  beyond 
doubt.  Therefore,  I  say,  concentrate  your  minds  and  apply  your  consideration 
to  the  question.  Did  she  know  about  it?  Again,  I  say  the  Crown  must  satisfy 
you  by  evidence,  and  not  by  suspicion,  that  she  knew  of  it.  It  is  quite  true,  as 
Mr.  Smith  put  it  to  you,  they  have  no  right  to  call  for  an  explanation  unless  there 
is  evidence  which  leads  you  to  the  conclusion  that  she  knew  Crippen  to  have 
committed  the  murder. 

Now,  the  affirmative  evidence  requires  to  be  very  carefully  examined,  and 
examined  from  a  slightly  different  point  of  view  than  was  suggested  either  by 
Mr.  Muir  or  Mr.  Smith.  It  centres  mainly  upon  what  has  been  described  as  the 
Jackson  incident.  It  is  said  that  on  or  about  the  end  of  January  or  the  begin- 
ning of  February,  the  prisoner  was  in  such  a  state  that,  as  Mr.  Muir  put  it, 
she  must  have  been  under  the  influence  of  some  horror.  Her  eyes  were  staring, 
and  her  condition  such  that  she  could  not  speak  or  explain  herself.  Mr.  Muir 
very  properly  called  your  attention  to  that,  and  if  he  could  have  proved  that  at 
the  time  she  could  have  known  of  the  murder  it  would  have  been  a  strong  piece  of 
evidence.  You  must  consider  carefully  what  Mr.  Smith  addressed  to  you  upon 
the  point,  when  he  said  that  the  evidence  was  not  established.  I  think  in  his 
remarks  he  could  have  gone  a  little  further. 

There  are  certain  facts  which  are  established.  The  murder  took  place  between 
one  or  two  o'clock  on  1st  February  and  twelve  o'clock  on  the  morning  of  the 
2nd.  That  we  know.  You  remember  Mrs.  Martinetti  stated  that  she  left  about 
1.30  in  the  morning,  and  that  was  the  last  time  she  saw  Mrs.  Crippen  alive.  On 
the  2nd  Le  Neve  told  Miss  May  that  Mrs.  Crippen  had  gone  to  America.  The 
2nd  of  February  is  the  first  date  when  Le  Neve  could  have  first  known  of  the 
murder,  and  when,  according  to  herself,  she  first  knew  that  Belle  Elmore,  who 

206 


Appendix  D. 


was  undoubtedly  her  rival,  had  gone  away.  In  the  light  of  that  it  is  very 
important  to  consider  Mrs.  Jackson's  evidence.  Mrs.  Jackson  says  in  her  cross- 
examination  by  Mr.  Smith  that  early  in  February  Le  Neve  said  that  some  one 
had  gone  to  America.  She  could  not  have  stated  that  till  2nd  February.  It  is  to 
be  said  in  favour  of  the  prisoner  that  Mrs.  Jackson  said  that  very  early  in  February 
Miss  Le  Neve  was  in  the  highest  spirits,  "  higher  than  I  have  ever  seen  her 
before.  I  think  some  one  must  have  left  her  some  money."  Mrs.  Jackson  went 
on  to  say,  "  I  know  whom  she  meant  when  she  said  that  some  one  had  gone  to 
America,  because  she  had  told  me  that  Mrs.  Crippen  had  threatened  to  go  away." 

You  must  consider  the  agitation  spoken  of  my  Mrs.  Jackson.  You  must 
remember  that  Mrs.  Jackson  said  that  about  a  week  after  she  was  so  ill  she  was 
in  the  best  of  spirits.  She  had  a  long  conversation  with  Mrs.  Jackson  when  she 
was  ill.  She  would  not  tell  her  what  it  was,  but  if  it  was  a  week  before  2nd 
February  it  could  not  have  anything  to  do  with  the  murder,  because  on  26th 
January  Belle  Elmore  was  alive  and  attending  the  committees  of  the  Music  Hall 
Guild.  On  31st  January  she  was  alive,  and  it  is  not  suggested  by  anybody  that 
she  is  dead  or  disappeared  till  the  morning  of  2nd  February.  A  week  before  she 
was  in  good  spirits  she  has  a  conversation  with  Mrs.  Jackson,  who  asks  her  to 
tell  her  what  is  the  matter,  and  she  says  she  cannot.  She  goes  to  bed,  and  the 
next  morning  she  has  a  further  conversation,  and  finally  said,  "  Would  you  be 
surprised  if  it  were  the  doctor?  "  Then  this  woman,  who  is  a  sensible  woman, 
says,  "  Was  it  he  who  got  you  into  trouble  before!  "  Le  Neve  eays  it  was. 
"Do  not  mind  about  that;  it  is  long  past,"  Mrs.  Jackson  said.  Le  Neve  said,  "I 
cannot  bear  to  see  them  together.  When  I  see  them  I  feel  my  position.''  It 
may  be  that  this  girl  had  deep  twinges  of  conscience,  and  felt  her  position  as 
being  the  mistress  of  a  married  man.  Then  comes  the  statement  that  Le  Neve 
had  told  her  that  Belle  Elmore  had  threatened  to  go  to  America  with  some  other 
man,  and  that  if  she  did  the  doctor  would  divorce  his  wife  and  marry  her.  And 
then  this  kind-hearted  woman  says,  "Surely  you  won't.  Are  you  not  giving 
up  too  much  for  him?  " 

If  there  is  nothing  but  her  agitation  on  a  date  before  2nd  February,  then 
there  is  an  end  of  the  case,  and  I  am  bound  to  tell  you  that  you  are  not  to  convict 
the  prisoner  on  suspicion.  You  are  to  take  into  consideration  the  evidence  relat- 
ing to  events  after  the  time  of  the  murder.  The  evidence  is  supported  by  the 
other  fact  that  Mr.  Smith  elicited.  Mrs.  Jackson  says  that  in  the  latter  part  of 
January  Le  Neve  was  in  a  bad  state  of  health,  but  she  would  not  say  anything 
about  the  actual  date.  If  her  story  is  true,  that  on  2nd  February  Ethel  Le  Neve 
came  to  her  and  told  her  "  She  has  gone  to  America,"  it  must  have  been  because 
Le  Neve  had  been  told  the  same  story.  This  scoundrel  was  telling  the  story  to 
everybody  else,  therefore  you  are  entitled  to  ask  yourselves  the  question,  "If  he 
was  telling  other  people  that  story,  what  reason  have  you  to  doubt  that  he  would 
tell  her  the  same  story?  Why  should  he  tell  her  a  different  story?  "  There  was 
no  motive  for  telling  her  a  different  story. 

I  have  to  see  that  you  act  on  the  evidence,  and  if  you  come  to  the  conclusion 
on  the  evidence  before  you  that  her  agitation  did  not  occur  after  2nd  February,  on 
that  evidence  you  are  satisfied  that  it  occurred  a  week  before  she  came  back  in 
good  spirits,  there  is  no  other  evidence  that  in  that  time  she  was  in  a  state  of 
agitation  or  ill-health.  The  Crown  are  bound  by  their  evidence,  and  the  evidence 
of  Mrs.  Jackson  is  that  it  was  before  2nd  February. 

You  want  to  consider  very  carefully  what  is  the  probability  of  this  scoundrel 
having  told  her.  So  far  as  the  evidence  is  concerned,  it  stands  in  this  way.  When 
he  was  arrested  he  said,  "  It  is  only  fair  to  say  she  knows  nothing  about  it.  I 
never  told  her  anything."  It  is  perfectly  plain  that  that  was  a  most  serious  state- 
ment so  far  as  he  was  concerned.  There  is  no  secret  about  it.  Crippen  was  most 
seriously  cross-examined  upon  it,  and  he  was  asked  to  what  it  could  refer  except 
his  wicked  deed  towards  his  wife. 

I  put  it  to  you  that  it  was  a  statement  strongly  against  himself,  although  I 
agree  that  with  such  a  man  as  Crippen  you  won't  care  very  much  what  he  says, 
still  you  must  look  at  it  in  so  far  as  it  relates  to  this  girl.  He  is  saying  some- 
thing to  shield  her,and  says  it  in  terms  which  reflect  on  himself.  He  says,  "  I 
did  not  tell  her  anything  about  it."  That  he  had  told  her  that  his  wife  had  gone 
to  America  and  had  died  you  need  have  no  doubt,  because  of  the  advertisement 
which  he-  put  in  the  Era.  I  am  bound  to  eay  that  you  must  ask  yourselves  if  you 

207 


Hawley  Harvey  Crippen. 

believe  that  he  would  have  told  the  woman  he  wanted  to  have  as  his  wife  if  he 
had  never  told  anybody  else.  Of  course,  he  did  not  tell  anybody  else.  If  the  story 
was  "My  wife  has  gone  to  America  and  subsequently  died,"  there  is  the  explana- 
tion for  Le  Neve's  conduct  which  in  our  wicked  world  was  a  ready  and  reasonable 
one,  although  it  may  not  be  one  of  which  you  think  highly. 

Mr.  Muir  haa  asked  you  if  it  is  not  proved  that  the  prisoner  knew  of  Mrs. 
Crippen's  death,  as  she  wore  the  dead  woman's  jewellery.  You  have  heard  Mr. 
Smith  upon  that  point,  and  I  think  you  must  consider  very  carefully  what  he  has 
said.  Do  you  think  that  the  fact  that  she  wore  the  jewels  and  clothes  was  con- 
sistent with  the  fact  that  she  believed  that  Crippen  had  cruelly  murdered  his  wife 
a  few  hours  before?  As  you  are  asked  to  draw  an  inference  I  must  tell  you  that 
you  should  only  draw  an  inference  that  is  hostile  to  the  prisoner  if  you  are  forced 
to  it  by  an  act.  Now,  gentlemen,  it  is  pointed  out  that  she  gave  a  considerable 
amount  of  things  to  Mrs.  Jackson.  I  can  only  say  you  must  be  very  careful  how 
you  act  on  your  suspicions,  as  she  appears  to  have  been  very  much  under  the  control 
of  Dr.  Crippen,  and  you  must  draw  no  inference  unless  you  believe  that  ehe  was  in 
some  way  concealing  guilt. 

You  are  asked  to  judge  of  her  conduct,  and  I  want  here  to  make  some  observa- 
tions in  reference  to  what  Mr.  Smith  said.  You  know  it  is  no  good  concealing 
from  you,  as  you  know  perfectly  well,  that  a  prisoner  can  give  evidence,  and 
possibly  you  may  have  wished— I  should  not  be  at  all  surprised — that  she  had 
gone  into  the  box  and  said  whether  or  not  she  knew  about  the  crime.  I  think  it 
is  just  to  her  to  say  there  is  no  obligation  on  a  person  to  go  into  the  witness-box 
unless  there  is  affirmative  evidence  against  them,  and  you  must  not  draw  a  hostile 
conclusion  unless  you  are  satisfied  that  there  is  an  affirmative  case  to  answer. 
That  is  to  say  that  if  you  think  the  incident  to  which  Mrs.  Jackson's  referred  to 
took  place  before  the  murder,  then  there  is  no  reason  for  her  to  go  into  the  box. 

As  to  her  disguising  as  a  boy,  you  must  draw  your  own  conclusions,  but  you 
must  be  a  little  careful  that  you  do  not  think  you  know  too  much  of  what  that 
scoundrel  may  have  told  her.  As  Mr.  Smith  has  told  you,  Crippen  may  have 
said  that  he  was  afraid  of  being  arrested.  She  undoubtedly  was  very  much 
attached  to  him,  and  undoubtedly  thought  she  was  going  to  be  his  wife,  or  at  any 
rate  his  mistress.  That  is  one  part  of  the  case  only,  and  you  may  think  that  some 
further  explanation  is  required.  All  I  can  say  is  that  you  must  be  satisfied  before 
you  draw  any  inference. 

I  must  say  that  another  point  made  by  Mr.  Smith  must  not  be  rejected  in 
the  summary  way  suggested  by  Mr.  Muir.  Le  Neve  said  on  the  boat  that  she 
had  not  seen  the  papers  since  she  left  London.  Mr.  Muir  went  a  little  too  far 
when  he  said  she  must  have  seen  the  papers  in  Belgium.  You  do  not  know 
where  she  was  when  she  was  in  Antwerp.  You  do  not  know  how  far  Crippen 
would  keep  her  under  his  hand  and  prevent  her  seeing  the  papers.  There  is  no 
evidence  that  she  did  see  the  papers.  It  is  said  she  must  have  seen  the  English 
papers  at  the  hotel.  Well,  the  Crown  know  at  which  hotel  they  stayed,  and 
they  could  have  called  evidence  to  show  if  there  are  English  papers  taken  at  that 
hotel.  If  you  come  to  the  conclusion  that  she  did  not  know  that  Mrs.  Crippen 
was  murdered  when  she  evinced  that  agitation  referred  to  by  Mrs.  Jackson,  then 
you  must  wipe  that  from  the  slate  altogether.  Then  you  must  ask  the  question, 
when  could  Crippen  have  told  her,  and  why  should  Crippen  have  told  her  at  all,  until 
the  actual  moment  of  flight?  Why  should  he  have  told  her  a  story  different  from 
what  he  told  everybody  else  between  2nd  February  and  8th  July,  when  Inspector 
Dew  came  to  see  mm? 

The  fact  of  this  woman  living  with  him  and  going  with  him  to  Dieppe,  wicked 
and  immoral  as  it  is,  is  not  evidence  that  he  told  her  he  committed  the  murder. 

Upon  that  part  of  the  case  you  are  entitled  to  take  into  consideration  what 
Mr.  Smith  has  said  to  you  about  her  being  gentle,  sympathetic,  and  loving  and 
affectionate  towards  Crippen.  If  he  had  told  her,  not  only  might  it  have  been 
dangerous  to  himself,  but  do  you  not  think  that  it  might  have  changed  her 
feelings  towards  him? 

Gentlemen,  I  have  called  your  attention  to  the  parts  of  the  evidence  which  can 
be  said  to  be  evidence  against  the  prisoner.  I  caution  you  that  you  are  not  to 
judge  her  upon  a  standard  of  morality.  You  must  be  satisfied  that  the  Crown 
have  made  out  their  case  and  that  Crippen  told  her  he  had  murdered  his  wife. 
and  until  you  are  satisfied  of  that,  she  is  entitled  to  your  verdict.  You  must  not 

208 


Appendix  D. 


allow  your  minds  to  be  influenced  by  what  you  have  heard  outside,  or  by  the 
feeling  that  the  prisoner  was  an  immoral  woman,  and  that  she  had  lived  as  she 
ought  not  to  have  lived.  She  is  charged  with  having  assisted  her  paramour, 
and  unless  the  evidence  is  there  to  satisfy  you,  you  must  find  a  verdict  for  her, 
but  if  you  are  satisfied  you  will  do  your  duty. 

At  twelve  minutes  past  four  the  jury  returned  to  the  Court  and  resumed  their 
places  in  their  box.  When  Lord  Alverstone  had  taken  his  seat  on  the  bench,  the 
Clerk  of  Arraigns  made  the  formal  inquiry  as  to  whether  the  jury  had  agreed 
upon  the  verdict  and  what  the  verdict  was. 

The  foreman  replied  that  the  jury  were  agreed  upon  a  verdict  of  "  Not 
Guilty." 

Accordingly  the  prisoner  was  immediately  liberated. 


APPENDIX  E. 

COURT  OF  CRIMINAL  APPEAL. 

(Before  Mr.  Justice  Darling,  Mr.  Justice  Channell,  and  Mr.  Justice  Pickford.) 
SATURDAY,    STH  NOVEMBER,   1910. 


Hex  v.  Hawley  Harvey  Crippen. 

This  was  the  appeal  of  Hawley  Harvey  Crippen,  on  grounds  of  fact  and  of 
law,  against  his  conviction  at  the  Central  Criminal  Court  on  22nd  October,  1910, 
before  the  Lord  Chief  Justice,  for  the  murder  of  his  wife,  Belle  Elmore. 

Mr.  Tobin,  K.C. ;  Mr.  Huntly  Jenkins,  and  Mr.  H.  D.  Roome  appeared  for  the 
appellant ;  and  Mr.  R.  D.  Muir,  Mr.  Travers  Humphreys,  and  Mr.  S.  Ingleby  Oddie 
for  the  Crown. 

A  preliminary  point  with  regard  to  the  juror  who  was  taken  ill  during  the 
trial  was  taken.  The  appeal  on  this  point  was  dismissed. 

THE  JUDGMENT. 

Mr.  JUSTICE  DARLING,  in  delivering  the  judgment  of  the  Court,  said  that  since 
they  had  decided  the  first  point  Mr.  Tobin  had  taken  further  points  in  favour  of 
his  client. 

The  first  was  that  the  Court  ought  to  quash  this  conviction  because  the  Lord 
Chief  Justice  had  allowed  the  prosecution  at  the  close  of  the  case  for  the  defence 
to  call  what  was  called  rebutting  evidence.  The  rule  was  that  a  judge,  in  con- 
sidering whether  he  should  allow  rebutting  evidence  to  be  called,  should  consider 
whether  that  evidence  could  have  been  given,  or  ought  to  have  been  adduced  by 
the  prosecution  as  a  part  of  their  case  and  before  they  closed  it.  They  did  not 
feel  inclined  to  lay  down  the  rule  in  the  words  of  Chief  Justice  Rindal,  in  the 
case  of  Hex  v.  Frost,  vol.  4,  State  Trials,  new  series,  at  column  386  (ubi  sup). 
He  had  said — "  There  is  no  doubt  that  the  general  rule  is  that,  where  the  Crown 
begins  its  case  like  a  plaintiff  in  a  civil  suit,  they  cannot  afterwards  support  their 
case  by  calling  fresh  witnesses,  because  they  are  met  by  certain  evidence  that 
contradicts  it.  They  stand  or  fall  by  the  evidence  they  have  given.  They  must 
close  their  case  before  the  defence  begins ;  but  if  any  matter  arises  ex  improviso 
which  no  human  ingenuity  can  foresee  on  the  part  of  a  defendant  in  a  civil  suit 
or  a  prisoner  in  a  criminal  case,  there  seems  to  me  no  reason  why  that  matter 
which  arose  ex  improviso  may  not  be  answered  by  contrary  evidence  on  the  part 

209 


Hawlcy  Harvey  Crippen. 

of  the  Crown.  They  would  not  put  the  rule  in  those  words.  In  the  first  place 
the  rebutting  evidence  must  be  evidence  admissible  in  the  case.  Supposing  it  to 
be  admissible  evidence,  it  then  became  a  question  for  the  judge  at  the  trial  to 
determine  in  his  discretion  whether  the  evidence,  not  having  been  tendered  in  chief, 
ought  to  be  given  as  rebutting  the  case  set  up  by  the  defence. 

In  coming  to  that  decision  he  should  have  regard  to  what  had  been  laid  down 
in  the  cases  cited  by  Mr.  Tobin.  But  the  matter  was  one  within  the  discretion 
of  the  judge  who  presided  at  the  trial,  who  was  in  a  much  better  position  than 
any  appeal  Court  to  determine  whether  it  was  really  fair  to  allow  it  to  be  given, 
and  wnether  it  did  or  did  not  expose  the  defence  to  a  disadvantage  to  which  they 
ought  not  to  be  exposed.  It  did  not  appear  to  have  been  laid  down  in  any  case 
that,  if  a  judge  exercised  his  discretion  in  a  way  different  to  that  which  a  Court 
of  Appeal  would  have  exercised  it,  that  fact  alone  was  sufficient  ground  for  quash- 
ing a  conviction.  The  only  case  where  anything  of  the  kind  was  suggested  was 
that  of  Wright  v.  Willcox,  1850,  9  C.B.,  650,  where  the  Lord  Chief  Justice  had 
said — "  The  time  at  which  evidence  is  to  be  received  must  be  in  the  discretion  of  the 
judge,  the  exercise  of  that  discretion  being  subject  to  the  review  of  the  Court." 
There  was  nothing  in  the  judgment  of  the  other  judges  in  the  case  to  the  same 
effect — in  the  judgments  of  Mr.  Justice  Maule,  Mr.  Justice  Creswell,  and  Mr. 
Justice  Talfourd.  There  was  nothing  in  those  judgments  as  to  whether  the  judge's 
discretion  was  subject  to  the  review  of  the  Court.  Mr.  Justice  Maule  said — 
"  The  objection  to  the  reception  of  the  evidence  was  that  it  was  offered  too  late. 
It  would  be  very  inconvenient  to  hold  this  to  be  a  sufficient  ground  for  setting 
aside  a  verdict.  Cases  in  which  the  discretion  of  the  judge  must  be  exercised 
frequently  occur.  When  a  party  has  closed  his  case  he  often  aska  and  is  allowed 
to  supply  a  deficiency."  No  doubt  the  question  was  one  for  the  discretion  of  the 
judge  at  the  trial,  who  was  necessarily  in  a  far  better  position  to  exercise  it  than 
the  Court  of  Criminal  Appeal  could  possibly  be. 

All  they  could  say  was  thia:  The  evidence  admitted  in  rebuttal  was  admissible 
evidence,  and  the  Lord  Chief  Justice  had  seen  no  reason  why,  in  fairness  to  the 
defence,  it  should  not  have  been  given.  He  had  exercised  his  discretion,  and, 
even  if  they  had  the  power  to  do  so,  they  saw  no  reason  why  they  should  interfere 
with  it.  But  they  wished  to  add  a  few  words  to  what  had  been  said.  If  it  were 
shown  that  the  prosecution  had  done  something  unfair — had  set  what  had  been 
called  a  trap — which  resulted  in  an  injustice  to  the  prisoner,  the  Court  reserved  to 
itself  full  power  to  deal  with  the  matter.  It  was  only  necessary  to  say  that  in 
such  a  case  the  Court  would  probably  come  to  the  conclusion  that  there  had  been 
a  miscarriage  of  justice,  and  exercise  the  powers  given  to  them  by  section  4  of  the 
Criminal  Appeal  Act,  1907.  But  there  was  no  reason  to  suppose  that  anything 
of  that  kind  had  taken  place  here.  On  this  second  ground  advanced  by  Mr.  Tobin 
they  saw  no  reason  to  interfere  wilh  the  conviction. 

With  regard  to  the  next  ground,  that  there  was  no  proper  evidence  before  the 
jury  to  establish  the  fact  that  the  remains  found  at  Hilldrop  Crescent  were  those 
of  a  woman,  and  that  in  any  case  there  was  no  sufficient  evidence  to  prove  they 
were  the  remains  of  Cora  Crippen — with  regard  to  this  ground  Mr.  Tobin  in  the 
course  of  his  argument  went  into  the  evidence  given  by  the  doctors  on  both 
sides  as  well  as  into  the  evidence  as  to  what  was  found  buried  with  the  remains — 
the  clothing  and  other  articles.  They  thought  that  there  was  evidence  before 
the  jury,  and  a  great  deal  of  evidence,  which  would  satisfy  the  verdict  at  which 
they  arrived  and  to  establish  the  fact  that  these  remains  were  those  of  Cora 
Crippen.  With  regard  to  the  evidence  of  the  doctors  concerning  the  piece  of  flesh 
and  skin,  they  were  not  surprised  that  the  jury  preferred  the  evidence  given  by 
the  medical  men  called  for  the  Crown.  For  the  doctors  called  for  the  defence 
when  cross-examined  had  been  obliged  to  abandon  an  opinion  they  had  expressed 
with  confidence  and  had  expressed  in  writing.  They  did  not  wish  to  say  anything 
more  by  way  of  criticism  than  that.  They  were  not  surprised  that  the  jury  had 
preferred  the  evidence  given  by  the  doctors  called  for  the  prosecution. 

It  remained  for  them  to  deal  with  the  criticism  that  was  directed  to  the 
summing  up.  Mr.  Tobin  had  said  in  the  course  of  the  argument  that  every  point 
that  had  been  made  on  behalf  of  the  prisoner  was  pnt  to  the  jury  and  put  fully  and 
fairly.  But  he  had  criticised  a  phrase  used  there  in  the  course  of  a  long  summing 
up.  Sitting  in  that  Court  they  had  often  said  in  similar  cases  that  they  would  not 
interfere  where  attention  had  been  called  to  phrases  ambiguously  used,  or  not 

210 


Appendix  E. 


expressed  quite  so  fully  and  clearly,  or  not  expressed  with  the  exactitude  which, 
as  counsel  would  point  out,  might  have  been  used.  They  must  look  and  see 
whether,  taking  the  summing  up  as  a  whole,  the  judge  had  put  the  issue  fairly 
to  the  jury ;  whether  all  the  evidence  was  before  them,  and  whether  the  judge 
adequately  directed  the  attention  of  the  jury  to  where  lay  the  burden  of  proof. 
They  thought  it  waa  plain  that  in  this  case  the  Lord  Chief  Justice  'liad  not  left 
the  jury  with  any  false  impression  as  to  the  burden  of  proof.  Mr.  Tobin  had 
argued  that  that  was  not  so,  but  he  would  read  one  passage  from  the  summing 
up  to  show  how  clearly  the  matter  had  been  put  to  the  jury.  The  Lord  Chief 
Justice  had  said — "Now,  gentlemen,  I  have  left  that  part  of  the  case  as  I  have 
told  you.  I  have  dealt  with  it  first  because,  if  you  believe  the  story  of  the  defence, 
it  is  a  conclusive  answer  to  this  charge,  and  you  need  not  trouble  about  the  other 
points  .  .  .  and  if  upon  considering  the  whole  of  this  case  you  come  to  the 
conclusion  that  you  are  not  satisfied  with  Crippen's  account,  then  you  have  to 
consider  with  me  whether  the  Crown  have  establis/  ed  their  case  upon  the  two 
issues  of  Cora  Crippen's  remains  being  those  found  in  the  house,  and  of  that  woman 
having  been  poisoned  by  the  act  of  the  defendant.  Of  course,  if  that  is  true,  it 
is  a  further  contradiction  of  the  story  he  has  told  you."  In  those  words  the  law 
was  clearly  laid  down.  The  burden  of  proof  lay  upon  the  Crown.  If  when  the 
prisoner  had  given  his  account  the  jury  believed  it,  the  case  for  the  Crown 
necessarily  came  to  an  end.  But  if  they  did  not  believe  it,  even  then  the  jury 
were  entitled  to  acquit  him  because  it  still  remained  with  the  Crown  to  prove  that 
the  prisoner  killed  his  wife  and  that  the  remains  found  at  Hilldrop  Crescent  were 
those  of  Cora  Crippen.  They  thought  that,  notwithstanding  the  criticism  that 
had  been  levelled  at  the  summing  up,  it  did  put  adequately,  fully,  and  fairly  the 
complete  case  for  the  prisoner,  and  that  no  injustice  had  been  done  by  any  term, 
phrase,  or  sentence  used  in  the  summing  up. 

They  considered  that  there  was  ample  evidence  to  support  the  verdict  of  the 
jury,  and  that,  on  all  the  points  taken,  the  appeal  failed. 

Solicitors — For  the  appellant,  Arthur  Newton ;  for  the  Crown,  the  Director  of 
Public  Prosecutions. 


211 


Sir    Alfred    Tobin,     who 
;it    Westminster   County 

Court    held    lliat    :i    imf- 
'  pop  off  "  dill  not 
ii.oi.n  t.'if  disiiiii-i-ii!  ot  a 
servant. 


in 


'  5  5 

jl 


•'g.2. 


I    I 


I 


HF 


UC  SOUTHERN  REGIONAL  LIBRARY  FACILITY 


A    000911  811     8 


University  of  California 

SOUTHERN  REGIONAL  LIBRARY  FACILITY 

405  Hilgard  Avenue,  Los  Angeles,  CA  90024-1388 

Return  this  material  to  the  library 

from  which  it  was  borrowed. 


