


Notable British trials 


.Herbert Rowse Armstrong 



NOTABLE BRITISH TRIALS SERIES. 

General EdUor^BMUW HODGE. 


Dr. Pritchard. Edited by William Roughead. 

The Staunton*. Edited by J. B. Atlay. 

Franz Muller. Edited by H. B. Irving 
The Annesley Case. Edited by Andrew Lang. 
Lord Lovat. Edited by David N. Maokay. 
Captain Porteous. Edited by W. Roughead. 
William Palmer. Edited by Geo. H. Knot . 
...Mrs. Maybrick. Edited by H. B Irving. 

Dr. Lamson. Edited by H. L. Adam. 

Mary Blandy. Edited by Wilbam Roughed 

City oi Glasgow Bank. Edited by W. Wa laoe. 

Deleon Brodie. Edited by William Roughead. 

James Stewart. Edited by David N. Maokay. 

A. J- Monson. Edited by J. W. More. 

Oscar Slater. Edited by William Roughe^. 

E. M. Chantrelle. Edited by A. D. Smith. 
Douglas Cause. Edited by A. Francis Steuart. 

Mrs M'Lachlan. Editedby William Roughead. 
Eugene Aram. Edited by Erie R. Watsom 

J A. Dickman. Ed. by S. 0. Rowan-Hanulton. 
The Seddons. Edited by Filson Yoimg. 

Sir Roger Casement. Edited by G. H. Knott. 
The Wainwrights. Edited by H. B. Irvmg. 

H.H. Crippen. Edited by Eilson Young. 

Thurtell and Hunt. Ed. by Eric R. Watson. 
Burke and Hare. Edited by W. Roughead. 
SteinieMorrison. Ed. byH. Fletcher Moulton, 
a J. Smith. Edited by Erie R. Watson 
Mary Queen of Scots. Editedby A. F. S eua 

Neill Cream. Edited by W. Teignmouth Shore. 

By waters and Thompson. Ed. by Filson Young. 

Adolf Beck. Edited by Eric R. " 

Henry Fauntleroy. Ed. by Horace Bleackley. 
Kate Webster. Edited by Elliott 0 Donnell. 
Ronald True. Edited by Donald Carswell. 
Abraham Thornton. Ed. by Sir J. Hall, B . 
Katharine Nairn. Edited by W. 

Charles Peace. Ed. by W. Teignmouth Shore. 
H. R. Armstrong. Edited by Eilson g- 


IN PREPARATION. 

Madeleine Smith. Ed. by E. Tennyson Jesse. 

Dick Turpin. Edited by Erie R. Watson. 

Queen Caroline. Edited by S. M. Ellis. 

J. P. Vaquier. Ed. by R. H. Blundell and R. E. Seaton. 
Duchess of Kingston. Edited by L. Melville. 

S. H. Dougal. Edited by P. Tennyson Jesse. 
Adelaide Bartlett. Ed. by Sir John Hall, Bt. 

J. 3. Rush. Ed. by W. Teignmouth Shore. 


Wm. Hods* & Co.. UA. Edinburth and London. 





Trial of 

Herbert Rowse Armstrong 


EDITED BY 

Filson Young 


1LLUSTKATKD . 


AUSTRALIA 

BUT1EU WORTH ft CO, 
(AUST.), LTD. 


17(1 KINO STREET 
SYDNEY, N.S.W. 


NHW A HA 1, A 

BUTTLRWQRTH 6* CO. 
(AUST,). LTD. 


iu/t.1 Allan ck nihekt 

WKLUNOTON 


INIHA 

BU ITEKWORW * Op. 
(INDIA), LTD. 

fl HASTINGS STRfcn* 
CAIOTltA 




SUM AMT) PRINTED IN (JitMT BRITAIN 
BY 


TfnXUM HODGE AND COMPANY, DTD, 
GLASGOW AND EDINIiUmiU 



PREFACE. 


Several features combine to invest the trial of Herbert Rows© 
Armstrong with remarkable interest in the annals of arsenical 
poisoning. Among the murderers of his class Armstrong might be 
described as the tea-time poisoner. As in the case of Seddon 
the theme was gold and moneybags, so Armstrong’s was the crime 
of the tea table; and there runs through his sinister story, in place 
of the chink of gold, the tinkle of the teacups. His was a simple 
and ingenious method, if people would only come to tea. Tea is 
an inexpensive meal, easily and <|u ie.kly prepared. If people will 
not come to lea, it can bo brought to them; and either butter or 
tea itself is an admirable vehicle in which to administer aisenic. 
One has only to read the evidence to hear how the word “ tea ” 
rings through it in page after page. How Miss 'Pearce got tea ready 
and told Armstrong about it; how the servant prepared the cake 
stand lirst, then the lea, and brought it in; ami how Armstrong 
came in to tea, and invited Mr. Marlin to lea, and how they sat at 
tea in the drawing-room, those two solicitors; and liovv Armstrong 
was always suggesting that the Marlins should come to tea; how, 
finally, both men brought tea down to thoir oftices Armstrong in 
order to induce Martin to come and have it, and Martin in older 
to provide an excuse for not coming. All ibis gives a peculiar 
quality—or shall I say aroma 1—to the Armstrong caso. 

Mr. Justice Darling, who tried the ease, himself characterised 
it, as a “ deeply interesting caso, and one of very groat importance 
to the public..” This alone would justify its inclusion in the 
Notable Trials Series; but it bad other unusual features. Arm¬ 
strong was tried for fho murder of his wife; but. if he had been 
acquitted of that, there was another charge on the indictment 
accusing him of the attempted murder oi Mi. Mai tin, a follow- 
solieitor, evidence as to which was ruled by the learned judge 



Y1 


PREFACE, 


to be admissible as evidence on the major charge. And I,hero i« 
considerable support for the view that if the exhumation of M,-„. 
Armstrong’s body, ten months after its burial, had not revealed 
the presence of arsenic and led to the conviction of Mm prisoner, 
other graves would have been disturbed and other tragedies, now 
mercifully hidden for ever, would havo been brought l,<» light. The 
arsenic actually found in Mrs. Armstrong’s laxly was the largest 
amount (3J grains) that had ever been discovered by Mr. "Websler, 
the Home Office analyst, in a post-mortem examination. 

The case is further memorable as being the first, great capital 
case in which a prisoner was defended by Sir Henry Curl,is 
Bennett, who has so rapidly risen to eminence in his profession. 
And it is still more worthy of record as being the last murder 
case tried by Mr. Justice Darling, undoubtedly the greatest 
criminal judge, as well as one of the most distinguished men, of 
his day. The firmness and certainty with which lie handled a most 
difficult case were exemplary; but tlio unconventional common 
sense of some of his utterances, and tlm piercing and clean-<-u( 
analysis to which he subjected the essential evidence could only 
have safely been employed by a judge equipped, like him, will, 
immense experience, the most lucid mentality, and the <■,lea,rest 
understanding of the ultimate character of justice | have 
followed Lord Darling’s career for five-and-twonty years; and 
although every case over which he has presided has, if only because 
it was in his hands, been an interesting case. Ids qualities were 
never .shown, I think, to more advantage than in this Iasi, g.-eal, 
trial just before bis retirement. 

To many people I owe acknowledgments of he!,, received in 
the editing and study of this trial; notably In Lord Darling 
himself, and to the Public Prosecutor, Sir Archibald Bodkin - ,1 
Mr. James, under-sherifi of Herefordshire; to Lord Hamath and 
ir Henry Curtis Bennett; to Dr. Hindis and Mr. Trevor (Iriffiths 
o Hay; to the proprietors of The Time, for permission to make use’ 

eir reports of the arguments as to admissibility of evidence the 
opening statement for the Crown, 0 , tho pl.dings^ £ £ 



PREFACE. 


vii 

Court of Criminal Appeal ; to the medical experts concerned, who 
have been good enough to revise the proofs of their evidence; and 
to the Editor of John Bull for permission to quote a remarkable 
article contributed at the time to that journal by Mr. Harold 
Greenwood. 

In common with the other Editors of this series, I owe much 
to the criticism, assistance, and supervision of Mr. Harry Hodge, 
who is not only the originator and publisher of the series, but 
may suitably be called its Editor-in-Chief. To his enterprise 
the series owes its origin, and to his skill and enthusiasm its suc¬ 
cess. I think 1 am expressing the views of all my fellow Editors 
when I say that to share this work with him is both a privilege and 
a pleasure. p y 




0 ONT ENTS. 

Introduction,. 

Leading Dates in Armstrong Trial,. 

The Trial.- 

iriitHT Day Monday, 3ri> Aphid, 19*22. 

Attorney ConoraiV, Opening Speech for the Crown, 

Legal Arguments on Kvidenoo, - 

Attorneys loneraLH Opening 8peeoh (continued), - 

►Swoon n Day ■ Tuesday, *Itu Aphid, 1022 , 

HriUt'iirt) for iht • Prosecution, 


Ida Bessie Kriond, - • » ;i;i Dinily CUou IVarcn, » » . gg 

Augusta Certrudo IIutehimi, - 35 Lily Bvans, . 43 

Henry dohn Hammond:?, - go Harriet lOlizabrth Price, « - 44. 

IneiA KUsio Reuser, * » - 3 <> MurielCladys Kinsey, * .« 45 


Toisti> Day ■ •WnoNKHDAY, Cmi Aphid, 1022. 
Pridnicc for the, Prosecution {continued). 

Kvo Allen, « 

Lucy Alice Lloyd, 
dohn Arthur Rangeeroft, 

'Humphrey' Vine?? Webb, 

Mrs. 


lAumru Day-T iunmnAY, 6 th April, 1022. 

timh\net\ for the, Prom'Ution {continued). 

Oswald Norman Martin (ox- Una Mary Baker, - -, - 74 

animation continued), - - 68 Allan Pmm, - 70 

Constance Muriel Martin, - « 73 Dr. Thomas Ernest Hincks, * 77 


Irirru I Uy -Finn ay, 7 th Aphid, 1922 , 

Moidmcc for the, Pnmmtlion ( continued ). 

Dr. Thomas Ernest IlinckH (ex* 
amination continued), * - SO 

Dr, Arthur A, I). Townsend, - 103 
John If, Davies, - - - - 110 

John Bird, - - * - - 113 

Deputy Chief Constable A. • 

Weaver, - « - - - 115 


Chief Inspector Alfred Orutehett, 116 
Statement by Accused, « - 117 

Chief Inspector Alfred Orutohett, 
(continued), - 120 

Police Sergeant Walter Sharp, * 123 


Arthur Chevalier, 
Robert JM acCoorgo, 
William day, 

Oswald Norman Martin, 


PAGE 

1 

21 


25 

28 

30 





X 


CONTENTS. 


Sixth Day—Satubday, Stic Aran*, 1922, 
Evidence for the Prosecution (concluded). 


Superintendent Weaver (re¬ 
called), - - “ . ' . 

Harriet Elizabeth Price (re¬ 
called) , * 


124 

124 


Edwin Alfred Taylor, * 
Dr, Bernard Henry Spihbury, 


John Webster, - ; * 

Sir William Henry Wiloox, 


Seventh Bay—Monday, 10th Aubid, 1022, 
Opening Speech for the Defence, 


Evidence for the Defence. 


Herbert Rowse Armstrong, - 


Eighth Day— Tuesday, 11th Apkxd, 1022. 


Evidence for the Defence {continued ), 


Herbert Rowse Armstrong (cross- 
examination continued), - - 221 

Inez Margaret Price, - - - 24^ 

Emily Davis, 


242 


Thomas Alfred Matthew*, - 
Henry Reginald Ohivnrn, - 
Dr. Frederick Sherman Toogoml, 


Ninth Day— Wednesday, 12tu Anui., 1922, 


Evidence for the Defence ( concluded ). 


Dr. Frederick Sherman 
(cross-examined), 

Dr. William Ainslie, - 


Toogood 


259 

269 


Dr. John Steed, 

Thomas Alfred Matthew* (re¬ 
called), - 


Sir Henry Curtis Bennett’s Closing Speech for tho Defence, 


Tenth Day—Thursday, 13th Aiuud, 1922. 

Attorney-General’s Closing Speech for the Crown, • * 

Mr. Justice Darling’s Charge to the Jury, - 
The Verdict, - - 

The Sentence, » - - - " " 


appendices. 

Appendix A. Proceedings in the Court of Criminal Appeal, 

Appendix B. 14 ArmBtrong’s Eight for Life.” .By Harold OwKmwood, 


125 

VM 

UR 

153 


m 


201 


243 

252 

253 


- 276 

• 278 

. 280 


- 300 

. 320 
, 357 

- 358 


- 363 
. 394 



LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS. 


Lord Darling, ---------- Frontisphce 

Herbert Rows© Armstrong,. Facing page 24 

Mrs. Armstrong,. » 4S 

Sir Henry Curtis Bennett, K.C., ------ » 170 

The Attorney-General, Sir Ernest M, Pollock, Bart., K.C., - „ SOD 





HERBERT ROWSE ARMSTRONG. 


INTRODUCTION. 

I. 

Tli© little town -of liny in Brecon lies pleasantly just over 
the Welsh border (its railway stall ion is in England) along the 
right bank of the .River Wye, surrounded in the near distance 
by such wild hills as Hay Bln IT, Lord 'Hereford’s Knob, and the 
Brecon Beacons. Hi is a, sunny, quaint littlo place, wilh irregular, 
old-fashioned houses and a broad High Street pleasantly lending 
itsedf to gossip ami the observation of other peoples affairs; and 
Belliud its quiet gardens, with an endless ripple and chime, runs 
the river in broad and shining roaches. 


II. 

The legal business of the town and of the farmers in the 
neighbouring countryside was, In the year 1,900, when this story 
opens, nominated by two firms of solicitors (both of old standing), 
whoso ollices faced one another across the main street. The head 
of one firm was Mr. Cheese, and of the other Mr. Grifliths. In 
1900 earn© Mr. Herbert Rows© Armstrong as managing dork to 
Mr. ^Cheese, Jfe was thirty-seven years of age, but had been 
admitted a so Heitor in 1895, and had (wen In partnership and 
prantisitig on his own account over two years in Newton Abbot, 
his native town, as well as in Liverpool. Although of humble 
origin, he had been carefully educated by two maiden aunts, who, 
at Home sacrifice, had enabled him to attend the University of 
Cambridge, where ho graduated M.A. Hu had worked hard in 
Newton Abbot and in Liverpool, and had saved, or got, enough 
money to put capital into Mr. Cheese’s business and to become a 
partner very soon after his arrival in, Hay. And very soon after 
that Mr. Cheese and his wife both died, leaving Armstrong in solo 
possession of the business. A# year later Armstrong married a 




Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 


Miss Katherine Mary Friend, and in 1907 brought her lo Iivo in » 
little house in the delightful eoombo called <hn;op Dingle, within 
half a mile of Hay, where many of Iho inhabitants have villus. 
Three years later he moved to a larger house a lew hundred yards 
away called “ Mayfield a house with a fairly large garden. 
During these years the three children of this marriage were horn. 
In it they all lived until Mrs. Armstrong died, and war. earned 
from it to Cusop Churchyard in February, llffil ; and until Arm 
strong was arrested on the last day of the. name year. 

The war came and brought its changes to the lives of the 
people in Hay, as elsewhere. Armstrong had I men a Volunteer, 
and had joined the Territorial branch, of the lioyal Engineers; 
and when the war came he went away and served in various parts 
of England. I believe he did not see any actual light i U g, being 
chiefly engaged in depot work, where his experience ns a solicitor 


would prove useful, and where lie was si,ill able to exercise some 
control over his own.business. Mr. Griffiths was not, so fortunate 
as. his brother solicitor. He was getting on in years ami vvim 
falling in health, and his son, who had passed' Ids limd buy 
examination, but had not yet boon admitted as a solie.il,nr was 
called away to the front. In these o.ireunisi nnces t|, became neons 
aary for Mr. Griffiths to take a partner, and Mr. Oswald Norman 
Martin, who had served and beeu invalided out, of the Army, e.amo 
to join him. Mrs. Armstrong had called upon Mrs. Griffiths on 
hearing that a partner was coming, and had asked if her husband 
might not assist.them. He had already made some tentative over 
tures on the subject of the amalgamation of Uio I,wo firms, but they 
had not been favourably received, nor had anything como of llm 
suggestion that he should stand by until the turn could conic Immo 
and take charge. After Armstrong bad bee, demobilined 
returned to Hay, Mr. Martin was in virtual charge of the 
business over the way. They mot each other, «f cotirre- 
every one of a certain standing knows every ffiso in Hay; and’ 
they had professional dealings and social associations Inti, they 
were rn a sense, rivals. They were both, as (ho local people would 

!u y ’wl’t lg r rS ’ and m mattOTS oomiot:te(1 with his private affair, 
the Welsh farmer is not fond of employing strangers. Mr. Cheese 
had been long known in the place, and so had Mr. Griffiths Hut 

WwoTai?!!! f T d himaelf + al “° in hi»lnu.ii,ess, it undoubtedly 
began to fall off. It was a pity, f pm Armstrong’s point of view. 



Introduction. 


that Mr. Martin was there to conduct actively the business brought 
to the old-established firm; if he had not been there circumstances 
might almost have forced them to make some arrangement with 
Armstrong. Anyhow, when the war was over, and people were 
beginning to take up the threads again, there were these two 
solicitors in Hay, their offices facing each other across the street, 
and there for the moment we will leave them. 

III. 

Armstrong was a popular man in Hay. On his return from 
the war he called himself Major Armstrong, and attached much 
importance to his military rank. lie was vory active in all 
the allairs ol the place, and seen ret 1, among other appointments, 
lb at ol (dork to the justices, which introduced his linger into 
many small local pies. Mr. Martin was not so popular. It was 
not; in his character to seek popularity, and ho suffered, as a 
result of his services to his country, from a form of paralysis 

which alloc tod one side ol his face, and sound imes gave people the 

impression that ho was smiling when ho was not. He was a quiet 
man, and lived his own life quietly. Armstrong, although ho 
took pains to ingratiate himself with every one, was not at. home 
the martial figure, (bat. his military career and gallant adven¬ 
tures might, have led. one to expect. It was common knowledge 
that In') was, in 1 act., henpecked. The late Mrs. Armstrong was 

a person ol peculiar character. She was both cultivated and 

clover, played the piano extremely well, and had earned the 
reputation with every one who had any knowledge of her of being a 
really good wonuui. She was, however, notoriously cranky, and 
extremely severe. She brought up her children with devotion, 
indeed, hut with a strict and sombre austerity, and her husband 
was ruled with a rod of iron. Until (bo war broke bis 
boundaries and enlarged his horizon little Armstrong (for he was 
a very little man, weighing only some 7 stone) had no kind of 
liberty oti homo, and, except for certain furtive, amorous adven¬ 
tures oi which 1 have heard, ho was obliged t.o live under the 
strict conditions imposed by his wife. Those conditions wore of 
an unusual severity. No wine or alcohol was admitted t.o the 
bouse. If at the table of some neighbour ho was offered wine, bis 
■wife would interpose with a xfegative on his account, except now 

3 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 


and then when she had been known l,<> say, u 1 think you may 
have a glass of port, Herbert; it will do your cold good. 11 ho 
was smoking as he came along the road, and his wife name in 
sight, the cigar or pipe had to be hastily put away, and he was 
only allowed to smoke in one room of bis house railed “ May 
field.” On one occasion, at a tennis party, she culled lo him sis 
the middle of a sett that it was time to go home. 44 Six o'clock, 
Herbert;, how can you.expect punctuality in the servants il the 
master is late for his meals 1 75 On another similar occasion, in 
publicly summoning him to come homo, she reminded him that 
it was his cf bath night. 77 Such a state of affairs seems fan Inst k\ 
but there is no doubt that it; existed. For whatever 

reason, she had him thoroughly under her thumb, and (no doubt 
for his own good) was determined to keep him there. People 
liked the little man, and wore sorry for him ; hut, however hard 
upon him they may have thought Mrs. Armstrong was, it did 
not diminish—who knows that it did not euhaimo '/ Urn,I un 
doubted respect in which she was hold by her neighbours. 


IV. 

This, then, was the course of Ibe life of these people in 
Hay to the outward eye. Local events came and went* Local 
gossips talked of this or that person’s affairs; people attended 
little parties, came and went as they do in all such places. Illness 
is always a topic for gossip in small country towns, ami among 
the figures that move through tho busy life of ibe place none was 
more universally regarded with interest- and a (hud ion than Ih , 
“Tom 77 Hincks, who had succeeded to his father's practice in 
the place, and was known and trusted and 1 iked for miles around. 
The big, upright figure with tho open countenance and the Hianm 
ing smile was a familiar sight then, as it is today, Whatever 
he was doing, hunting up cm tho frills or shooting in tlm country 
side, Dr. “Tom 77 always put his patients first; and often, if he 
were going out for a day’s shooting, would get up at bum in tlm 
morning and attend to his medical work and be busy on it up lilt 
midnight after he had come home. His presence in a house 
would indicate to the gossips that somebody was ill. It. was 
rumoured in August, 1920, that Mm Armstrong was in indifferent 
health, and that her eccentricities had increased; and, mire 
: A 'v ■ 




Introduction. 


enough, on the 22nd of August, 1920, Dr. Hincks himself was seen 
taking her away in a motor car to Gloucester, where she was 
placed in Barmvood Private Asylum. Here was food for conver¬ 
sation. It was known that she suffered from acute depression 
and some kind of nervous affection of the hands which pre¬ 
vented her from playing' the piano, and people’s sympathy with 
her husband already increased when this new trial became known. 

During* her absence the little man enjoyed, it is true, a 
certain freedom. People wore kind to him and asked him out. 
Heads, if they were wagged, wore wagged in secret. Then, six 
months la!or, if was known that Mrs. Armstrong was much better, 
and was coming homo. And in January, 1921, she came,' homo, 
but began to fail again. A mental nurse was installed, and in 
February, 1921, people heard that Mrs. Armstrong was very ill, 
and that Dr. Hi neks was calling every day. And on the 22nd 
of February fids poor lady died, and, a few days Infer, was buried 
at On sop Churchyard, near by her home. A friend, who was 
one of the four who attended the funeral, told mo that. Armstrong 
seemed tjuito unaffected, and was chatting about, fishing rights 
while the coffin was being carried down. And on the following 
Sunday at the little village church, where the service was made a 
kind of memorial to the good lady, lie read the lessons (ho the 
sexton told me) with groat, eloquence and feeling. 

V. 

And so life was resumed once more; Major Armstrong took 
a new lease of if, and gave little dinner parties, at which alcohol 
was no longer banned. People eamo and went, got/ ill and got 
well, and so on. After one of Armstrong’s little dinner parties 
Use local inspector of taxes, who had done justice to the excellent 
Madeira provided by his host, was taken very ill on the way 
home ami had a very bad night; and people who knew of if 
rather smiled. There was a good deal of illness in that autumn 
of 1921,# Mr. Mart.in, for example, was ill for several days, mid 
had to have Dr, Hi neks in constant, attendance. Now, among 
those people who did not accept Major A rmstrong’s in vital imm 
wore Mr, and Mrs, Martin. But. it. was characteristic of the 
little man that lie was not easily rebuffed, and so he gave con¬ 
tinued invitations, ami appeared to want to be friendly mul 




Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

sociable, but could only on one occasion induce Mari in io come 
to his house, and they had tea togo/thor. When I'urllu'v inviiaiiotm 
to tea failed, Armstrong tried inviting the. Marlins io dinner, 
but even that was refused, and it was i bought (hat business rola 
tions must be getting rather strained. 

And then, suddenly, a series of bombshells fell. <U\ New 
Year’s Day, 1922, the town was dumbfounded U> hear ihni Major 
Armstrong had been arrested the day before and charged wii h 
attempting to-murder Mr. Martin, Tills roused 1 ho greatest in 
dignation. People went so far as (<> suggest, that it had been 
engineered by Martin on account of business rivalry. Kut si til 
more astounding events happened tlm next day. Si range doctors 
came to the town; it was known that something was happening 
up at Gusop Churchyard; and then that Mrs, Anus! rung’s body 
had been exhumed that very morning and was being examined in 
a little cottage near the churchyard. Reporters descended 
apparently from the skies. Sensation after sensation war. re 
ported. Gossip upon gossip multiplied, and through five long 
months, until Armstrong was executed, the town was a coni re of 
sensation and excitement such as is randy experienced in such a 
place. 


VI. 

. That was the outward course of events, Now let us glaum 
at the events a little beneath the surface aw i hoy appeared (<> 
those two or three intimately engaged with the persons chiefly 
concerned, so that later we may go deeper still and examine 
some matters which were known to nobody at the time except, 
possibly Armstrong himself. 

When Armstrong was suddenly arrested on the .'list 
December, 1921, there were five people only in 11 ay who were not. 
surprised. They were Dr. Hineks, Mr, and Mrs. Martin, Mr. 
Davies (Mr. Martin’s father-in-law), and Mr. Trevor GnfiUlnu 
For the greater part of two months those people had beep certain 
that Armstrong was trying to poison Mr. Martin, and lliat 1m 
had poisoned his own wife. They had been in communication 
with the Home Office, who had enjoined xipon them tin 1 si rudest 
secrecy and the necessity for not letting Armstrong have a glim 
xnering of an idea that he was suspected. It was a drama! ie and 

6 



Introduction. 


eerie situation for these people, and the last three weeks must 
have been extremely trying. 

Consider the facts. Only two months before Martin, after 
repeated invitations, had gone to tea with Armstrong at his house. 
There was a business difficulty between them, and he thought that 
Armstrong wished to discuss it, although, as a matter of fact, he 
never alluded to it. During tea he had handed Martin a buttered 
scone with the apology, “ Excuse my lingers/" and Martin had 
eaten that, as well as some currant loaf. He had hardly got home 
before he was seized with, the most violent pains, with vomiting 
and diarrhoea, which continued throughout the night and reduced 
him swiftly to a condition of extreme weakness. Dr. Hincks was 
called in, and saw the usual symptoms of a severe bilious attack, 
and prescribed accordingly. But, as the sickness continued, he 
was (fortunately) not entirely satisfied, and he had an analysis 
made, and found in the sample submitted that, there was one- 
thirty-third of a grain of arsenic. This set. him thinking and 
pondering, and one day, riding on horseback over the hills to 
visit a distant patient, and revolving in his mind the oirouin¬ 
stances attending the death of Mrs. Armstrong, the key to the 
whole situation flashed on him. That neuritis of hers, which 
they had all regarded as merely functional disorder, had not boon 
functional but organic; it was peripheral neuritis—one of the 
symptoms of arsenical poisoning. He remembered all the other 
symptoms. Vomiting, the poouliarity known as “ high stop¬ 
page ” gait, discolouration of the skin, Ac., Ac.-.all symptoms 

of arsenical poisoning. What. Martin 'was suffering from, Mrs. 
Armstrong had died of. And if in a small liquid sample taken 
from Mr. Martin one-thirty-third of a grain of arsenic had been 
found, what, might ho found in the body of Mrs. Armstrong? 
The, more be thought of it the plainer it became. lie wrote at 
onro to the doctors at Barnwood Asylum, and they, too, realised 
that they had been deceived as to the cause of 'Mrs. Armstrong’s 
physical illness. They remembered how the symptoms had 
diminiHjiod during her stay in the asylum and reappeared after 
her return home; they, too, realised (hat they had mistaken 
organic for functional disease, and (in the complete absence of 
suspicion) missed the diagnosis which would have put them on 
the right track. The fads were placed before the Home Office, 

and the slow hut certain wjioola of the criminal law began to 

7 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong, 

revolve. Stiffly and hesitatingly they moved at first, an the 
Director of Prosecutions began to make his own independent 
inquiries; but ever increased in pace am! smoothness ami 
momentum, until in the dock of ll'is Majesty’s Assizes of the 
county of Herefordshire they Hung off Armstrong into the outer’ 
darkness of shameful extinction. 

The Home Office was, nuiurally, slow to move at (he 
beginning; it does not do to suspect every one against whom 
some private malice or feud may inspire or Huggeat mwpi 
cion;, moreover, in a recent ease of poisoning alleged 
against a solicitor in Wales the defendant had been acquitted; 
and it was probable that the authorities were determined not. to 
set the law in motion on such a eharge unless they were abso 
lutely certain that. suspicion was properly founded, and that the, 
case would be proved; for if it is a terrible thing that a murderer 
should escape, it is an equally terrible thing that an innocent 
man should be put on trial for his life. Therefore, the first steps 
were taken, cautiously; but to Dr. llinokw and the Martins, who 
were . convinced of Armstrong's guilt, and certain that he was 
engaged in a persistent attempt to poison Martin, the machinery 
seemed to move slowly indeed. You must, consider Mart inks 
position. He was afraid of Arms!.rung, lie remembered that 
sinister occasion when he had yielded to Armstrong’s entreaties 
to go to tea with him, and the agon sen that had followed ; and 
here.was the same man daily ringing him up and insisting that 
he should go to tea with him again. The two were solicitors for 
the vendor and purchaser of some property respectively. Arm 
strong had.failed to complete; Martin was pressing for the return 
of the deposit—some five hundred pounds—-but neither c.omple 
tion nor deposit was forthcoming from Armstrong" .only in vita* 
tions to tea. If it were not, sink a grim story there would lie 
something comic in this almost furious bombardment of lea in 
vitations across the village street in Hay. 

“Will you com© to tea this afternoon V 9 telephones Arm 
strong. “ Can’t come to tea,” rep Hew Martin, “ but 1 will hmk 
in afterwards about six.” : / £ Oh, never mind,” says Armstrong. 
f< Any day will do. Come to tea to-morrow instead.” Marlin, 
quaking with apprehension, does not go to tea to-morrow. Tim 
telephone hell rings again. “Why did you not come to tent ” 
says Armstrong. “Tea has been waiting for you for ha,If an hour.” 

8 



Introduction. 


Tea and telephones, these were the weapons with which this 
sinister warfare was waged. Then, as Martin would not go to 
tea at Mayfield on his way home through Cusop Dingle, as 
Mahomet would not come to the mountain, the tea mountain was 
brought to Mahomet. Tea was started at Armstrong’s office ; 
butter was brought from Mayfield, scones sent over from the little 
caf‘6 across the road. The telephone now asked Mr. Martin u to 
come across and have tea at the oHioe.” In vain was the net spread 
in the sight of poor Mr. Mar (-in ; bill- he was hard put to it to find 
excuses for not crossing (ho road and taking his tea with Arm¬ 
strong. So in sheer sol('-defence, though, 1 imagine, with poor 
appetite, ho started having tea in his own office, in order to 
have an excuse for not going across the road. And so you picture, 
amid this furious gale of invitations, these two men sitting on 
either side of Use street having their tea, or unable to have it; 
Armstrong furiously drinking his, when Marlin would not come; 
Martin distastefully not. taking Ids, in order to say that he had 
had it. Martin confided to Dr. lihieks that he, could not stand 
it much longer. “ Whatever you do/’ they said, “ keep away 
from Armstrong’s house. And under no circumstances eat or 
drink anything in Ids presence.” The police were making 
secret visits, clddly at night, to Hay and insisting on the same 
policy; above all, Armstrong was not to be alarmed. (t All very 
well/* says poor Martin, “ but lie is bombarding mo with invi¬ 
tations to lea; every time 1 see 1dm he darts across the road, 

* Why not come to tea‘I ’ And S have run out ol excuses. ’’ 
Hold on a bit longer,” they toll him. And he and Mrn. Martin 
actually took it in turns to keep awake at night, haunted by one 
knows not- what- grim, beckoning spec-l.ro with a teacup in its 
hand. And wo Armstrong was at last put to the necessity of 
asking Mr, and Mrs. Martin to dinner. It was strange enough 
that any one should refuse' an invitation to tea, but no one could 
refuse an invitation to dinner. It, was expensive, of course; but 
it need only happen once, M a rt in made some kind of a torn * 
porising answer, but on the day that the invitation fell due Arm* 
strong was already in the hands of the police, ami Mr. and Mrs, 
Martin could breathe freely. 

The ordeal of Dr, Hi neks was to last a day longer. He wai 

in a very pneullar position, owing partly to the courage and in¬ 
tegrity of law own character. ^Armstrong was his patient, and he 

■ 9 





Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

had been attending him ami giving treatment. f„ r venereal dimwo 
peiiodically lor some tinio; ati<l while hr was atieuding him fie 
was already in communication with the police' on I ho subject, of 
his airest. In his own opinion (and 1 think most people would 
agiee) he had no alternative in either ease, lb' believed Ann 
strong to be a murderer, and wished him to be arrested; but 
every man is presumed innocent until lie is proved e;uillv, and 
there was no valid reason why ho should discontinue his 1 real 
ment and so drive his patient to tint necessity ol' eonliding in 
another doctor. But, although Armstrong had boon arrested 
on the charge of attempting ho murder Martin, the real ease 
against him was that he had murdered Mrs. Annul rung, and 
until her body had been exhumed Dr. IIinelm must have been in 
considerable suspense. Had that body been found five from 
arsenic he would have been in (ho position of having made un 
warranted accusations against his friend and patient; ami he 
might have walked out of Hay, which had been the mum of bin 
work for thirty years, and his homo for lifly. But when, on the 
day following the arrest of Armstrong, Mrs. Arnmtnue^N collin was 
opened, the first glance told Dr. IlinckH and Dr. Bpilslmry (hat 
his suspicions were correct. The stale of preservation of the 
remains told them that at once, and the fact was confirmed ft liltlo 
later when the analysis of Mr. Webster revealed the actual presence 
of a greater quantity of arsenic Hum he had over found in a 
poisoned body. 

It cannot be doubted that Dr. JTiriolm acted with a courage 
worthy of the highest tradition of his profession. He had been 
mistaken about Mrs. Armstrong’s illness ami (he cause of her 
death, as had the other doctors who had attended her; but an 
soon as his suspicions were aroused ho shouldered the burden of 
the inevitable consequences, and did his duly I,, society. 


VII. 

The reader must now be informed of another cause of mm 
picion against Armstrong. About a month before (he episode 
ol the tea-time attempt, and soon aflc.r Martin’s arrival 
in Hay and marriage to Miss Davies, lm had one mmminw 
received a parcel containing a box of chocolates, Noiihnr 
nor is wi e was m the habits of eating chocolates, and (he 



Introduction. 


box was put away until some days later, when they were having 
friends to dinner, and Mrs. Martin put some into a bon-bon dish. 
There was no clue as to where the chocolates came from, and after 
the party those that were left were put back into the box. Some 
on© was taken ill after that dinner party, and later the chocolates 
were examined, and it was found that some of them had a small 
hole drilled in the base and that arsenic had been inserted. The 
diameter’ of the hole exactly fitted the nozzle of the instrument that 
Armstrong afterwards alleged that he used to inject arsenic into 
the roots of dandelions. Another case which subsequently brought 
Armstrong under suspicion was that of Mr. Davies, an estate 
agent at Hereford, who had, some controversial business with Arm¬ 
strong ; who came to Hay, had lunch or tea with Armstrong, and 
was takem ill with sum to abdominal pain on his return home. 
He was operated on for appendicitis, and died, the cause of death 
being (1 believe) certified as peritonitis following acute appendi¬ 
citis. it is possible that in certain circumstances the cause of his 
death might; have been tine subject of further investigation. 


VIII. 

'When Armstrong appeared before the magistrate at his own 
bench in Hay, his place as dork was taken by his elderly col¬ 
league, (he clerk to (he bench at Talgarth, to whose otlieo he had 
himself aspired already. This gentleman had been one of the 
dinner party of four after which the inspector of (axes was taken 
so ill, and it, is possible (hat the inspector had suffered in his 
stead. It, is said that there was a somewhat, rich vein of comedy 
in the way ho handled Armstrong at these proceedings. The 
prisoner himself, not, to bo out done, offered to assist his elderly 
colleague, whose infirmity hampered him in the execution of his 
onerous duties. Anyhow, the usual deposit,ions were taken, and 
Armstrong was committed for (.rial at. (he next Herefordshire 
Assizes, the defenco being reserved. The I .rial began on the Jrd of 
April, IW22, before Mr. Justice Darling, who was then on his last 
circuit, prior to roli remen t. The Atlornoy-Cenoral, Sir Hr nest 
Pollock, assisted by Mr. 0. H. Vaeholl, K.O., and Mr. 

St. John Mieklothwait, represented the Crown, and the defence was 

* Now Lord Han worth. 


11 




Herbert Rowse Armstrong, 

conducted by Sir Henry Curtin Bennett, K.C. : Mr, S. U. C. 
Bosanquet, and Mr. H. A. Godson. Tho Grand Jury, on Mr! 
Justice Darling’s advice, had thrown out Hie bill as (o the 
attempted poisoning by moans ot' a box ol' chocolates, there being 
insulhcient evidence to connect the prisoner wiih (he sending of 
the box. 

The proceedings began with a long and iniportanl argument 
as to whether the evidence as regards what wo may call Iho Marlin 
case was admissible. Many eases were cited, and Mr. Just ire 
Darling finally decided that tho evidence was admissible on the 
ground that it showed that tho use of arsenic for poisoning human 
beings as well as dandolionH had occurred to Iho prisoner's mind. 
This decision was of the greatest importance. If it, had |„.,. n 
wrong, and the Court of Appeal had held that the evidence watt, 
in fact, inadmissible, the conviction of Armstrong would have 
been quashed, and he would have been released. On |f„, oilier 
hand, without this evidence it seemed unlikely that there would bo 
a verdict for conviction, and Mr. Justice Darling was already of 
opinion that the case was of a land in which it was desirable, in 
order to get at the truth, to have as much evidence as possible 
as to the surrounding circumstances. Aa it turned null, his 
decision was right, and was uphold by tho Court of Appeal The 
reader must turn to the trial itself in the following pages for the 
details. The greater part of tho evidence is of a medical tuilmv, 
and is of the unsavoury kind usually associated with cases of 
arsenical poisoning. It is extremely important, however, ami 
should be read with attention by any one who wishes to understand 
the case. The suggestion of the defence was that Mrs, Armstrong 
herself had deliberately taken arsenic, that she was of unsound 
mind and suicidal tendencies, that her husband had no motive 
or murdering her, and that there was no evidence that he had 
ever administered arsenic. There was a further medical <lefon„. 
presented by Dr. F. S. Toogood that Mrs. Armstrong suffered from 
auto-intoxication when she went inlo tho mental hospital, ami lies! 
arsenic had nothing to do with her condition, and that there wait 
nothing in the conditions inconsistent with her bavin- had m, 
arsenic whatever np to 16th February, when one pels,am,m do.,o 
was taken which caused her death. To account for ,.|,e discrepancy 
of these conditions with the time taken for the arsenic to reach 
the parts of the body as found at tin post-mortem examination, ho 



Introduction. 


put forward the ingenious theory that a large part of the arsenic 
had become encysted, or retained in a kind of capsule attached to 
the wall of the stomach. He cited in support of his theory the case 
of Due de Pralines, who was alleged to have been poisoned by the 
police in the seventeenth century; but Mr. Justice- Darling knew 
all about the Due de Pralines, and also that the evidence of his 
case was known to have been falsified and misrepresented, so he was 
able to dispose of this ingenious theory in his summing up. The 
only comment to be made on Dr. Toogood’s evidence was that it was 
not good enough. 


IX. 

Perhaps the most dramatic firing in the course of a trial that 
took place throughout - in an atmosphere of tense emotion was the dis¬ 
closure by Sir Henry Curtis Dennett that after Armstrong’s arrest a 
packet of arsenic, had been found in a drawer in bis bureau which 
the police had already searched without result. 11, seems that 
after Armstrong’s arrest he fold his solicitor about this packet, 
which represented the residue of the white arsenic that he had 
bought- at. Davies’s shop. I ! is solicitor wont on his inst ructions to 
Mayfield, looked in flu* bureau, and, like t he pel ice, failed to lind 
the packet. Then he went, again with his clerk, and he described 
in his evidence how they found the packet of arsenic u caught 
up ” at the back of a, drawer. They applied for a list Pf the 
articles found by the police, in order to ascertain, whether this 
packed had been seen by them or not; it had not, and so they 
did not. disclose its presence until Sir Jlenry Curtis Beunoff 
produced it; so drama! ieally at. the trial* itself. At, first sight 
there seems something peculiar about, I lie discovery of this packet, 
and the reader will naturally ask, was it put there by the 
defence, and, if so, for what, purpose 'I Or was if put. there by 
the agents of the police, and left, as a I rap, and, if so, for what, 
purpose '{ It, seems a little mysterious; and the importance of 
if does not. seem sufficiently to account for the sensal ion caused 
by it. ]}ul I believe the facts of the matter to be simply those 
revealed in the evidence; Armstrong did remember it, and (.old 
his solicitor about, it, and it was first overlooked and ultimately 
found, and the finding not, communicated to the police,. U is. 
interesting to see the different use made of such a piece of evidence 
and (he comments of Lord Darling, Sir Lrnest Pollock, and Sir 

13 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 


Henry Curtis Bennett respectively. Lord Hurling Ironled i(. as 
a very damaging piece of evidence, and commented on Arnml rong’n 
alleged failure to rcnuemlmr it; Sir Henry Curl in Iiennott went 
so far as to say that it might save AniiNtroug’a life, ns aeoounling 
for the remainder of Urn purehmie of arsenic, hull’ of whirl. Im 
alleged he used in making up Ihe litllc parkols rot- poisoning 
dandelions. Its chief interest now lies in llm example il given 
of the ingenuity of a clever counsel in inlerprel mg every raet as 
favourably as possible to his client, Tim passage" in Sir lienry 
Curtis Bennett’s speech dealing with Ibis matter is well worlh 
reading closely. 

Armstrong gave evidence on his own behalf with llu. mime 
calmness that he maintained throughout the trial, ami was quite 
unshaken until, after a sovero cross-examination by |be, Attorney 
General and a re-examination by his own emmsol, be was taken 
in hand by the judge, wlto, in a few masterly a,ml ptn'Kislent ques 
tions, revealed Armstrong’s inability either to explain the litlle 
packet of arsenic found on him at his arrest, or his concealing Ihe 
fact that there was another packet hidden in Ihe desk in his 
bureau which the police did not Ibid when I liny searched. The 
judge’s questions also made it dillie.ult for any mu. to believe that 
Armstrong really did, for (be, purpose of poisoning Iwenty imli 
vidual dandelions, make up twenty individual pa.-kels «,f while 
aisenic. Ihese questions shook tl.o prisoner, and, I imagine, 
really shattered the case for the dofeneo. Any one who reads H.em, 
and Armstrong’s motl.od ol‘ dealing will, them, can have litlln 
doubt that they went to the root of Ihe mailer of his guilt far more 
certainly than the arsenic ever went to the roots of his dandelions. 
Sir Henry Curtis Bennett made a very offer,I ivo and eloquent speech 
for the defence, and the Attorney-Ceneral’s reply was a masterly 
example of its kind. Armstrong sat apparently unmoved through 
everything, with blue eyes staring in front of him ll.ro.igbout (lie 
summing up, to which I have alluded in tl.o preface. 

Severe as this summing up was, the general union was that 
Armstrong would be acquitted, and the betting was in favour „f 
acquittal. Sir Henry Curtis Bennett himself was so e.m/idonl, 
that he went for a walk, expecting to come back either to hear 
the verdict for acquittal or to meet Armstrong himself a„,j find 


to Hereford, the 

14 


newsboys were crying in the streets the paper 



Introduction. 


announcing the verdict “ guilty/ 5 A regrettable indiscretion on 
the part of a juryman and a London evening newspaper revealed 
to the public the fact that when the jury retired to consider their 
verdict the foreman asked every one to write his verdict on a slip 
of paper, and that eleven bore the word “ guilty 55 and on© “ not 
proven ”; and when the foreman announced the result the man 
who had written “not proven” said, “Well, Tom, you know 
what 4 not proven 5 means. 1 really believe the man is guilty.” 
After which the foreman, finding they were all agreed, was alleged 
to have said, “ We have heard enough of the case, and we needn’t 
discuss it any more. Let’s have a quiet smoke before we go back 
into Court.” This unexpected glimpse into lh© methods of a jury 
consisting of ten farmers and two professional men is undoubtedly 
interesting, and seems to indicate a degree of common sense which 
should go l.ar to ref nit's I he theories of those who think that an 
ordinary jury is not a satisfactory tribunal for the testing of cir¬ 
cumstantial ovidenro. I bit the publication of this story was 
severely (‘.ensured at the time by sc vend eminent judges. 

In duo time the case came before the Court of Criminal 
Appeal, presided over by (he Lord Chief Justice, who sat whh Mr. 
Justice A,very and Mr. Justice Shearman. The appeal was dis¬ 
missed, and a fortnight later, on (lie Jlst of May, .192:2, Arm¬ 
strong was duly hanged at Gloucester, having made no confession. 
His attitude to the religious ministrations of his clerical friends 
was described as being one of “ respectful attention.” lie was 
visited by Mr. Matthews, Ins solicitor, and Mr. Chevalier, a 
Liverpool solicitor who had been trusted and esteemed by Mrs. 
Armstrong, and (no doubt, for her sake and the children’s) did 
what ho could to arrange Armstrong’s somewhat, tangled affairs. 
Death was dealt to him on that. May morning, while the birds in 
Cusop .Dingle wore singing about, the house where his children were 
awaking, with (he swift, and merciful ollieieney of modern methods; 
and for the sins that he- committed ho paid up to the full measure 
of his capacity to pay. 

X. 

Armstrong’s presence was characterised by neatness and smart¬ 
ness of appearance and alacrity of demeanour, lie was very 
small, but so well proportioned that he did not. scorn small, unless 
he was standing beside a person* of normal height. Ho was voluble 

■ 15 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

and egotistical, regarding himself and Iuh affairs as <>l great, im¬ 
portance; his manners -wore excellent. Some people lound him 
simply a bore; others, among whom worn a certain number of 
women, found him attractive. The most remarkable thing about 
him was his eyes. They were Light blue, the rolour of iorgei mo 
nots, and they had a glittering brilliancy, almost as though I hero 
was a light behind them. This, it will be remembered, was also 
a characteristic of Smith, the man ‘who had a habit of marrying 
women with a little money and drowning them in a hath; and, ! 
doubt not, of many other scoundrels. 

XL 

In cases where so much of the evidence is circumstantial li is 
generally considered necessary to have ample proof nut. only of ih** 
cause of death, or of the actual giving of poison, hut. also that 
the defendant had it in his possession, knew how to use it, and 
had both motive and opportunity for using it,, Armstrong wan 
an old hand with arsenic, lie was interested in his garden, waged 
a continuous warfare against dandelions and plant a,ins, ami always 
had .stocks of weed-killer, which is a preparation of arsenic, in 
hand. In addition to this he bought arsenic himself and made 
up his own weed-killer; still furl lung and this was a slgntbeauf 
fact, he bought a quantity of win 1(5 arsenic in I ho January pre 
ceding Mrs. Armstrong's removal to the asylum, and bought it 
from the local chemist, Davies—Mr. Martin’s father in law, It 
was this whit© arsenic which ho is alleged to have used to poinon 
Mrs. Armstrong and Mr. Martin, As to opportunity, there wim 
no doubt, and it was not contended,, that, he often sat with ft hi 
wife when she was ill and, in the absence of the nurse, gave fmr 
whatever nourishment she was hawing. As to motive, lmwe\m% 
there was a difference of opinion. Sir Henry Chtrlta liennHt wiw 
very impressive on this subject of absence of motive; and, indeed, 
to any ordinary mind (.here would seem to be no motive great 
enough to account for so monstrous a crime. Hut motives which 
would not be: sufficient for ordinary people were, apparently, 
sufficient for Armstrong. With regard to his wife them wan h 
financial motive — miserable enough, it is true fur tlm lady 
possessed only about two thousand pounds in, the world; but the 
incident of the will indicated that Armstrong attached importance 

to it. While he was away at the war she made a brief will leaving 

16 ' ■ 



Introduction. 


everything she had to her children, with a small legacy to Miss 
1’oarco, and nothin* lo her husband. Bm soon after lie came 
back she signed, or was alleged to have signed, a new will in 
wlueh nothin* was loft b. her children or Miss Pearce, and every. 
(Inn* lo her husband. This will was in Ihe prisoner’s own hand- 
wntm* and, ,I the signature was not a forgery, it was almost 
corUinly ohianuMl undvr a, mmUluvn notion as lo wiial tho docm- 
monl; was, for the will was improperly witnessed, the witnesses 
m*nm* rnulher in the presenee of the testator nor of each other 
Armstrongs story of this will will he round in his evidence; its 
existence, I am alYa.d we. must admit, shows that, he had a financial 
interest the death of his wife. To that must he added the fact 
that he. was m financial dillieull.ic H at the lime, and that he, died 
insolvent. 

Wo have, seen wind, kind of a woman Mrs. Armstrong was, 
and that Armstrong's life with her was not what you might, call 
a joy I ul one. There is further to he considered the fact that he 
. ,,u "onl ranted. an inlimae.y of what degree is really of , 10 groat 
importance with a hul.v umiamod, who gave evidence, at the trial* 
she came and spent a night at Hay soon aider his wire’s death 
™presumably to see his house and the children; and within a 
mmdh or two „| the deal It he had asked her to marry him, although 
at the tune ni Ihe arrest she had, apparently, not decided ho do 
«m I hose, then, were Hie moi ives which induced him to embark on 
■ie campaign ol cumulative poisoniitgin tniuuledoses which had boon 
gom* on lor some I into before Mrs. Armstrong’s removal ho the 
asylum. There is a difticully ns to the administration of tho 
large dose, which was evidently given within a few hours of her 
being removed to Haro wood. One. may well ask wind; can have 

. . hm ° , W wl 1,1 administering a large and fatal dose to a woman 

wlm bad just l*een examine.! by two doctors and certified as 
mentally insane, but physically in ordinary health. .Supposing, 
ns might well have happened, (hat Mrs. Armslrung, who was taken 
violeully ill just lieibro s(aiding for the. asylum, and had presum¬ 
ably got s;id of Ihe greater portion of Ihe .lose, had .lied in tho 
motor car mi I ho way lo (lloueesler, there would have had to bo 
an inquest; neither Dr. Ilincks nor the oilier doctor who certified 
her would have give, a death cert ideate in «uoh circumstances; 
and a post, mortem examination would have revealed the presenee 
"I arsenic. One may well won.Ur why Armstrong t.x.k such risks. 

13 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 


I can only assume that, in the case of the dose being successful, 
his defence would have been that the poor lady, on hearing dial 
she was going to be taken to the asylum, decided l<> commit suicide. 
A possible motive (not put forward by the prosecut ion) tor Arm 
strong's desire that his wife should bo diselmrgod from Urn asylum, 
and not merely sent home on leave, was that in (ho latter ease 
she would still have been under a certificate of lunacy, and there 
fore not qualified to make the new will which he drafted ami 
which she signed. 

The delusions from which she suffered wero of n sad and 
pathetic nature. She, whose life was governed by a sense of 
duty, went about weighed down by the fan Untie belief that she did 
not do her duty by her husband and, children, and that, she had 
committed some criminal act for which she could bo arrested. 
She was also under what was certified as the " untruo delusion " 
that she was being poisoned; but in the light, of later knowledge 
this appears to have been no delusion, but simple Fad. 


A terrible possibility here presents itself. It. was suggested 
to me, by one who saw her constantly during this period, t hat she 
knew she was being poisoned, and that in her strange mental 
condition she felt that she must not, for the sake of her children, 
reveal what she knew and incriminate her husband. If there in 
any possibility of truth in that view (and, only those who knew 
her and were with her can judge), it, raises her martyrdom to a 
point of heroic tragedy such as has surely never been recorded 
before. I can only say for myself, having pondered the matter 
considerably, that I have no kind of certainty about if nit her way, 
and that I only hope it is not true. Another of her “ delusions * 
was that Dr. Hincks did not know what was the matter with her; 
and this, as he would be the first to admit, is not entirely bane 
less. That at this time she took a dislike to and mistrust in 
doctors generally on the grounds that they “did not, know what 
was the matter with her" might add some plausibility to the 
ghastly possibility that I have suggested, 1 am bound to suggest 
it, because the person who holds that view has a mm? intimate 
knowledge of the circumstances than any one else living. 

As to the second large dose of arsenic, from which Mrs, Arm 
^ to the defence, was administered 

2 r f there J ^ that in her enfeebled condition she 

could have moved from her bed to get eueh a d<w. oven if «) w 



Introduction. 


know where In got it, for a period rm.d, in excess of the twenty- 

fzJrz p iri7 r 1 *- Am,<>ugh sir ^ 

Burnt 1,1 Ins best In, produce medical evidence that the fatal 

cl i T 7" " T Iior lhiUl >■««»» 

death, , 1 ,, no convinon (ho jury; ami, in the, li^it of the 
ov,donee o Sir Henry Willcox ami Dr. Hpilsbury, ifc CiH hardly 
convince the reader IW.mnhly, like all aLie poisoner! 

A,, msti onp; jr t>(l tired (ll o small doses and decided to louden 

matters, ami to put an end to Iho situation oneo and for all 

story!?! I""'-™ l> ^ rli Vr K ° '' U ° rou « h, y wilh '»•« prisoner's 

si, ,y bavm<y actually wrapped twenty little packets lor the 
jh, rpose Ol poisoning twenly dandelions that I need not refer lo it 
further here It see,ns unlikely, an,I the jury disbelieved it.' 

" im ; '"Tl h * ! d Mf ,iW “ <*»<• « liiuidy for usin. at 

the tea table; and, as we know, one of (hen, was actually found 

m his pocket at I be tune of bis arrest, ready, no doubt, 'for Mr 
Matlm should km roluelanee lo eome to tea be overcome,. There 
>h only tins to be sanl. Ihat, people who know Armslrmm well 
"ie I hat it was just Ibe kind of 1 l.iti- lie would have'done 

iLriilh ! •' T 1 P ;’ r,li, ' Kv muM ’ Wh<> lik -‘ 

1 " n ‘ chemicals and apparalus; and ! have had shown to 

,,U> ,h, '‘ hin ;' wh! ''>' l»«* «*vi.| bo used for inior.fi,ur 

*™ W P< T k ‘ r r 1 , 0 ' 1 ; U ' ,1,,li ° n 11 “*«» —11 Hvrinyo wiiii 

; In,1,!, ' <1 ’ hl ' K«v« it to Dr. II ineks wilh'sonie olher 

hospital apparalus. aider Mrs. Armstrong ,loath, as son,elhi„,r 
ho had no more ,me lor. But if Hifjrniliennt II,al. (he litlle nowlo 

r^ ,h,a - —- 


1 have sal. through a summer „mrnin ;r a el,air on the. tennis 

awn ol the. house which used to lie called Maylield. The damle 
Imns W ''. n :/ ,, ; r ‘ l, ' r n ; !ln > l "'l «■»“' Plains had, at Hie time 

my \mt. taken almost eoniplole possession of half of (he lawn 
Iho sun Shone, the doors and windows were wide open, so Ihat 
the Hummer breev.o stirred through the house, and the voiees of 

^rm7life ' { ** A '»■«« 'war* 

11 ,,U ,UI,! * l:l l’l >u ‘ r «•“: «r children, had taken possession 

10 ’’ ,l “‘' u1, llu « l ?thl.N were with (hose other litllo 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

O ' 


children whose voices, more repressed and mil. quite no Iui[i|iy, 
had sounded there at the time of thin story. 11, is (lie |m W n'ru 
of those children that to me at any rale invests I his crime with 
a peculiar dreadfulness. And in considering I lie endless puzzle 
of what it is in one man that, side by side with ordinary human 
qualities, makes him capable of fiendish enmity and puts him 

into the class which we call criminal, 1 am impelled to I he, .. 

elusion that what makes a poisoner differ from 1,1m normal man 
is not so much a positive as a negative quality. It is (he alwenee 
of something from his moral make-up, rallior limn the presence 
of something, that seems to mo (o make the difference. And in 
this case I would say that what Annulroug and people like, him 
lack is imagination. They see things ami actions objectively, 
not subjectively. Otherwise, how would it be possible for a man’ 
engaged with life in all its ordinary relationships not (o recoil 
from contemplation of the effect of his conduct on those Huh* 
lives? There is something innocent in the worst of us; and no 
one can live in the company of little children without brim- aware 
were rt only wistfully, of the morning freshness and beauty of 
their outlook. It is easier to understand a mini murdering' his 
children m insane desperation than coldbloodedly Nehomiim"and 
contriving actions which could only blot out (he sunshine oUheir 
lives in darkness and shame. I am driven to believe, (hen-fore 
that this man was deprived of the power of realising nr inuennwm 
what might happen, or what must happen, his children ns a 
consequence of his actions. 


For some months after that execution at; (lloueesler paid they 
continued to live at Mayfield, haunting with their inuoeont presence 
the scene of so much wickedness and so much snITerin- It, i H „ 
dreadful thought that they should have continued I here, while two 
of them at least were old enough to know wh.it was happen in-. 
There are many stories about thorn; but this is U(l( , a part or the 

Enough fl T r u° dW0U ° n ’ nor (1 ° 1 fwjl '''^"'1 upon to do L 
fnc- I ? /° mewher6 in the ™l*l. under another name, hear’ 
ng the burden and handicap involved in this s-ut slm-v n 
young people are living out Lir lives. 


♦ 


20 



Leading Dates in Armstrong Trial. 


June, 1907* 
17th June, 1917* 

7th June, 1919. 
■May, 1920, 

4th May, 1920* 
July, 1920, 
8th July, 1920, 


M Augu nt, ,1920, 

4th August, 1920. 
15th August., 1920. 

22ud August, 1920, 

lltli January, 1921* 

22ml January, 1921. 
27th January, 1921. 
19th February, 1921. 
10th February, 1921. 

18th February, 1921, 

% 

22ml February, 1921, 
20th October, 1921. 


Armstrong married Katherine Mary Friend, of which 
marriage there were three children. 

Mm Armstrong made a will in which she made provision 
for the children of the marriage along with other 
bt'ijuOHlfU 

Armstrong bought a hall-pound of arsenic. 

Armstrong visited a lady referred to an Mrs. -— in the 
evidence at a hotel in London. 

Armstrong bought 5 gallons of weed-killer* 

Armstrong returned from Army sendee. 

Mrs. Annul mug made a new will bequeathing all her 
real ami personal estate to her husband. This will 
was in the handwriting of Armstrong, whereas the 
previous one wan in Mrs, Armstrong's own hand- 
wnfing. No provision was made for the children 
in this will, 

l)r. Hlurks .saw Mrs. Armstrong, when there appeared 
to be nothing the matter with her. 

Armstrong bought three tins of powdered weed-killer. 

lh\ HinolvN gave Mrs. Armstrong sleeping draught. 

Mrs. Armstrong certified as insane and sent to Barn wood 
Private Asylum. 

Armstrong bought a quarter-pound of arsenic (a very 
early date in the year for taking stops to make 
weedddllrr), 

Mrs. Armstrong came home. 

Mentnl nurse installed. 

Mrs. Armstrong started vomiting badly. 

Dr, Hi neks oommouoed daily visits. Armstrong asked 
Dr. Hiuck& who titer his wife might take homoeopathic 
medicines. 

Mrs. Armstrong lost complete tune of her limbs, 

Mrs. Armstrong died. 

Armstrong had meeting with Mr. Martin, Mr. Martin 

wrote giving notice of the rescission of contract and 
demanding repayment of deposits with, costs and 

expenses. 4 


21 



Leading Dates. 

O 


22nd. October, 1921. 

Armstrong invited Mr. Martin to tea, and continued 
doing so until he ultimately went on the 20th 
October. 

26th October, 1921. 

Mr. Martin had tea with Mr. Armstrong, after which he 
was ill for several days. Dr. IJinclm lmd an analyms 
made and definite traces of arsenic found. 

November, 1921. 

Armstrong asked Dr. Hinoka what would be a falal done 
of arsenic, and, when told 2 grains, he said he thought 
1 grain was enough. 

28th December, 1921. 

After repeated invitations to Mr. Martin to have tea 
with him Armstrong invited Mr. and Mrs. Martin 
to dinner, hut they refused. 

31st December, 1921. 

Inspector Crutcheti visited Annul rong and took a wt,ate* 
ment from him. Armstrong arrested. 

2nd January, 1922. 

Exhumation and post-mortem examination of Mri» 
Armstrong’s body. 

19th January, 1922. 

Armstrong charged with murder. 

3rd April, 1922. 

Trial commenced. 

13th April, 1922. 

Armstrong convicted. 

11th May, 1922. 

Hearing of appeal commenced. 

16th May, 1922. 

Appeal dismissed. 

31st May, 1922. 

Armstrong executed. 


22 



THE TRIAL 


WITHIN THE 


SHIRK HALL, HEREFORD, 
HEREFORDSHIRE SUMMER ASSIZES, 
MONDAY, Brd APRIL, 1922. 


Ju<i(/c — 

Mb. JUSTICE DARLING. 

Counsel for the Crown — 

The Attorney-General (Sir Ernkst Pollock, K.C.) 
Mr. C. F. V aoiigi.i., K.C. 

Mr. St. John Mioklkthwait, 

(Instructed by this Director ol* Public Prosecutions.) 

Counsel for the Prisoner — 

Sir Henry Curtis Bennett, K.C. 

Mr. S. It. C. Bosanqukt, K.C. 

Mr. E. A. Godson. 

(Instructed by Mr. Thomas Alfred Matthews, Solicitor, 
Hereford.) 




Herbert Hows© Armstrong 



First Day Monday, 3rd April, 1922, 

The (limit ,k ok Assign Herbert Pn wse Armstrong, you 
art'' charged in this iedictinent with iJu*> wilful murder of your 
wile, Katherine Mary Armsi rung, al Uusop, on 22nd February, 
1921. I low a ay you : are you guilty or not gu illy 'l 
The- PimmNUR * Not guilty, 

(The jury were duly sworn.) 

The (Turk ok Aw hi hr; • (lentlemen of Ihe jury, t.ho prisoner 
ad Hu’s bar, I (order!. I to who* ‘Armstrong, is charged in (Ida indict¬ 
ment wil,h flm wilful murder of Katherine Mary Armstrong, at 
Husop, on 22n<l February, 1 92 l, Upon this indictment lie has 
htuui arraigned, and upon arraignment he has pleaded, not guilty, 
and has put hi niseif u[>on Hod and his rount ry, whieh emmtry 
yo-u are. Your duty, therefore, is (.<> inquire vvhether he he guilty 
or not guilty, and to hearken to thi* evidence. 


Opening Statement for the Crown, 

The Attounmy'- (i KNKUAh, opening (.hot ease for lho prosecution 
on the charge of murder, described tirst the symptoms of the- last 
i 11 ness of Mrs. Armstrong, and said these were (rustworthy 
symptoms of arsenical poisoning. At the time of her death J)r. 
Hindis thought the symptoms wore due- to natural onuses hut 
later on, in September or October, the attention of the Director 
of Public Prosecutions was drawn to* ihe ease, and Home* OlHce 
experts were consulted. It* was decided to make a- post-mortom 
examination, ami on 2nd January the remains of Mrs. Armstrong 
wore exhumed. The examination was made by Dr. Spilsbury, 
and lie found on analysis that* in the curiously well-preserved re¬ 
mains, and in Ihe organs which alone he dealt with, there were 
imarly *U grains ol arsenic. More than a fatal dose was there fore 
discovered still rusting in parts of the body ten months after 
death. From those facts the jury would, on the evidence to ho 
submitted, draw the inference that there must, have been adminis¬ 
tered a largo dose of arsenic within twenty four hours of death. 
The stale of the, re,mains also suggested to Sir William Willcox, 
medical officer to the Home Office, (hat death was undoubtedly 
duo (o arsenic., and that Mrs, Armstrong had been submitted for 
the, last weeks of her life to a course of poisoning, with a tinai 
dose within twentydour hours of her death, whim she. was lying 
in bed unable to move bin* limbs or her hands to feed herself. 
** Who poisoned her t '* aske&l the Attorney-(leneral. ct Who 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

administered that fatal dose and that constant poisoning' whirl* led 
to her death? I am going to submit to you (hat (hr rvdinner 
points conclusively to the fact that she was poisoned by her 

husband.” 

The Attorney-General then proceeded (o drsrribr Arms! rung's 
career, noting his admission os a. solicitor in tobm The 
prisoner, he said, was a Master of Arts of Cambridge University, 
and he was justices' clerk at Hay. He was partner in a legal 
firm, of which, on the death of his partner. In* brramn solo 
proprietor, and he had his office at Hay and lived at May held, 
Cusop, some distance away. In June, 11)07, he married Katherine 
Mary Friend, of Teignmouth, and by her had three children. He 
served in the Volunteers, and on the outbreak of tin* war he became 
a captain in the Royal Engineers (Territorials) and served in 
France, his record in this respect being one shared by many mm 
in the same class. During his absence Mayfield was let, and Mrs. 
Armstrong went down to Teignmouth to live with her sister. Pro 
feeding, the Attorney-General said he was going to relate some 
facts which, he submitted, were convincing. Mrs. Armstrong 
loved her children. She was possessed of some small property. 
She was an intellectual woman, with apparently some knowledge 
of business, and on 17th Juno, 1917, she made a "will will* remark 
able caution and precision*—a will bearing traces of some reflect ion 
for the purpose of taking care of her children. In thin will she 
left remembrances of ,£50 each to her sister, Ida Bessie Friend, 
and to a Mr. Chevalier, and an annuity of 1*12 to Emily Alin* 
Pearce, her housekeeper, a devoted old* servant. She lilt her 
husband 150 a year till 1933, and .£100 a year after that dale, 
which was the date when his elder daughter would he twenty five. 
The will left the residue of the property to the children, tin* 
capital to* go to them on reaching certain ages. A draft- or abstract 
of this will on blue paper was kept, at Mayfield, and was found in 
Mrs. Armstrong's bedroom after her death, and wan given t?v Mina 
Pearce to,Armstrong himself. During Ins war service Armstrong 
visited Bournemouth, and there became aoqi tainted with a lady 
whom, in May, 1920, he visited in some hotel in London. Counsel, 
i n . mentioning this fact and wi Hi,holding (ho name of flu* lady, 
said there was not the slightest reproach attaching to her in flu* 
circumstances alluded to. In July, 1920, Armstrong returned 
home, and within a day or two of" getting back what" purported 
to be a new will was made by Mrs Armstrong, This will wan dated 
8th July, 1920, and .stated that Mrs, Armstrong revoked all former 
wills and testamentary dispositions and bequeathed alk her real 
and personal estate to her husband absolutely, and appointed hint 
her sole executor. It purported to bo witnessed bv Emily Pearce 
and Lily Candy, and it made her husband finally Vnd completely 
master of her estate, to the exclusion of her children. Tim first will 
was drawn with great care and forethought tor the children, and 
■ 26 ■ . . ' 



Opening Statement for the Crown. 

was in the handwriting of Mrs. Armstrong; her sol I ; but. the will 
<>,[ July, 1920, was wholly in the handwriting of ilie prisoner. 
Armstrong wan a solicitor. 11, was common knowledge Unit a 
will, to be valid, must be signed by the testator and witnessed by 
t.W‘ 0 * witnesses signing in the presence of the testator and of each 
other. Without such afU\slal ion the will was invalid. 1 am goings 
to prove (said Sir Ernest Pollock) by (dear and unmistakable 
evidence from Lily Dandy, now a married woman named Mrs. 
Evans, that at the time she signed the will as purporting; to bo 
a, witness of it Mrs. Armstrong was not present. She signed the 
document at (he request of the prisoner, and she sigmal it in a 
manner in whieh the prisoner, as a solicitor, must have known 
made (hat will invalid. I ask you (o take duo note oi the fact 
that that will ma.de no provision for safeguarding lhe tdiil(Iron’s 
interests a most curious alteration, having regard to the manner 
and circumstances of the first will. 

Continuing, Sir Ernest related how Mrs. Armstrong was seen 
by Dr. Iltucks on 1st August, when there was nothing the matter 
with her ; how on I bill August he gave her a sleeping draught.; and 
how on 22nd August, she was certified insane and taken to a private 
asylum near (lloueestor. During her illness, which was physical as 
well as mental, she displayed symptoms now recognised as those of 
arsenical poisoning. Sir E. Pollock said (hat. Armstrong made 
extonsive purchases of arsenic, and gave a list going hack t.o 1914, 
when both liquid weed-killer and solid arsenic and caustic soda 
were bought by the prisoner. On 71h Juno, 1919, he bought half a 
pound of arsenic; on 4th May, 1920, four gallons of weed killer ; 
and on 4th August, 1920, three tins of powdered weed-killer, all 
from Die Hay chemist, Davies. Among Mrs. Armstrong’s symp¬ 
toms in August and later wore loss of power in the hands and 
feet, which was a symptom of arsenical poisoning. Counsel 
admit.fed that; for the purpose of treating her mental illness Mrs. 
Armstrong was given for one month—from fU.li October to 4th 
November—a tonic containing a small quantity of arsenic, bm, 
said the amount was considered by experts as wholly insufficient 
t.o account for her symptoms. In fact,, they would say it played 
absolutely no part in causing her death or the features 
attending it. 

The Attornoy-Ueneral next referred to letters which passed 
between the private asylum authorities a,ml Dr. IIhicks, on behalf 
of Armstrong, in which Armstrong requested early in January that 
Ids wife should be stud, home. Dr. Townsend, flu; asylum super in ■ 
iendent, was not, too willing. He did not consider that, Mrs, 
Armstrong was bettor mentally, though lies’ physical condition had 
improved, and he suggested that she should have three months’ 
leave at homo, and should remain under the observation and con 
trot of the inst itution. Armst rong strongly opposed this, and 
asked for her unconditional return home, ami he got his way. In 

27 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

refusing, said the Attorney-Gencral, to allow her (o come home 
on probation; in refusing the assistance and oonlrol of Dr. Townn 
end, might it not be that Armstrong declined to have nuothej 
authority about the house who would have to inquire jus to (he 
patient’s death; who had still got Mrs. Armslrong on his books ; 
whose responsibility for Mrs. Armstrong was still retained ; who wan 
bound, if and when she died not under his immediate rare, lo 
satisfy himself that she had died in circumstances which nffered 
no question and which could bo elen,red up sal isfactorily. Jin 
would ask the jury to consider whether there was any le- iliumle 
reason for refusing so sensible, so wise, so kindly, ami so pal mm 
a course as that suggested by Dr. Townsend. 

[Ill adjourning the Court for luncheon, Mr. ,1 unlice Darling 
released the jury for an indefinite period pending a legal point 
which/it was intimated, Sir Henry Curtis Bennett would raise ns 
to the admissibility of certain evidence for I ho prosecul inn. | 


Legal Argument on Evidence. 

After the adjournment the Attorney General af itu.v raised 
the question of Sir Henry Curtis Bennett’s object ion. Ho (oh} 
the story of the prisoner’s alleged attempt on (he life of Mr. Marlin 
by tendering him a poisoned teaeake af fra at Mayfield on 26ih 
October, and said these facts were required to rebut iho suggys 
tion which was being made that Mrs. Arms! rough; death could have 
been caused by arsenic taken by misadventure. ' Further, In* added, 
the facts were required to show that, the prisoner had definitely 
attempted to poison Mr. Martin, and a true bill had been found 
on that matter against Armstrong. Counsel said he had a sue 
cession of cases from 1849 onwards, in which evidence had been 
held admissible in poisoning charges that other persons besides (hose 
who had died, but who were also in (‘lose association with Urn 
accused, had suffered from similar poisoning symptoms. Annum* 
the cases quoted were lib v, Gccrintj, (1840) 18 L.J., M,(k Tib; 
E. v. Garner, (1864) F. & F. 546; !L v. Fianim<jun, lY> CoJ, m\\ 
and Makin v. Attorney-Gan ami for lY.SAV ,, (1804) A.C., 57. The 
Attorney-General said that the evidence which he would call, show 
ing that Armstrong tendered the poison to Martin with Ids own 
hand, tended to rebut the suggestion of the defence that. Mrs. 
Armstrong was poisoned by accident. 

Sir Henry Curtis Bennett submitted that- on fids occasion 
the evidence was not admissible. The eases to which (he Attorney 
General had referred were cases where the defence was either that, 
the person did not die of the particular poison, or that the death 
was the result of accident. The word “ accident ” in these eases 
had a double meaning. It might Tnoan that the person who died 
28 



Legal Argument on Evidence. 

bad himself aeei den t-al ly taken the poison, or that lit os person who 
was charged with the murder bad by accident administered poison. 
In this present oast 4 . there was no suggestion made that Mrs. Ann- 
strong did not din From the result of arsenical poisoning. It was 
pari, of li)o oaso that Mrs. Armstrong did in fact dio as a result, of 
arson in. Tbo puestion which (in*, jury would luivo to dolonnino 
was noi. whether the poison was adminislorod by (ho prisoner acci¬ 
dentally. That was no(. part of ilm defence; nor was ii, part of 
tlio doionoo (o say (hat the prisoner adminisSered (ho poison in 
any way. Tbo ease, (or (bn doionoo was (had, bo had noi hi ng what¬ 
ever In do with tbo taking of arsonio by Mrs. Armstrong. Hueh 
ovidoneo as (.bo Crown desired (o jgivo relating to (ho poisoning of 
Mr. Martin was, ho submit Ind, legally inadmissible, boeauso it, 
would projudioo or endanger the prisoner on another charge. In 
/d. v. Winflow, S Cox, 297, Baron Ma.rl in bold that snob ovidoneo 
was noi, admissible. Boeauso Mr. Martin suffered from symploms 
of arsenical poisoning on 201 h (Htober, rntih! i bad. possibly be said 
to (.brow light, on whether Mrs. Armstrong was poisoned by her 
husband in January, 1921 'l 

Mr. Justice I)Aitmm; - Is it the defence that she eommitted 
suicide '1 

Sir IL (burns Bmnnj-jtt- It, is not upon 1110 to say at this 
moment more than that the defence is that be had nothing what¬ 
ever to do with the adminislering of arsenic or any other poison 
l,o Mrs. Armstrong. 

Mr. Justice Dmiunci— If the suggestion is in Be or may be 
that she took it herself in order to commit suicide, would it, not. be 
relevant to show that, another person who displayed all the symp¬ 
toms of arsonieal poisoning, although he did not, die of it,, dis¬ 
played them because ho had taken a meal administered to him by 
the defendant, and that, the defendant; was in a position to have 
given the same poison to his wife? 

Sir IT. (bums Bennett —When the defence is f< 1 didn’t do 
the thing. I didn't administer the poison. I agree, that my wife 
died from arsenical poisoning, but, 1 never bad anything whatever 
to do wit,h the administration of it,” surely it is going a very long 
way to say that ho murdered his wife because nine months or nine 
years later some other person showed symptoms of poisoning after 
Slaving had a meal with Armstrong. 

At, a later stage Sir H. (hud is Bennett intimated that it, was 
no part, oMhe defence to suggest, that Mrs. Armstrong took arsenic 
in mistake for something else. 

Mr. Justice 1 >aiuu no said that,, in his opinion, the authori¬ 
ties cited showed that tho evidence which the Attorney-Ceneral pro™ 
posed t,o eall was admissible. Ih 4 did not, think it necessary to 
give any detailed grounds for his decision, If he was wrong there 
was the Court of Appeal, which mould sot him right. 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Opening Statement for the Prosecution Resumed. 

The jury were then recalled, and the Attoknhymnmuai* con • 
tinned his opening statement* Dealing ih’st wiili cve.nls hi 
J anuary and February, 1921, he said that on l lib January Ann 
strong bought a quarter of a pound of arsenic a very early dale 
in the year for taking steps to make weedkiller. On VJnu 
January Mrs. Armstrong came homo, and Nurse Kinsey, a dmlnel 
nurse, was called in. She advised that a mental nurse HhouhMx- 
engaged. Nurse Allen was summoned from Canlih, and was in¬ 
stalled on 27th January. Mrs. Armstrong’s general health was at 
first good. .Then, however, feelings of nausea sot in, a,ml on D 
February she complained to Dr. llineks. Ilo lournl the Ijiyh 
steppage 77 gait which was one of the symptoms ot arsmiical poison 
ing. On Sunday, 13th February, she skirled vomiting; badly, 
and had to take to her bod. From Wednesday, IMl^ hohruary. 
Dr. Jlincks came daily until her death. Afler I he Huh she wan 
unable to take any solid food; and from tlio ISlh she lost com 
pletely the use of her limbs, and was unable to get <*ut oi l»ed. On 
16th or 17th February Armstrong asked Dr. lliiirkr^it hu; wih* 
might take some homoeopathic remedies which she ianmed and had 
long been in the habit of taking. For the most part smh modi 
cines were entirely innocuous, although they might not do much 
good. The doctor was cautious, and asked for (wo hollies (.,», 
examine. He found they were quite harmless, and then said 
there would be no harm in Mrs. Armstrong taking them. A ft ot¬ 
her death over fifty empty bottles wore found, and two of thorn 
contained some form of preparation of arsenic, but the amount- 
was so trifling that it would require in one ease lifioeu and in 
another thirty bottles to make anything like a serious dost*. Mr;;. 
Armstrong died about ten, o’clock on the morning of 22nd 
February. Armstrong was telephoned to at Ins oilier, and he re 
turned home at lunch time. Counsel asked who could possibly 
have administered the poison which produced symptoms of 
arsenical poisoning in Mrs. Armstrong from 15th to 22nd August, 
before she went to the private asylum. Miss Fearer was away on 
holiday. One person, and one person alone, was at- Mayfield both 
in August and again in February, and that person was Urn 
prisoner. It was he who made ibe purchases of arsenic in August, 
1920, and again in January, 1921. After his wife’s death Arm 
strong paid a visit to Italy, and while away kept a diary, in which 
one of the entries made by hi* *. obviously indicated that "A rmstrong 
was going to ask the lady he (counsel) had referred to earlier in (he 
day to become his wife, though he did not do ho actually until 
Whitsuntide, which was in the middle of May. 

The Attorney-General then proceeded to deal with Armstrong’s 
relations with Mr. Martin, his fqjlow-soliejtor in llav. He spoke 
of the aloofness which had marked their personal relation* until 
■ 30 ■ ■ 




Opening Statement for Prosecution. 

it became Martin’s duty In press Armstrong for the completion of 
a nalo tor which ho hold large sums of dt^posiI, money as solicitor 
tor Uio vendor. Then Anudning became apparently anxious to 
get on friendly terms with Martin. Ah soIie.il.or for the pur¬ 
chaser, Martin was pressing for completion or for the return of 
the deposit money. There was an interview on 20th October 
winch ended somewhat, unsat isfaetorily, and Mr. Mart,in wrote 
Armstrong giving not,ice of the reeisiou of the contract and de¬ 
manding the repayment of the deposits, with costs and expenses. 
The next afternoon Armstrong invited Mart in io come to tea, and 
ho continued doing so from day to day until Mart.in actually went 
to Armstrong's house on 2t>lh October. Mart,in had asked Arm¬ 
strong to ride up in his motor ear, hut Armstrong declined, and 
was at, home when Maid,in arrived just, after live o’clock. At, the 
tea table a cur hum thing happened. Martin was Kitting with his 
back to the window, and it, was growing dusk. Armstrong sud¬ 
denly took up a buttered scone and said, “ Kxcuse my fingers,’ 7 
and put it, down on Mart in’s plate. Mart in unsuspectingly ate 
it,. On returning home he began to he ill, and was ill for several 
days with symptoms which, by TOth October, made Dr. Hineks 
so uneasy that he had analysis made and a definite trace of arsonie 
was found. When Mart,in got, better lie nut, Armstrong, who said 
to him, (t It may seem a curious thing to say, but, you will have 
another attack of the same kind ,’* and ho asked him again to tea, 
and renewed the invitation not once, but a dojson or a score of 
times. These invitations were not accepted. The matter of the 
sale was not cleared up, and the money was not returned; but (he 
invitations continued to ho given by Armstrong, and on 28th 
December lie asked both Mr. and Mrs. Martin to dinner. That, 
invitation was also not accepted. Inquiries had been going on 
over since Martin s. illness, ami on dlst December Chief 
Inspector Crete,heft visit,ed Armstrong in his office at Hay and 
took from him a statement, in which lie gave his own version of 
what happened at, the tea and as to the delayed completion of the 
sales; also of his inquiries about, Mart,in’s illness and his offer io 
( *°. Martin’s work during bis absence. The statement also do- 
tailed. Armstrong’s dabbling in the preparation of weed-killer from 
arson io, which he admitted he purchased. Ho specifically denied 
having, poisoned Mart,in on 2(>th October. On his arrest, which 
innnedialely followed, documents wore found on him, and among 
them was a packet containing a white powder, which turned out to 
he arsenic.* I his packet Armstrong had attain plod to abstract front 
among the letters he was giving up. Counsel also mentioned that 
Armstrong had asked Dr. Hiucks in November, 1921, what would 
1)0 a fatal dose of arsenic, and on being told 2 grains, said, u Oh, 
1 thought 1 would he enough.” These facts excluded the possi¬ 
bility of accident,. It, was saithat such evidence was only cir¬ 
cumstantial, but, direct evidence in a poisoning trial was prac- 

:*i 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

tically impossible. In a crime so sinister ami subtle the value <>( 
circumstantial evidence was that it did not depend on (ho verachy 
of witnesses, but each separate part of it lit led together like (he 
parts of a puzzle and pointed to one conclusion, namely, (halmt 
was the prisoner who killed his wite, who had (he moans, I he 
opportunity in August, and again in February, and win* hud Hie 
motive to administer poison to 'Mrs. Armstrong. You wi11 find 
the means with the prisoner (Sir Ernest eoneluded). You will hml 
the opportunity with the one person who was at- May held bm h in 
August and February. You will find tlie motive in (ho will 
which I have described to you. These quest ions that a.rise will be 
answered by the evidence, and I shall .invite you to come to the 
conclusion upon the evidence that the prisoner is guilty of the 
charge, and, if he is guilty, your sympathy for the living must not 
cause you to forget justice for the dead, or (hat the interests ot 
society require you to do your duty fearlessly and laithtully, as l 
know you will. 


The Court adjourned. 



Second Day—Tuesday, 4th April, 1922. 
Evidence for the Prosecution. 


Ida Bkhhik Drimwd, examined by Mr. Mimc mmivvAt'iv*-! am a 
aistor of dm lain Mrs. Armstrong, I am single, and 1 reside at 
,Rosary View, Tonpiay. My si si or was a woman of good 
business capacify. 1 saw her in 1919 al. Bath ; she was in fairly 
good health (.hen, bub she. was suffering from neuritis, which affected 
her in her hands; she complained of pins and needles. | did not 
see my sister again unl.il August., 1920. On Saturday, 21st 
August., 1920, ! received a. telegram from Major Armstrong* and 
in consequent',e f went to May hold, arriving about- five o'clock. My 
sister seemed bright and pleased to see me., and then she got into 
a very nervous a.nd highly strung eondition, and seemed to got 
worse while I was there. The next, day she had break fast in Inal, 
and I was with her nearly all tin’s morning after. She, was sink 
during (.he morning. Dr. flineks ranie on the Saturday evening, 
and again on the Sunday morning, the 22ml, with Dr. Jayne. They 
had a consultation together about my sister. As the* result of 
that consultation it was decided that- she should he sent to Barn- 
wood. My sister was sick again that, morning, and vomited during 
the morning. She was also sie!i on the way t.o Barn wood. 1 drove 
with her to Barmvood, and came baek t.o May hold ami stayed a 
day or two. That was the last* lime I saw my sister alive. Sho 
made a will shortly before her death and handed it to me. Kxhibit 
16 is the document I refer to. It. is in her handwriting, except 
the signatures, and it is dated 17th January, 1917. My sister 
wrote out that will two or three times in draft;. Sho also had a 
small sheet of paper on which she made an epitome of the will, which 
site kept, ^ I saw that epitome when T was at Mayfield the day 
after my sister was buried. 

By Mr, Juhtkiu Dartunu—T he epitome Is in my sister*® own 
handwriting. I think the document was headed t( Copy of my 
Will ** or My Will.” There was something cm the outside. It 
was blue paper,. T saw it, in what my sister always called her 
private drawer in her bedroom. It was (.he only piece of paper 
there. I was told she had destroyed everything else. 

Ilmmhjati.oH amthmctl -I looked at*the will and road It. 1 
think I showed it t.o Mr. Chevalier, who was one of the executors. 
Miss Pearce was (hero at. the time I showed it t.o Mr. Oh oval ier. 
My sister handed the original will to me to keep, and it roniftBmd in 
my possession unl.il the arrest of Major Armstrong. 

By Mr. Jin-mew l)AM/iNn—-The will which was handed to me 
Is tho one produced here to-day. * 
a 


n 




Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Ida Bessie Friend 

Examination continued —I think it mm llio day my nHi\r 
signed it she handed it to mo. She gavo il l,o mo to keep for i u -V 
She never wrote asking for it bank. 

Cross-examined by Sir II. Cuhtjh Khnnktt - My sislor w „« 
a strong woman; for many years she had boon a maYlyr |«, ' 

tion, and was highly strung. She worried a great deal „l„,u| 
matters, and blamed herself if anything wont wronr. She vvis . 
great believer in homoeopathic; medicines. I know lilal. “ tt 

itraa »>o eV> a, Totrcii ti in I*l» 1 « r. l> C t .. £ i,,» I„.: _. * 11 /• * *. , 


or- ninny 
al niHit 


id parlly for iier 


A ml row 
prnnirod 


by lit* 


years she was in the habit of taking pills for indig 
after dinner. They were partly for indigestion and 

general health. 

By Mr. Justice Darling— What were thoyi |), 

Clark’s dinner pills, I believe they were. She 'always 
them from the doctor. J 

Did you take them too?—Yes, and all the family 
. Cross-examination continue r/—They were, made' up „ v nl>llr 
cfe Co., of Bristol. So far as I know, Major and Mrs. Armstroim 
were on very affectionate terms throughout the whole of iheir 
married life. During the war Major Armstrong was servin', , 
the Army, and my sister part of the time; was'iivi,,^ at Tob, 
mouth. She came in 19115 and stayed unl.il I!)18 I ... j." 
frequency while she was at Teigmnnuth. She was very worrio J 

when at Teignmonth. The first will which has be..reduced 

exhibit 16 was made m January, 19:17. That was while M„j (lr 

Armstrong was away serving. It was given ini,, my ( . hal . U ' J 

was open and the contents of it were always upon for m./'jo 
at. That will remained m my possosNion until I handed it b. l|,, 

prosecution. The epitome T referred tn did nut go mb. ||., . fj 
of the will, but it gave the sums left to different people. * 

not a draft or copy of the will. When I was called i„ ‘ e 

°n the 21rt Angus*, 1920, Major *,,,,,1.,.,!,I !f j’ 
and we went out by train to Tlay. When I g„|, al lb, ,7 V i 
that Mr. Chevalier was there already. Mr Chevalier W im , T 
an executor of that first will, but ho'was a very obi h-iond of MnS 
and Mrs. Armstrong and the children. Mv sisler al li,,, ' J , 

m«l« her appetite scorned to 1„ ,m,ol, 1,1... • 

next morning she had breakfast in bod and afler i , ■/ 

I at that time firmly believed that she wan Ruffe, dn'" f, 
tion, and that the egg had upsot her. Major Ammlrnm" mm buTv 
that morning making arrangements for w a, , M ,lN '" N - v 
the hector and eo ,J My T‘ m '’ 

came, and she was examined by both doctors. ' * a - v ’ uv 

There was no doubt at all, wrr thorn ’that «„ n,..i 1 
thought it right she should go for a time Ye if - ' ■ ' 1 '’ ny .V'” 1 

—I knew something must be done and that ,,r,VAl:< ' asylum? 
that was made. She was very melancholv •, W<lfl 1 H,1 ffgoHlior> 

T* * tal 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

0 11 . , W* Beanie Friend 

form «»>*lII^TcK»«i»a l, ww Il limt afc l )'T 1 k T? U ® iBtonsi,i «‘ l - The 
liol. to havo «io,u> 1( V f‘° ?,'• (1<mo , tlun « 8 which she ought 
<lono. J wmtl, w jlh i, . ' '! ,<1,l,le '''"ngs wllu;h sho ought to have 

Hindu, JZmnl 1 !' '"m • U '"T’ <h1 : Ma j‘ ir An, strong ami Dr. 
lie got leave duriiio- Hu'"wnr W*- A ."" M, ' ro,, « vlHll ' 0 d his wife when 
why tho visits won?,. i 'V 101 ’ >ul; K ' Ui was always wondering 
at Maylield I August, 1920, when I was 

eneo. ‘ ] reoolleci 'si'kV.Vi-?" U «J 11 - lll( ! r ° wa,K a| mthor will in exist- 
saying Urnl s o’hi. I i °r M *i J01 '- An " H|,r,m S about her will and 
tlmt is ail .ti,, , ;’ 11(0,1 ; iI,0n "« h V, wilL Ho « aid - “ Yes, 

what Major Armih-,!, 1,lH ' uado another. I was satisliod from 
another will. ' ' ^ ,old 1,10 lll(n ' i,ial; «ho had in fact made 

madif' in'j'ainiary'*' 1 <)?7 T/' 1 ” 11, T W)TO , l' ORKCwi<>n <>f a will 
will ?~Yos. ^ )ll( ’ y° u thoro whh a Kuksoqutmt 

altor!ng°h(>r 1 wj'lf 'w /" 0 A ' m) » N, ' iY ; (! "^"i'tAi,- She had talked of 
alter n 7 y will!'- S l! T TV", ^all, “ I f- 1 ,iTik 1 shall 

for my imshaml ” Vociof 11 ’l * ° "l’ 1 '. * have left enough 

coming to her ’ Mlie, T * U ) WW a ' 1 . l 1 1(,1, ’ al ' 1 "« Ul ° m,1,u ‘r Hint was 
the terms of the ! , ' l<1 n< ’ ,; <«" *"« HnyllOn^ about 

My sister had not Mtm m' 0T J 10 1,0 ' ’! 11 ’ H . lu ' l,a<1 ,l,loU " !r will, 

in her will bolween ii ?• " n ' 1 ' a ^ ani about making an alteration' 
Hold in Amrust i< V' 0 ,' 1,1,110 a,; Bat I» and the time 1 visiled May- 

think, ahm,"; thelni ? 1 / 1 '-,; S,1 °, wroU ’ f r,° Tn , B3l . rnwoo<1 abon,; i(; - * 

" °* Itoooinbor or tlio bo^innini* of January. 

CrMNHiur,—I A reside rttrDn ., lb,Ton ™' examined by tho Attohney- 
No. 1C) _ The Men!"i tom . u ' y . V,ow \ J orijnay. (Shown exhibit 
in my handwritim? a "t' 0 'i th n(. will, daled January, 1<)I7, is 
tho dining-room and M "} v '," UNS , l lat Wl11 nt Tll « Knoll, in 
Miss Farley is i.iio o(l u >r a1 ,' -° y an ! MrPL A rmstrong were present. 

wlm asked me I,, witness h ^wili^ 't"‘‘T, !*' . wa * Mrfi - Armstrong 
ImmKvriUn^. ' 0 w * ^ 10 W1 ^ 1H 171 Mrs. Arnmirong's 

lived wil,h < Mai l ( l .r°Av ,,y m n ' U ' CmT ™ JHinnhtt— -Romo years ago I 
1 have semi tli'im fmmn. W am, . Mrs - Armstrong for six months. 

Hft Y *% — a ** ' * wM 

rw.id« h rf S 2r°cLnI A ^' 0ffl I m ’ !, y Mr. Mioki.bthwatt—I 

Hereford Probate ReVshw’ 1°'° ' 1 ft ’’> <'hief dark at tho 

ports to he the will of J' ** ,>r<l ' 1noe a document which pur- 

Probato was <r,.«„n i Armstrong, dated 8th July, 1920. 

the estate was"sworn ^aM?m''{«. May ’, ff 2L The Value of 

3s. Probate was e , mT'l ' u ^ ’ an<1 ,he net arao «”t was £2278 
b anted to the acensod, Major Armstrong. 

35 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Inez Elsie Rosser 

Inez Elsie Rosser, examined by Mr. Miokeetk wait- • 1 am a 
spinster, and I reside at 8 Rear Street, Hay. I was a house 
maid at Mayfield. I went there towards the end of December,, 
1920, and I remained until June, 1921. 1 remember when Mrs. 

Armstrong came home in January, 1921. When she. eamo home 
she had delusions, seemed very strange in her manner, and she 
thought she heard me about very often when l was not. about, 
when I was in bed. Miss Pearce and I did (he rooking between 
us. 1 remember when Mrs. Armstrong was so ill (hat she had to go 
to bed. Before that she* generally had her meals in the dining 
room. . Afterwards, of course, she had her meals upstairs In her 
bedroom. It was Nurse Allen who took her meals up lo her, I 

was up in Mrs. Armstrong’s room every day at Unit (imo. I 

went to clean up in the morning. During I lie last, morning or 
two before she died I sat in her room while I he nurse was down 
stairs. 

Cross-examined by Sir JL Curt. its Bennett- After she went to 
bed the meals were prepared by Miss Pearce, with my help, and 
they were taken up to her by Nurse Allen. Mrs. Armstrong never 
ate dinner while she was in bed. Nurse Allen also cooked food for 
her while she was in bed. It was on the occasions when the nurse 
went downstairs that she called me up to bo there while she was 
out of the room. While Mrs. Armstrong had delusions I remember 
her saying that she heard a man walking about, the house. 

Emily Ellen Pearce, examined by Mr. Vauueee Up to the 
time of the death of Mrs. Armstrong F had been in the service 
of the Armstrongs as housekeeper for nearly ton years. After Mrs, 
Armstrong’s death I continued in the service of Mr. Armstrong, 
and I remained in his service right up to the (hue of his arrest! 
After that I continued to look after (ho children, ami I am with 
the children now. I remember that in August,, 1920, Mrs. Arm¬ 
strong was taken to Rarnwood. I was on holiday at the lime, and 
came back about the 1st of September. T did not. sen Mrs. Arm 
Strong again until she came back from 'Rarnwood in the follow 
ing January. When I left to go on holiday Mrs. Armstrong wan 
not very strong; she never was strong. The maidservant in the 
employment of the Armstrongs when T left was Lily Candy, now 
known as Lily Evans. She came into their service* some time in 
the spring. I remember signing a document, but. I do not 
remember whether Lily Candy was in the room «fi the same time 
or not, but I remember that she was going to sign it. r I do ru»t 
remember signing more than one document. ! cannot remember 
when I signed it. Both Major and Mrs. Armstrong were present 
■when I signed that, document. I was not told what tho nature 
of the document was. (Shown will dated 8t.li July, 1020)—That 
is my signature. I was back again at Mayfield when Mrs Arm¬ 
strong returned from Barnwood oif the 22nd January, 102l' She 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Emily Ellen Pearce 

seemed l,<> ho very weak, and only able | l() WJl lk about, a ]it(,|o. 
She sometimes assisted herself in walking with a stick. Somo days 

(sldTir'?! l '°l K> M!ller l . hun t oliK,, ' M - Nurse Allen arrived from 
If I .1 \i . m S, Yi’T :U , ,U l ( WlUl MrH - Armstrong down |,bo t.imo 
■' ' : /!’ l,rHt ' Mr«. Armstrong kook [,or meals with (,ho 

Ian ly in ho ..mint; room, when she was well enough. I did most, 

° l 1,1,0 .'"'f : 1 Mi ' n - Armstrong's health ehangod for I ho 

Z- f,;;: ; "I 0 1 l ! ,1 ‘ «!»• was out, in the garden Unit 

day I helped to keep her warm; she had 1ml, water bottles and 
an eiderdown .Shortly after that, she became very ill. Shu 
U <.„ K h she had I,alum cold. Ur. Hindis was called he Mrs. Arm’ 
iSiton^ took j,o her bn<! Nommvlmro about I.lio Ibfh hV.bruary . about. 

a coujdo ot days aft,or she had been sit lino in the garden.and 

all,or I,hat, 1 do not; romomber sending any solid food up to her I 
l.hink she had only broad and bid,tor during that lime. 

i.i. | | I »ioan by her not. having solid food 

a, she had only mdk |„od. She had over so many kinds of 
tunics, but .slit 1 ; dnl not oat wry much, 

Sho hn«l K a { r„ lapioca, Rem-or’s, and 
oUier thmgs-~"what, mighl be called invalid’s food. I used lo m-e 
pare some ol f.hnl and (he nurse prepare,! the real. The nurse 
gonot ally carried I,he lood up to the room. At. that lime there 
were no oilier mouthers of I,lie household (leaving out. the children) 
except, my so I and Inez Rosser staying in the house. VVe remained 
the only occupants of fhc house down In the dale of her death 1 
do not, remember seeing Mrs. Armstrong downstairs after she took 

AUei the l(,lh or I7ih February the doctor came to see her every 

Mav(ield 1r ’ ,U ' Ha '’' iK! ' l "" 1, a tnilo from 

fine eon Mrx - A last, illness he came home to 

luncheon almost every day. On TlmrsdnyH, whirl, was market, 

! ' y ; t! * n|ll(llj,ll « hiok Ins lunch in the oflice. I always thomdit, 
that, Major Armstrong was on a (Teel innate terms with his^vile 'lie 
sometimes sat. m his wile’s room alone with her I sal. in her'room 
while the nurse went to get, her meals and a hrealh „f fresh air 
un'T "i? m M /-‘ Annsfrong there wl.en I wenl to relieve he 

m™ .. . u . . . .^ ... 

, .wT'Sy l, will. !«>.• 

I only saw Mr. Martin for the first time vesl.er.bnr i i... i 
seen him «*n the road before that, but I did not know who he w-m 

Ml'li (M '“a "'"l 1 Mr - y.” 1 »l Mh.vIM.1 

1 . 1 

37 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Emily Ellen Pearce 


them. 1 am not positive whether they were buttered or not, but 
I do not think they were. Major Armstrong; was homo some lime 
before the appointed hour for tea. Ho was in the garden superin¬ 
tending something. 1 do not remember how long ho was homo 
before the time for tea; 1 do not remember him arriving from the 
office that afternoon. I cannot remember seeing him before iho 
gentleman came in to tea. The scones and oilier things wore on a 
three-tier cake basket in the drawing-room. They wore sianding 
ready before the gentlemen came in to their lea. There was no 
one in the room when they were put there. Having put (hem in 
the room, I went and had my tea wilh lhe children. 

By Mr. Justice Darling —After I heard Mr. Martin and Major 
Armstrong come in 1 told the maid to make, (ho lea. She put’in 
the tea and took in the teapot, and that is all i. know about it. The 
maid’s name was Mrs. Price. 

Examination continued —-I must have had my tea wilh (ho 
little girl in the dining-room that aflernoon. As a rule I had my 
tea with Major Armstrong, but on (his occasion I did not have H 
with him, because when he had tea in the drawing room I did not 
take the little girl in. I knew that Major Armstrong always hud 
weed-killer in his possession, both before and after (he war. 

Have you known any weed-killer used since Mr. Arms!rung 
came back from the war?—I think so, hut 1 could not be positive. 
I think Major Armstrong only used the weed kilim' when flu*, 
gardener came to help him. 

■ ^ r * Justice Darling —I do not know whether he used it 

by himself when the gardener was not there. 

Examination continued -—-Wo used to dig up (ho weeds in (ho 
paths ourselves pretty often, and a jobbing gardener mimed 
MacGeorge also used to dig them up. 

Do you remember last"year whether in January Major Arm 
strong was doing anything to the paths wilh weed killer? I do 
not know; I think lie was going to, but I forget whether anythin*** 
was done or not. 


Why do.you say _ you think ho was going to'/ Horanse wo 
talked about it many times; 1 was going to dig up some more weeds 
and he said, “ We will put some weed-killer down.” 

By Mr. Justice Datuuno — I do not; remember when tint,I wan. 
x&TTim&tion contwuGci —I used to help in tlm garden. 

Was there any weed-killer used last year ?-d ihfnfc there m „«t 
have been. 

But -was there?—I cannot remember. M action ran wan the 
gardener who was called in to cut the bodges round and trim ur> 
generally. 1 


Cross-examined by Sir IT. Cuivris Bknnktt- 1 always used to 
_ave my meals with the family unless it was drawing room loa. 
1 sometimes had my meals in thff drawing-room with llm family 
when the children were not there. There was nothing ox tra 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Emily Ellen Pearce 

ordinary about my not going in when Mr. Martin was there. 
That luis happened many times before. 1 do not remember Major 
A nusl rong coming back be fore (tat on the afternoon Mr. Martin 
was (here. I knew ho was in (he garden, hut I do not know what 
time he came bark. The first tiling 1 know about him coming 
baek was when S heard ho was in (he garden. 1 believe there were 
two mi'ii working in the garden that afternoon, and that Major 
Armstrong went (o see (hem about (be work (bat they were doing 
when he eame bark ; and I believe it was while he was still in the 
garden that Mr. Marlin arid veil. 

By Mr .In stick; Paulino . I did not see Mr. Mar (.in arrive, 

hut I was (old he had eome. I believe be went into the garden 
to see the major. 

Orotta-ruuun hut thru r.onl hvued— T take it 1 hoy went for tea then, 
but I did not see (hem. I sent Mrs. Price in with the teapot. 
The rest of (hr (hitigs were in before. 1 am not certain whether 
the scones had been bought, or wind bet* (hoy were made by mo at 
homo. It was the usual custom when Major Armstrong was going 
to have friends to tea in (he drawing-room to put the cakes and 
bread and bid ter in the drawing-room beforehand. 

About (ho question as to whether (hose si'.ones were buttered 
or not, as I understand it, if you out. (ho so,ones, whichever way 
you cut (hem to butter (hem, you would not put (hem together 
again f ? ■ No. 

So if the s<‘.one was together it was not buttered, at any rate, 
in the kitehen No, I should not think it. was buttered in the 
kitchen. There was no butler in the drawing-room m far as I 
know. The butter was kept in the larder. 

.By Mr. deism on Daumno—I do not remember whether the 
seones were buttered in 1 ho kitchen or not. If they wore not 
buttered in the kitchen, and (here was no butter in the drawing¬ 
room, anybody who ale a scone would have to cat it dry. That 
was the way they were usually eaten. 

bVo.s\swv/:<7 fit ma f.i on r on I v v/ u e<J —T <) get to the larder anybody 
would have to go through the kitchen, T did not see Major Arm¬ 
strong in (ho kitchen that: afternoon. I do not remember being 
in (ho kitchen after Major Armstrong came back. I cannot 
remember who (her Mrs. Pi* ice was in the kitchen during the after¬ 
noon or not. She might, have been. At any rate, I did not see 
Major Armstrong in (he kitchen that day. I have been with 
Major and Mrs. Armslrotig about ton years, and during the whole 
ol that time 1 (houghi, they were always on most affectionate terms. 

. y° u luul of opportunity of judging, and that Is the 

opinion you formed ?—You see the Major was away a long time 
at the war. 

Alter ho came baek in 1010, and before he went, they appeared 
to be on most affectionate terms 1 ?—Yes. Mrs. Armstrong was not 
at all a strong lady. I boliovh she suffered from indigestion for 

$9 





Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Emily Ellen Pearce 

years. I was at Teignmouth with her. While she was at Teigu 
mouth she complained of rheumatism in the hands and Iukvh. 
She sometimes complained that she was losing the power of her 
hands to play the piano. It came on occasionally. Sound inics 
she could play beautifully, and at; times slab could not. She was 
a fine musician. It upset her very much when she could not play. 
I remember coming back to Mayfield from Teignmouth about (ho 
end of 1918, just before Christmas. Just a Hot' wo canto back 
from Teignmouth the children had whooping-cough, and 1 was ill, 
and Mrs, Armstrong had to do extra work, and she complained of 
pains in her hands and knees. That would bo in the spring*;. I 
was away on holiday in August when Mrs, Armstrong wont to 
Barn wood. I remember her coming hack on the 22nd January. 
When she came back from Barnwood she was very much depressed ; 
she was imagining things were happening in the house. 1 believe 
on one occasion she came down in the middle of fbe night to try 
and find people in the house. 

By Mr. Justice Dueling —Mr. Armstrong was at (tome then. 

Cross-examination continued —On otic occasion Mrs. Arm¬ 
strong complained that there was somebody behind (he piano. 
That was a delusion. She was quite right on many things. That 
was the condition in which she came back from Barnwood. When 
she came back from Barnwood she was still complaining about her 
hands and feet. She had been away from 22nd August uni i 1 22ud 
January. She continued in the same condition of healih unlU 
the 16th February. Some days she was able to got up and other 
days she was not. I remember the kith February quite (listinelly. 
On that day Mrs. Armstrong was well enough to be out, in tin 
garden sitting on a chair. She was just outside tin*, porch. 

By Mr Justice Bab,ling —She was wrapped up in an eider 
down, and had hot-water bottles at her foot. 

Cross-examination continued—\1 p to the 16th February aim 
had not taken to her bed altogether. ' On the Kith February she 
became worse. She thought she had taken a oh ill in tlm garden, 

I do not remember whether it was on (lie 16th or 17th February 
that she went to bed and stayed in bed until hor death. |>uring 
the Mine from the 22nd January, when Mrs. Armstrong came back’ 
until her death I prepared most of (lie food, because"I thought, I 
could do it better; she was not so used to the nurse. While she 
was well, taking ordinary food with the family, j prepared (ho 
food. She then had the same as we had. 1 prepared the food 
with the help of Miss Rosser. After she went upstairs, j, prepared 
the food and Nurse Allen took it up to her, as far as 1 nan re 
member. No one else except Nurse Allen, Miss Rosser, and myself 
had anything to do with the preparation of hor food, so far as 1 
know. I sometimes went up and sat with Mrs. Armstrong while 
the nurse went out. (Shown exhibit No. 17, a will)—! signed that 
document m the drawing-room. * As far as I remember, both 

40 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Emily Ellen 

Major and Mrs. Armstrong wore present on that occasion. ^ do 
not; romombor whether I act ua,!ly saw Mrs. A rnmtrong sign tbnt 
(lucumonL in my presence, but. I think 1 war, in Ihe drawing room 
and she asked mo to sign ii , and she pul- her baud on the paper 
while I was doing iL She sa big* Pul, i t there/’ A ftnr I had 
signed ii; Mrs, Armstrong raid, M There' is Idly; hIio will sign b. M 
i do not remember windhor Lily rame into I hr mom while 1 was 
there or not. Major Armstrong wan id way a sn Ha* habit, of coming 
back t,o lumb except on Tim rxdn vs No difference wan made <iu riTifiT 
Mrs. Arms! rung's hmt. illness. The reason why In' did not conic bank 
sometimes on Thursdays war llmI it wan market day. 1 remember 
a (hiy or ,xo after Mno Armstrong rnmi 1 , bark her being up in (.bo 
attic. When who came (town from t hr a 1 t in nhr asked me whether 
if any one threw (hem, selves, out of tho w imhtw (law would break 
their hark. 

Did she, a fit a- coming bark from Bamwond, say anything 
aland, a window there? Sim na id aim tried to gel out, of the 
window, but It wan Cantoned, A dor wr eii mr back from boi ng 
away at Teignmouth yam emtbl nui mil tho path from the lawn; 
tho place wan all covered with word,: Prior to tin' war Major 

Armstrong and, I very often spent our time ueedum the garden. 
I remember on one nreanimt before iho war helpum Major Arm 
strong to make weed killer. I hrlpod to bod the* Wider, anyhow. 
I do not know what tho ingredient:; wore, f anw the weed kilim* 
in a watering (am after it worn made, f remember the children 
being particularly fold not, to touch it. I oaumd. remember 
Major Anostrong in IllUk the year after be eitnie bark, dmeusmtig 
the weeds and getting weed killer. Aider we came back from 
Toignmouth and there* were no many wee da I remember Major 
Armstrong saying he wotdd have to *get mtm weedkiller, lie 
said so two or three times, bid, I eonld nut say when, 1 remember 
a petrol tin being used on one omisdon for making t he weed * 
killer. The- petrol tin was used Imeiume the watering nan wan not 
big enough to contain all that we ladled for the garden. I do 
not romombor exactly when that, warn hid, I ran remember seeing tho 
can. 1 do not remember Major Armstrong having any particular 
instrument through which ho used to put unmet lung to get rid of 
plantain. Any lit, tie powders or anything like that that had to do 
with the garden were kepi in a cupboard In tlm library. 

By Mr. Jiwtwm Daiimno 1 have seen rid, poison there, for 
one thing. I bought, it myself. 

Oros% c;mnii not ion rnritun /eg t have akm seen powder for 
poll siting up silver plate kepi in ifior*\ I do nut remember seeing 
anything else, f was not in the habit of going to find- enplxaird. 

Ko-oxamined by the Attohnuv Bunkum. I did not know it wtu* 
a will I was signing when I si-nod the paper in July, 1920. 1 

believe I was asked to sign document a before then, but 1 have not 
boon asked to sign any others biddy, It wan only this morning 

4! 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Emily Ellen Pearce 

that I remembered about Mr. and Mrs. Armstrong both being in 
the room when I was asked to sign the will. I only remembered 
about Mrs. Armstrong putting her hand upon the will and saying 
Lily would sign it this morning. 

I want to turn to something else. You told Sir Henry that 
Mrs. Armstrong a few days after she came homo wont, up the 
attic and then said something about if any one throw themselves 
out of the window they would break their back. I have got. your 
statement of the 3rd February, and you say this, “ Mrs. Amu 
strong never expressed any desire to (lie I never heard it-. 

She was a good-living woman p,( i— Very. 

u And appeared to have no fear of death ; I do not think 

that she realised that she was so ill as she was ”1.Well, l did 

not think so. 

So that you did not attach any importance to what, she said : 
if any one threw themselves out of the window they would break 
their back?—I knew she had delusions, and I mentioned it, to 
Major Armstrong, and he said, Wo must get another nurse.” 
Up to the time we went on holiday in July, 1920, and during the 
time we were away, Mrs. Armstrong played (he piano from time 
to time. Sometimes she could, not, play because her hands were 
not very strong, and she used to feel she could not, play properly. 
She complained of neuritis. She a,Iso complained of rheumatism 
in her hands and knees between 1915 and 19 IS. I think she 
always had a little of it as long as I have known her. She some* 
times complained of it in her face too ; she used to (‘all it ” tie,” 
I do not remember any particular occasion after wo got, back to 
Mayfield on which she complained of rheumatism. I think it 
was the right arm she complained of most., but 1 am not. sure. 
She would say, “I have it in my hand again,” or something 
like that. It was nothing to lie up for, only she rawer was 
strong, and always had some pain somewhere. 'When Mrs. Arm¬ 
strong cam© back from Barnwood Asylum she complained of her 
legs very much, but I do not remember exactly what she said. 
She had them massaged. She said she felt, a weight attached to 
her feet. I did not see Mrs. Armstrong before she went to Barn 
wood, and I cannot say whether she complained more about, her 
feet when she came back than before she went away. Before l 
went on holiday in 1919 Mrs. Armstrong was pretty much in lmr 
ordinary health. When she came back from tbo asylum she was 
much worse. 

[A-t this stag© a letter was read by the Attornoydkmcwal, from 
which it appeared that the solicitor'for Mr. Armstrong cm 17th 
January objected to any further statement being taken from 
the witness except in the presence of himself or his reprawmtafive, 
. The witness said she thought that since that date she had not 
given any statement to the polictbl 
:■ 42 ■: . 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Emily Ellen fmtm 

Further cross-examined by Sir Henry (Hums Bennett .My 

it iter view with the police on 31st December would 1 jiwt about throe 
hours. Two detectives and sometimes two a.nd, sometimes one 
constable were present. 1 had another interview on 2nd January, 
and I first gave evidence at the police court, on. 11th January. 
Later 1 made another long statement to the police on 3rd February 
at the police station. Only Mr. Crutehctt was present. The 
interview was a, long one, and many questions were put io me. 
On 9th February 1 was again questioned, just, he tore the Police 
Court, proceedings, during which I was sixain railed. One evening 
sit Hereford I was asked some more questions, and later Superin¬ 
tendent Weaver came to May held and asked me a number of things. 
No represent at ivo of Mr. Matthew’s was present, at any of these 
interviews subsequent to 17th J ami ary. 

Lily Kvans, examined by the Attorney 0 kni-hiao I reside 
at, 135 Kow Hoad, Richmond, in Surrey, and 1 am the wife of 
William Henry Kvans. My maiden name was Lily Candy. 1 
•was a domestic servant at; Mayheld in 1920. I w(mt, t here on 
the 15lh March, 1920, and 1 remained for nine mouths, mild 
I5(b December, 1920, wlum f left to get married, (Shown exhibit, 

No. 17, the will of 8th July, 1920) “It was Mr. Arms! roup' who 

asked mo to pul my signature to I hat, doeimuml. 1 was in his study 
when ho asked me. There was no one else present. Mr. A run 
strong did not tell mo what, the document was, and 1 did not, 
examine it in any way myself. He told mo where to sign it. I 
did not see any other signatures on the document wlum I signed 

it. During t,ho nine months 1 was in service at Mayheld l did 

not sign any oilier documents for Mr. Armstrong, I saw Mrs, 
Armstrong on the day she was taken away to (he asylum at, the 
front door before she pot, into the mot,or. 

Cross-examined by Sir II. 0turns Bennett I am quite sure 
I did not, sign any other documents whilst 1 was in the employ 
of Major Armstrong. (Shown document; No. 43) The signal ure 
at the top of that document, is my signature. Major Armstrong 
asked me to sign (hat. I had forgotten about it. Tlud. docu¬ 
ment, is a. National Health Insurance form. This document was 
signed in the study. The other document, was also signed in the 
study. 1 never signed any in the drawing-room. It, was in the 
afternoon, between dinner and tea, that I signed tin*.' will. 

Re examined by the A/rToitNEY-HiONnnAr,— 1 got Mr. Armstrong 
to help me. with the National Health. Insurance form, because \ 
had lost my medical card, and Mrs. Armstrong was anxious that. 
1 should get one in ease I was ill. I got the form from Liverpool, 
because 1 was in the Royal Liver Friendly Society. 1 do not 
remember whether I signed it after Major Armstrong had tilled 
it up or not, but 1 remember i 1?was in the study that. 1 signed it. 

. . 48 




Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Harriot Elizabeth Price 

Harriet Elizabmtii Trick, examined by Mr. Miokuktuw ait • 
I am a widow, and before I was married I was a domes! ir servant 
with Mr. Armstrong. After my husband’H death I relumed to 
his service on the 11 th of July, ,1921. Miss Pearce ami S managed 
the house from that time together; there was no other wi-vanl. ^ 1 
remember the occasion when Mr. Martin came to it*a. Miss 
Pearce told me he was coming. Miss Pearce prepared (he lest 
that afternoon. The table was laid some little time before. A 
loaf cake, bread and butter, and scones wore put on the stand 
in the room. Miss Pearce set the lea. I went into ihe room 
when I came downstairs, and 1 found the tea was prepared, f 
took the tea in. Mr. Martin wan silling on Major Annul roug’s 
left-hand side, and Major Armstrong was faring; the teapot. SI is 
back was to the window. The scones were on the thive tier cuke 
stand on Major Armstrong’s right hand wide. 1 name at might 
out after I took the tea in. While 1 was there (tie dev. Mr, 
Buchanan called, and I showed, him into the study. Major 
Armstrong went to see him. 1 lit the gas in t he at tidy when he 
called. When I cleared the tea away the armies that were left 
were whole. 1 put them into the eake tin. There wmv flume 
scones left over. They were pul away ami eaten later, I do not 
remember Mr. Martin going away. I have no\er semi Major 
Armstrong prepare weed-killer, neither have I seen him using 
it. I have assisted Major Armstrong in weeding tin* garden. 
Miss Pearce also helped in that. 1 never in the course of tidying 
up the house, the bedrooms, and so mi, saw any anionic, I do 
not know what arsenic is. Major Armstrong never mentioned 
the word arsenic to me. The scones were e.urranl soonest, and 
Miss Pearce made them. 

Cross-examined by Sir IS. (hums Bknnktt Tim scones I 
removed after the tea wore whole scones; they were not, buttered. 
I removed them from the cake stand, and they were put into the 
cake tin, and afterwards oaten in (he, house, 1 have no doubt, 
about that. The first time. I saw Mr. Martin was wlmn he came 
to tea that afternoon. I saw him in the garden first of all. The 
next time I saw him was when T took in (he lea. The (able in the 
drawing-room was just a small oval table such ns you get in a 
drawing-room, whore you just have room to put a teapot and 
cups on. Major Armstrong was sealed at. the table for the pur 
pose of pouring out tho tea, and Mr. Martin was seated guile cionn 
to him by the side of tho table on his loft hand side. They were, 
no distance from each other. Having brought in the h*a, 1 wont 
out again and left them. The next thing l’ did wan to gn in and 
tell Major Armstrong that the rector was there, Mr. iVmbanam 
When I came hack 1 found the gas had already been lighted in 
the drawing-room. The globe was broken that, evening, ami I 
had to go in and clear it up. My duty was to attend to the indoor 
work. I know there was a groat number of weeds on the paths 

' 44 ' 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Harriet Elizabeth Price 

in the garden. Jay was a man who name occasionally to attend 
to the garden. There was also a man mimed MacGoorge who used 
to oome. I would not have known arsenic oven id I had seen it 
lying about. 

Muriel Gladys Kinhky, examined by the Attorney-General 

.. 1 am a nurse, and 1 reside at. Broad Si.reel, Hay. 1 have been 

nursing now for some eleven years. I was t,rained, at the Poplar 
Maternity Home, and afterwards at a surgical home in Manchester, 
then at a. North London surgical home in Simsbury. On the 23rd 
of January, H)21, I wont to M ay Hold in response to a telephone 
message from Major Armstrong. He asked me if 1 would go up; 
he said Ins wife had just come from a menial home,', and would I 
go up and assist. Mrs. Armstrong in dressing and undressing, lie 
asked mo if ! would go up for an hour in the morning and an 
hour in the evening. He said she was rather weak, and was not 
quite aide to manage horse]f, and that, he wotdd be able to look 
after her during the day. I wont up to Maytield after 1 received 
that telephone message. 1 found Mrs. Armstrong's physical con¬ 
dition to bo good, but. her mental stale was weak. 1 went up that 
day in the morning and also in the evening. 1 should think it 
would be between nine and Ion in the morning and seven and eight 
in t.he evening. When I wont in the morning I went into her 
bedroom and took her to the bathroom to bathe, and I dressed her 
there. 1 usually look her down to the drawing-room, where I left 
her. She was able to walk about the house and up and down the 
stairs at that time. In t.he evening I took her up to bod and 
undressed her. 1 went, on doing that until the 27th. The services 
that I rendered on each of these successive days were just as I have 
described. On the 27th Nurse Allen came. During t.he time I 
was there Dr. llmeks came to see her once. I do not know whether 
he called on any other day whilst T was attending her. T think it 
was t.he Sunday evening that, ho came, the 26th. After I left I 
called again on 10t.li February. It was just a social call. I saw 
Mrs. Armstrong. I was very much surprised at her condition. 
Sim had a deep discoloration of the skin, and she was very wasted. 
She complained to me of having severe pains in the stomach, and 
she had been vomiting badly. She was lying down on the sofa 
in t.he drawing-room when I saw her on that occasion. It was in 
the afternoon, between three and foxir, as far as I remember. 
Major Armstrong was alone with her. During the four days I was 
there, fron^the 23rd to the 27th, T did not give her any medicine, 
but. she took two pills on the night of the 26th of January. I did 
not. see her take l,hem. She told me she had taken them, and 
Major Armstrong told me she had taken two pills. I asked Major 
Armstrong why she had taken them, and be said he thought she 
had taken them for indigestion, that she usually took these pills for 
that complaint. I do not know Vhat the pills were, I knew she 

' 45 




Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Muriel Gladys Kinsey 

was taking homoeopathic medicine; they worn some pills she was 
used to taking. I did not make any Further inquiry about what 
these pills were, but Major Armstrong told me that she had vomited 
during the night after the pills. I do not think she vomited while 
I was with her. 1 did not hear ol‘ her being siek on any other 
occasion. It was on the 27th that. I was told who had taken the 
pills; she had taken them on the night of the 2(>lh. I left, her on 
the night of the 26th about eight or halt-past,. She was m bed 
then. She did not vomit at all, while .1 was t here. While I was 
there the major slept in the same room with Mrs. Armstrong lor 
two or three nights. On the other nights ho slept, in the room 
opposite, across the landing. When l railed on lhe l()(h oi 
February she looked like a jaundice ease. She was very blue round 
the mouth. She told me she only suffered from vomiting; she dul 
not mention that she suffered from diarrhma. She was very dis 
tressed about the vomiting. She was very siek and was suffering 
great pain. 

Cross-examined by Sir H. CtmTiw Bmnnhtt During the time 
I was there, the four days, as far as 1 could see, Major and Mrs. 
Armstrong were a very affectionate couple. lb' was most, at ten 
tive to her. When I was first of all engaged Major Armstrong 
told me that during the daytime he and Miss Pearce would look 
after Mrs. Armstrong. It was quite clear to mo that, during the 
time I was there Mrs. Armstrong was suffering from delusions; 
she had an idea that people were about in the. house, and things of 
that sort. On Wednesday, the 20th, in the morning, when I went 
for the purpose of helping her to got, up, I remember her asking 

me a question. She asked me if ! thought it, would bo Huffirient 

to kill any one if they threw themselves through the attic window. 

Did you really fear that Mrs. Armstrong might, commit 
suicide 1 —After the remark I thought she was not; safe to be left*. 
That was why I suggested she should have a nurse altogether to 

look after her. I went to Dr. Hi neks and told him that. that, was 

my view, I also made a special journey to Major Armstrong 
upon that Wednesday, the 26th, that she made this remark to mo, 
and I told him I thought Mrs. Armstrong ought, to have a mental 
nurse. 

Up to the Wednesday night, the night of the 26ih, although 
she had had delusions, and although she had asked you this quen 
tion and you were frightened about her safety, as far as you know 
had she been sick?—Not to my knowledge. On the evening of the 
26th I had supper with them. It consisted of finned f>oef, brown 
bread, and postum. Postum is a coffee preparation, 

/Did Mrs. Armstrong tell you the next morning, the 27th, not 
having been sick as far as you know up to l,ho night of the 26th, 
that she had had indigestion after that meal and had taken two 
pills?—No, she did not say so, £ot after the meal. She told me 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

M„ri«l CUdy. ‘ Ci “* , ’ v 

hersol C (.ho next morning' Utal, kUo had Nick, nixl six' had 

thought she had indigos (ion and had t.n.K^n (ho j > i 1 ] s . M i’H. * n j* 
strong also t.ol<1 mo on one occasion (,1ml nothing on earth "j ,u ** 
make her take any medicine a^ain, as sbe thought she had < ”’ on 
poisoned with dru^s a(. (ho asylum. Thai was one of her <h-l Uf4loIU1 * 
She wonl on to say that in future she would only l.ako b ( ‘ r nV ' n 
homoeopathic stuff. 1 never saw any of this honnropalhh* 
cino. I do not know where she kept i(.. 

Re-examined by (.ho Attorn my (Irnmuam 1 never had any o\ 
peri once of monta! eases before. My train inf' had been land'ly lor 
maternity oases and surgical oases. When this iuci dent occurred 
I thought (hat (he ease was one for somebody else; i(. was not (lie 
kind of ease I had been accustomed to. ! iherefnro wind. and saw 

Dr, Hincks. 

The Could, adjourned. 


47 



Third Day—Wednesday, Sth April, 1922. 


Eve Allen, examined "by Mr* V awheel 1 reside at Newport, 
Road, Cardiff. 1 am a professional trained nurse. On (ho 27lU 
of January last I went to Cusop in answer to a telegram I received. 
I arrived on the evening oi : the 27ih ol‘ January, and I took charge 
of Mrs. Armstrong. I continued to ho nurse in eharge until her 
death on the 22nd of February. When I first, wont (hero she wan 
very frail, but still she had a good appetite. She took hor meals 
at first in the dining-room with the Family. I used to bn (hero at. 
the same time. Mentally S did not. (ind any insensibility about, 
her, but she had certain delusions. The physieal stale which I 
have described continued, J (hink, until the Idlh of February, 
when, after having lunch with us, she went to rest, and .she started 
vomiting. That was on a Sunday. T think (dun vomiting conned 
for one day, and 1 thought she was much better, (hi the Wednes¬ 
day I rang up the doctor, but he. was out. ah an urgent cane. 

By Mr. Justice -Daultnii— She was not, vomiting eonl inummly, 
only occasionally. 

Examination continued —By Wednesday her rendition had 
become more serious in my view. She was looking so frail and 
her colour was certainly very bad. I showed the vomit to Ur. 
Hincks. She would only keep anything down about twenty 
■minutes and then it returned. I thought that, she was worn*, 
and I 'Sent for the doctor. The doctor camei the* same day. I 
cannot remember whether the doctor was shown I wo bot tles on 
that occasion. There were two bottles of homoropathie medicines 
kept, one of mix vomica and the other f cannot, remember. I 
was giving Mrs. Armstrong some of the hommopathie medicines out 
of the bottles. 


Had you the consent, of the doctor to that'/ Well, in the tnd, 
yes. I cannot remember whether there was any other medicine 
except what the doctor prescribed that she took in her last illness. 
The doctor continued to attend Mrs. Armstrong down to. the 22nd, 
the day on which she died. During the last four days of her 
life I used to feed her myself; she was so ill Hint was not, able to 
feed herself. She was not able to get. out, of bed. After Sunday 
the L3th, when she was taken with vomiting, she did not <mt out, 
of bed even for natural purposes. I got her the necessary utermik 
Her strength was not very good, I mean she was helph4 in many 
ways_ She could not use her hands to feed herself/ 

Was the use of her legs in any way affect,ed or twvU^Welh 
she seemed to be more or less paralysed; she could not move them 

‘ i . 3 ? c v ‘ A nn&trong did not lose eomeiouHness until 

eight o clock on the morning she tlied. She died nt; 10 n.m. On 

4rO 



H. R. Armstrong 



Evidence for Prosecution. 


Eve Allen 


iho morning she died, about four o’clock, I noticed a change in 
hoi, and aho said to mo at that lime she had no desire to die. 

lie exact words she used were, “Nurse, I am not going to die, 

Imlli, 1 ha ?, °. vor J'j hi,l K live for—my children and my 

... ‘ u | 1 Kaw -Major Armstrong irequently during this last 

i ness, because ho used to come info the bedroom occasionally. 

J w,nT° v.° M n U, ," ay ’ 11,0 • Jl ° wa » «!«»«> with Mrs. Arm- 

* ' I Vj ■ °'. u . ’ i ’ 1 ’ Im<> ' mi wards 1 had to go down to my meals, 

... 1 . J 1 ’ 1 J •msfumg usually slopped in the liedroom—either 

Major Armstrong or Miss Pearce. J did not leave the room to 
go to my meals until I was relieve,1 by one. or other of them. 
On my return Irom my meals I found him there still. I then took 
over the duty. I would be away at my meals about twenty minutes 
or hall an hour. 1< nmi the Monday morning, the 14th, onwards, 
she cease, to have anything except invalid food—milk, Benger’s 
lood, soda wafer and milk. The, Bongor’s food was given in fluid 
form; it was mixed with milk. The Bonger’s food would be pre¬ 
pared m the kitchen downstairs. I sometimes prepared it. She 
did not take very much. I sometimes made sufficient to go 
throughout the day. I did not take it all up to the sickroom at 
once; r only took up what 1 would call a foci at a time. As 
regards the milk and .soda, Iho soda was got from a sort of tap 
on the table in the bedroom. The, milk was in a- jug covered 
ovor in the bedroom. From time to time .she took a drink of milk 
l 1 (Wum « 1, y ] wont for a breath of fresh air, and 

By Mr. .Tosttob Dakmno—I was not long away when I went 
out tor a walk. I am a registered nurse belonging to a corpora¬ 
tion and we are hound to go out at certain times. During the 
la«l dayB I did not out walking. ® 

. continu'd —T had to go down, of course, for my 

nio,ds. hven after the Kith Major Armstrong or Miss Pearce at 

Ti!owlav^an 1°T fT h' 1 , Tho vomi ^« I think, on the 

r, T 1 7’ti " i 1 wuf I, 8 ' 0 Wfts mu(,h bettor - That would be the 

’ 1 1,1 ink - With the exception of that day, the vomiting 
always occurred alter she took food. I kept notes at the time but 
bey have been destroyed. Tho food would keep down for twenty 

Xe'was’mTin T ** re * u ™«d- After the doctor came 

nIk, was not able to retain her food, oven tho Benger’s came hack 

von it in 7 n, n'’ ltci \ P, 7 n . tho J«th <m imtil her death she was 
J ' ™ {7° / la - y s before her death she was troubled with 

uiautia.n. _ Her logs and arms were wasting very much The 
«km, I noticed, was going very dark and copper coloured. I 

cannot remember when T first noticed that colour. I also noticed 
norm about’, her h]m. uuwveu 

Did she show a desire for f^od?-Yes, she was very anxious 
io got hotter. She made attempts to keep the food down. I did 

.49 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Eve Allen 


not see Major Armstrong in the house on the day of her death until 
abount lunch time. On the last day, in the early hours of the 
morning, about 4 a.in., I noticed a change in the patient s condi¬ 
tion. Major Armstrong was sleeping in the opposite room, but 
I did not rouse him or send any message to him until about eight, 
o’clock. She was then quite conscious. At eight o'clock I stud 
the maid to call Major Armstrong. Ho camo in at eight, o'clock. 
The doctor, I think, came about 9.30. I cannot remember 
whether Major Armstrong was present then or not. 

By Mr, Justice Darling —When Major Armstrong came into 
the room Mrs. Armstrong spoke to him, but what passed between 
them I do not know. She was then very weak; she was on the 
point of dying. I realised that she was mu eh weaker, and thorn 
was really no chance. I thought she was dying. She died at. 
10 a.m. 


Cross-examined by Sir H. Curtis Bennett— When I fust of nil 
went to look after Mrs. Armstrong I was told (hat she was suffering 
from delusions. I saw Nurse Kinsey when I arrived at May held, 
and she told me that she thought this was a case that required 
a regular attendant. She told me she was afraid that Mrs. Arm¬ 
strong might commit suicide; she told me what Mrs. Armstrong 
had remarked. It was quite clear to me from the 27 th of January 
onwards for the first fortnight that Mrs. Armstrong was suffering 
from delusions, but her health at that time was fairly good. She 
was very frail^ to look. at. For the first for (might at any rate 
there was no sign of vomiting. During that time she' was down 
stairs and taking her meals with the'rest of the family. Sim 
generally had her breakfast in bed, then I used to dress’ her ami 
she would get up by lunch time. She would have her lunch amt 
tea and her supper with us in the dining-room. During (he whole 
of that time her appetite was fairly good. The first time I reeok 
lect her vomiting was on Sunday, ‘l3th February, after lunch. I 
think the lunch on that occasion was boiled leg of mutton and 
vegetables, and for sweets I think junket, and’preserved goom* 
berries. We all partook of that It was served in the 

dining-room. After that meal I had just, gone upstairs l<> prepare 
to go out when Pearson, the little boy, came in and told mo his. 
mother was sick. That would he about twenty mi mi ton after 
lunch That was the first vomiting that, had taken place at all 
since I had been there. She had complained before about feeline- 

5™’ t ut , had 2 0t „ m y knowledge vomited. She had (old me 
tnat she always suffered from indigestion. , 

Did you know that she had taken some pills while you were 

tim a J° told me she had always taken 

them. She. used to take them at night after supper. 

Do you know whether she took any that day?—No, I took 
them away; I thought prpbably. it might have had an effect on 
the vomiting. * 1 

50 



Evidence for Prosecution. 


Eve Allen 

After this vomiting you took away the pills 1—Yes, I hid them; 

I wanted to see if they were the cause of her vomiting. She did 
not have any more of these pills to my knowledge. On hearing 
from the little boy that his mother was sick I went down to her. 
I undressed her and put her to bed. 1 gave her a glass of hot 
water with a pinch of bicarbonate of soda in it to see if it would 
stop the vomiting. She was retching a great deal. 1 think she 
slightly during the night. That was the night of the 
Id-14th. She was not much better on the Monday. It is not the 
case that she sat out in the porch on the Monday. The occasion 
on which she sat out in the porch, and when she got a chill, was 
the Friday before the Sunday, the 11th of February. It was the 
latter end of the week that she sat with the eiderdown and the 
hot-water .bottle in the porch. I arranged that for her with the 
help of Miss Pearce. 1 am quite sure that it was some day before 
Sunday, the 13th of February; it was either Thursday or Friday. 

1 left my notes which 1 took in Mrs. Armstrong's bedroom, and. 
wind became of them I do not know. I cannot recollect whether 
on Monday, the 14th, I went out for a walk in the afternoon. 

Would you bo out lor two hours'1—1 would, naturally, if Mrs. 
AimsUong was all right, but I cannot recollect whether 1 was out 
that day or not. 1 recollect that Mrs. Armstrong did vomit on that 
Monday, but 1 cannot remember when it was. She had some 
call sdoot jolly, and after the calf’s-fnot jelly she vomited. That- 
calfVfoot jelly was got from a shop in flay, but 1 do not know 
who fetched it. The vomiting on that day was not quite so bad 
as it was on the Sunday. On the Tuesday she was not so bad: 

I thought she was much better on the Tuesday. The vomiting 
restarted on the Tuesday or Wednesday. It, however, had restarted 
on the Thursday, because I rang up the doctor. After the. sickness 
on the Sunday Mrs. Armstrong requested me not to send for the 
doctor. I think the reason why she did nob want the doctor was 
because, like myself, she thought it might he a bilious attack. I 
did not send for the doctor. I rang the doctor up on the Thursday 
I got some calomel for her, but she did not have it. 

By Mr. Justice Darwot—C alomel is given for the bowels as 
an aperient. 

Cross-examination continued —The only solid food Mrs. Arm¬ 
strong had had up till that Thursday was the calf’s-foot jelly. 
She, of course, had milk and things of that sort. As regards the 
preparation of the Bonger’s food, you havo to bring the milk to a 
certain le*iperature and then mix it with the Bonger’s food. I 
prepared some of that food. She did not take that only; she also 
had milk and soda. She was also having brandy at that time, 

1 think. I am not. quite sure whether she was having cham¬ 
pagne then or not. T prepared the Benger’s food in the kitchen. 

I put it m a jug usually and took up sufficient for Mrs. Arm¬ 
strong. The jug would be left in the larder. 

61 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Eve Alien 

By Mr. Justice Darling— 1 did not take the whole jugful up¬ 
stairs. I think 1 put the jug in the larder. 

Cross-examination continued —The jug would remain there 
until I wanted the next feed, then 1 would go downstairs and take 
some of the already prepared Benger’s food up again. I healed 
up sufficient for the next meal. The times of the meals varied; 
she was having very small meals, but frequently. Bengor’s food 
was given in between the soda and milk, and in between that 
she would have kettle broth. She would have something to lake 
every fifteen or twenty minutes; she was taking it alternately 
soda and milk, and then broth, and then Bongor’s food. 

By Mr. Justice Darling —The kettle broth was made in the 
kitchen. I did not make a lot at one time; it was made fresh 
every time. She would be having Bengerks food about once every 
hour. 

Cross-examination continued —From the 17th, when the sick 
ness started again, till the 22nd, I had very little rest either 
night or day. At night time 1 was sleeping in the same room as 
Mrs. Armstrong. Major Armstrong was on the opposite side of 
the passage. During the day time 1 would only bo away from 
Mrs. Armstrong for twenty minutes or half an hour, and before 
going away I saw that Mrs. Armstrong had everything she wanted. 
When I came back I sometimes gave her something to fake. I 
usually gave her something to take before going away for my 
meals, and she would not require anything until I came bark 
again. I always timed the feeds so that, she had a feed every 
twenty minutes. I always chose the time T thought host to bo a way 
for my meals. Major Armstrong used to go away to the office i!» 
the morning and come back again. He usually went off about <),:*() 
and came hack about one. Then he wont away again about 
and^ came back about five. He usually came 'in to moo his wife 
during the time he was at home. As 1 have already stated at the 
Police Court, they were on most affectionate terms during the whole 
time I was there. I am not sure whether from I ho Sunday on 
wards I had my meals with Major Armstrong, but up to that time 
1 did have my meals with him. I cannot remember whether I 
had my mid-day meal with him after that or not. A I, any rale, I 
had my ^meals down in the dining-room. During the time 1 was 
downstairs Miss Pearce or Major Armstrong was upstairs with 
Mrs. Armstrong. It would not he correct to say that after that 
Thursday she appeared to be very much hotter on the Saturday, 
On the Tuesday or Wednesday I should say she wns a 1 ifile betieV, 
At the foot of Mrs. Armstrong's bed, upon the wall just over the 
fireplace, there was a medicine chest. It would he a good distance 
from the foot of the bed. I do not think she could touch it from 
the bed. You might be able to stand at the foot of the hod, hold- 
mg the end of the bed, and tou8h the cupboard. That was the 

52 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Eve Allen 

cupboard in which Mrs. Armstrong kept her homoeopathic medicine. 
I never examined the contents of that cupboard. 

Up to the Sunday before she died—that would he the 20th_ 

would she be able to get out of bed for natural purposes?—No. 

Let us see what is meant by this—” In the early days she 
would get up ior natural purposes. I was always standing about 
until I saw her_ coming back ^ I followed her. She was not up from 
Sunday, 20th February/’ Was not she getting up for natural 
purposes up to that Sunday ? What 1 am reading to you is what 
you said in cross-examinatioji at the Police Court. Would she 
get up for natural purposes up to the Sunday?—Not after the 
Sunday when, she was ill. She was exceedingly weak, and if she 
had attempted i<> get out oi bed she could not have done so. 

I iiiukI. pul, it to you again. At the Police Court when you 
were asked a question you said, “ In the early days she would get 
up for natural purposes.” That may be quite early clays?—A 
fortnight; bolero the vomiting started. 

.Let me read the whole of it before you give your answer, 
and then you will appreciate the point—' c ‘ In the early days she 
would get, up for natural purposes I was always standing about 
until I saw tier coining back.” Did not that mean that you were 
stand mg about until she came back from the lavatory?—Of course 
I was always with her wherever she went. I mean to say, it was 
only natural. J 

, By Mr. .Tuhtioh DAm.iNo—When I say I was standing about, 
until 1 saw her coming back ” 1 mean I would be on the landing 
or not very far away. She would be coining back from the water- 
closet. 

Or<m-<>.T<imination continued — I mean in the early days she 
would get up for natural purposes—before this vomiting started 
on the Sunday. I do not think she got up after the Sunday The 
hrst time I was asked with regard to all the details of the vomit¬ 
ing, &c., was on 1st and 2nd of January of tin's year, rather 

more than ten months after Mrs. Armstrong died. I have already 
s -ated that two days before her death Mrs. Armstrong had diarrhoea. 

I hat continued until she died. I remember the case so well, be- 
eausc I never had such a hard case. I made notes of the case which 
left behind, Tt is usual to put down the time the person 

takos^ lood and the time she vomits. As I have already stated, 

1 noticed at four o’clock in the morning on the day Mrs, Armstrong 
died that there was a change for the worse. I remember sending 
the girl 1*> call Major Armstrong at eight o’clock that morning] 
Mrs, Armstrong was then quite conscious. They had some con¬ 
versation together which T did not hear. Dr. Hincfes arrived about 
twenty past or half-past nine. I remember Major Armstrong 
coming to the bedside with the doctor when he came on that 
occasion. That was the second* occasion on which I saw Major 
Armstrong that day. I remember Dr, Hincks saying that he 

m 




Eve Allen 


Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 


thought Mrs. Armstrong was dying, but I,hat who would probably 
live the day. Major Armstrong went out when (ho <lo<>,tor wont 
out. Mrs. Armstrong died at ten o’clock that morning. The next 
X saw of Major Armstrong was about one o’clock. 

By Mr. Justice Darling —Prom tho time Mrs. Armstrong 
died until I saw Major Armstrong I was engaged in clearing up. 
I laid Mrs. Armstrong out. I was in and" out; tho room where 
she lay dead occasionally, going back and forward from the 
kitchen to the bedroom. That went on till about one o’clock 
Major Armstrong did not go into her room between Ion ami 
one o’clock to my knowledge. 

, Re-examined by Mr. Vachell —The first; vomiting l saw 
by Mrs. Armstrong was after the midday dinner on Sunday, tins 
13th. The two children, Major Armstrong, Mrs. Armstrong, and 
myself partook of that dinner. Miss Pearce was also present and 
had dinner with us. We all took the same food. There was nobody 
else ill to my knowledge. I put Mrs. Armstrong to bed on tlm 
13th. After that she took everything, all her meals and feeds in 
her bedroom. The only solid food, as I have already stated, that 
she took was calfVfoot jelly. I think il; was tho Thursday that 
the doctor was called in, but I have not soon my notos sumo, 
and I cannot tell definitely. I did not have a case book in which 
wu PUt T ?7 noteS; m 7 notes were on paper fastened together. 
When I left her bedroom I took tho notes with me to my own bed 
r ““-. * donot know whether I brought them back on the morning 
she died or not, there was so much confusion, but I think tho Iasi 
time I saw them was in Mrs. Armstrong’s bedroom. I do nol 
remember whether between ten o’clock and one o'clock on the day 
Mrs.. Armstrong died I cleared away my notes from her bedroom. 

•:During the last four days of Mrs. Armstrong’s life she was taking 
Wengers food milk and soda, and kettle brolh. When she 
wanted a drink of milk and soda she would ask for it. The 
syphon stood in the room., and the milk was also in the room 
covered up. During the last days of the ease, when Mrs. Arm 
strong was so obviously ill, I did not tako my primer allowance 
of time off, but I would have to leave tho sickroom for my meals. 
Kfo Mr ‘ Darling—D uring the last four davs of her 

;i?w e 7 as n ? ab e tG 8lt l,p in , "‘ ,L "J» Vomit on 

the Monday. I cannot remember her sitting up after that That 

able to take her food during tho last four days; wo had to feed 
durimf h +hn° U f n0t A Ven Slt np ™ he ' 1 - (1i(1 TIOt gotimt of bed 

tb ° se four d ? , y s to my knowledge. 1 do not tliink sbe 

wfl/T 6 man / lfred lt - WtlPri was necessary for her to relieve 
herself I gave her the utensil into bed. 1 cannot remember ow 
many days before that I did that. I do not think she got up at 
all from the Sunday on; she was^very ill ' t ’ 

As I understand it, it is suggested 'that she could after the 
54 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Eve Allen 

13th have got out of bed and got a bottle out of the cupboard above 
the fireplace. What do you say to that?—I do not think it was 

possible. 

You have said you do not think it possible that she could 
have done it after the 13th, that is the Sunday, but what do 
you say to any time during the last four days?—I do not think 
it was possible then, because she was so much weaker. During 
r.he fast four days she was much weaker than on the 13th. 

Did you ever find at the time you were there, before or after 
her death, anything about the room out of which she might have 
helped herself to a poison?—No, the two bottles that she was 
taking were taken out of the cupboard entirely; one was nux 
vomica, but I cannot remember the other one. If she wanted one 
of these nux vomica things I usually gave it to her; I gave her all 
nei medicine. 1 put the bottles back into the cupboard. They 
were not large bottles, just homoeopathic things. 

^ A bottle of very, very small pills, were they? Do you know 
homoeopathic medicines ?—No, I do not know them, but I ■ saw 
more of them when 1 was there than 1 have seen at all: they were 
dinner pills that she took. 


e A mce Lloyd, examined by Mr. Mioklethwait—I reside 

^ Street, Hay, and I am a district nurse employed by 

the Hay and Ousop District Nursing Association. I was asked to 
go to Mayfield on Sunday, 20th February, for one night to relieve 
Nurse Allen. . I went there between nine*and ten at night. I took 
my things oh and went straight up to Mrs. Armstrong’s room. 
Major Armstrong was in the room when I went in. Miss Pearce 
went upstairs with me. She showed me the things which were 
ready for use, and pointed out everything to me. She then left 
me alone with Mrs. Armstrong. Major Armstrong wont out with 
Miss Pearce, and they left me alone in the room. T felt Mrs. 
Armstrong’s pulse as soon as X got there. It was very weak. I 
mat up with her the whole night. During the early part of the 
night she was. very restless. She had two severe attacks of 
vomiting. Directly after she vomited I warmed milk food for 
her. The milk was in the room in a jug covered over. Mrs. 
Armstrong complained of pain in the abdomen. She had a motion 
Unit; night. J gave her a dose of medicine from a bottle on the 
table. 1 cannot remember whether the motion was diarrhoea or 
not. Sho wont to sleep after that, and slept until I went at eight 
o’clock in, the morning. 

Cross-examined by Sir XI. Oumub Bennett—-I was with Mrs 
Armstrong for between ten and eleven hours on the Sunday night. 

ft has been said that for (he last forty-eight hours—the last 
two days of her life—she had diarrhoea. During the time you 
wore with her, ton or eleven hours, she had one motion ?-—One 
motion. m 


m 




Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Lucy Alice Lloyd 

And that is all?—That is all. 

She vomited twice during the night?—Yes, 1 cannot remember 
the time between the attacks, but it was from I,waive to two the 
vomiting occurred. After I gave her I be second let of milk she 
did not vomit again. I gave her the milk out of the jug which 
I found covered up when I arrived there. From two' o’clock, 
until eight o’clock she calmed down and had a good sloop. 

John Author Rangecroft, examined by Mr. Mioki.htmwait- 
I reside at 69 lorrington Road, Catford, and I. am senior laboralorv 
assistant at the Clinical Research Association, Watergate House, 
Adelphi.. On the morning of the 1st of November I superintended 
the receipt of certain specimens which arrived by parrel post.. 
There were two packages amongst the specimens. ' A letter from 
Dr. Hincks, of Hay, came by post tho same day. A Her rending 
the letter I kept the specimens myself under lock and key. A 
letter was written to Dr. Hincks from the Association, and'I kept, 
the specimens by me until the 19th of November. 0„ the I9lh 
of November, in consequence of a telegram from Dr. Ilineks, 1 
handed the specimens to the lady clerk, who in turn handed (hem 
to a. district messenger addressed to Mr. Webster, St, Mary’s 
Hospital, Paddington. I produce tho receipt which was Hven to 
me by the district messenger, and it is exhibit, No. 9. 


Humphrey Vinks 'Webb, examined by Mr. Vaohki,!,-- I reside 
at Caledonian House, Bear Street, Hay, ‘and I am an undertaker. 
1 knew Mrs. Armstrong for a number of years prior to her death. 
1 carried out the arrangements for the funeral. The eollin was 
made in my workshop, and I engraved the nameplate. The coffin 
was lined with wadding and domett. There was a pillow under 
the head and some sawdust and shavings put in the hoi tom of (ho 
coffin. My son and I put the body in the coffin ourselves along 
with my men. We used a towel to lift, tho body into I ho coffin 
That towel was placed in the coffin ever the body' and underneath 
the side.. A silk pocket handkerchief was placed on her face, She 
was buried m Cusop Churchyard on the 2. r dh of February 1921 
in my presence. On the 2nd of January, 1922, I was present, at, 
Cusop Churchyard when the body was exhumed.' ] helped to lift 
the coffin from the grave. It. was the same coffin which I had 

Church ln February, 1921. The coffin was removed to 

Chuich Cottage, Cusop. At ten o'clock on the ,’ird of January 
I opened the coffin m the presence of Dr. Spilsbury Dr ||inok«f 
£,• Chief Constable Weaver, (d ief h • 

f an( \ SerReant Star P«- I «aw the body. 11 XT the 
J Armstrong. The towel and the handkerchief and 

other things were exactly as I put them. I was at » 

fnterment m examinatl0n > and 1 subsequently replaced the body for 
56 ■ 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Humphrey Vines Webb 

i Attorney-GeneraIi —My lord, I wish, to call the lady , to 

viiom 1 referred in opening. I would, subject to your lordship’s 
mrection like to adopt the course which was taken before the 
justices; her name was passed to the justices, but it did not appear 
puDlicly. I am quite ready to take any course which has your 
lordship s approval and which my friend would like me to adopt, 
.r. Justice Darling Do you want the name given in Court? 
oir H. Curtis Bennett —No. 

handS" tothe^ury.^ 1 ™ -11 °“ be PUt ° n a pieCe ° f P a P er and 

The Attornet-General I am absolutely in your lordship’s 
fcands. i have no feeling on it one way or the other. 

Mrs. —— examined by Mr. Vachell—I know the prisoner at 
the bar. I first met him, I think, in November, 1915. That 
was when he was with the Forces and on some duty in England. 
He was not at all particular m his attentions to me at that time. 
1 knew he was married. I never met his wife. Be was stationed 
tor some time at Christchurch near where I live. I saw him there 
from time to time. After my first introduction in November, 

r* saW r 11111 10111 ^ me time. That continued while he 
was stationed near my home. 1 cannot tell you how long it lasted, 
lie would be stationed there for six months, and then go away for 

a few months and come back again. In 1920, after he was de¬ 
mobilised, I met him m London. It was the first week in July. 

1 met him by appointment. We dined at a restaurant. He was 
just a family friend at that time. I saw him next at the end of 
April. He told me then he had been abroad. He came to see 
me and my mother. I had heard before that that his wife was 
J a h . Pe wr °t® me and my mother. I cannot remember 

whether it was the 28th or 29th of April when he paid that visit, 
ft _ was just ordinary conversation that passed between us then. 

1 have no recol ection of him being at all particular in his atten- 

wi n u t0 ° n l 118 v,8lt on the mh of A P riL 1 next saw him at 
u .sun at o, when ho came to Bournemouth. On that Occasion 
ho asked me to consider the idea of marrying him. That was 
eilhor he 14th or the 15th of May. I said I would have to give 
bnV;',? "° r ^ lu ai <:onsideration, because I had very great responsi- 
miil.ics-.my mother and my ward to arrange for. 

Having given it due consideration did you arrive at a con¬ 
clusion? —I was never definitely engaged. 

• , 1)x ! 1 ^’l 1 visit his house at Mayfield?—I spent one day and 
n.ght them m October last. The next time I saw him after Whit¬ 
suntide was m August. We discussed the subject of marriage 
on that occasion, but nothing more was settled. I did not see him 
again before I paid my visit to Cusop. 

not Wer ° y ° U thCn ° n th6 foot l n ® of his fiancee?—No, certainly 


57 



Mrs - 


Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 


.. ? y J 1 f\i Va :^ E Doling Did you over promise to marry 
him?—Not definitely; 1 was considering the matter. 

Until now you have not definitely promised to marry him?_ 

Examination continued —You did correspond with him? Yes. 
i ij. * , not want to embarrassing, but there wore certain 

letters oi yours found on Major Armstrong when lie was arrested 
You know that, do you not?—I did not know that. 
i * I? 11 ®.Attorney-Genera 1 desired to have the lotion, identified 
but fair H. Curtis Bennett objected. The loiters, however, were 
admitted for identification only at this stage, the witness initialing 
each as it was presented to her.] ” 

met Sr 6X r in r d by ?" H - ° URTIS B»NW*-Afc the time I first 
met Major Armstrong he was billeted with some old friends or 

mme He became known not only to mo hut to my mol her and 

or T“^ e . rs of , the fan:lil Y- Certainly up to' Whitsuntide, 

oi about that time, he remained just a family friend. lie never 
disguised from me the fact that he was a married man with throe 
children. hrom what he said to me .1 formed the opinion I hat 
he tos an affectionate husband and father-. Tho visit in April 

An y< ?r r W£ f 3USt an ordinal 7 v isit to my mother and myself 
After Mrs. Armstrong’s death my mother and I wrote lellc'rs of 
sympathy to him. At the time of the visit (July, 1920) u, London 

week ha T P dfd d f &t * WaS wii;l1 lV!ends '« Condon for a 

ZVt' A 1 d \ d g ° T 8 P eclall y from the country. J dined with 
Majoi Annstrong on that occasion. I wont to llav on one ocoa 

fn°+ln f0 r 0 i n ® , day a -^ d . one ni g ht " At that time 1 happened lo he 
in the district, at Cheltenham, and i c.amo over ri-om then' I was 
staying with relations. At tho time I wont to Uav iho house' 

thp£ r V? 188 P « r< f’ was them T1,0, ' t ’ w «« «1«> ono of"Ilm children 
tbe /-?’nr be tiat ' was not at s °hool, tho rmmgest. h’rem 
until May, 1921, my friendship was just an ordinary SdihiS 

W1 * b i ^ I1 j an wko vas a f r i end °C my family. From" May li)‘>i 
until to-day although there was discussion'as to marriage’ l "was 
never engaged to him. w ’ 1 waH 


Arthur Chevalier, examined by Mr. Vauuull-.-.T H so li 
citor m practice m Liverpool. I have known Mr. and Mrs Arm 

oT war a nl,mb ?i 0f . y , 6arS - 1 know ih(il » 1’cl'ore tho outbreak 
of war. I was m the habit of visiting them. I did not regard 
one as a greater friend than tho other; one was a friend of 
longer standing than the other, that; is all. I d* m': , 

saw less of him. I was demobilised early in 1919 for snecinl’ 

jTll'CLL^ ~ him ’ 1 th “ k ’ ™ ^ uSl 

’^° August, 1920, somewhere about the 19th of that 
month I received a telegram from’Major Armstrong, in consoquonS 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Arthur Chevalier 

of which I travelled to Cusop. When I arrived I found Mrs. 
Ai mstrong was not herself; she looked very ill physically, and it 
was quite evident that she was not at all clear mentally. So 
far as I can recollect, she had some meals with ns during the time 
that elapsed between the Thursday and the Sunday morning. 
Majoi Amistiong told me when I first met him that Dr. Hincks 
was attending her, and Dr. Hincks came the same evening when 
1 was there. Major Armstrong, very shortly after I arrived, went 
ovei with me to Dr. Hincks , and we had a consultation at his 
house. It was then arranged that she should be removed to a 
piivate asylum, and on the Friday Miss Friend, her sister, was 
telegiaphed lor. I think I suggested that to Major Armstrong, 
and he fell in with it at once. She came on the Saturday. Major 
Aimstiong did not say anything to me about his wife having 
nuide another will. I knew at that time of the existence of the 
will she had drawn up in her own handwriting. I knew I was 
an exceiitoi under that will ; she told mo she had appointed me, 
or intended to appoint me. I had no conversation on testamen¬ 
tary subjects oil my visit in August with either of them. I prefer 
to leave ihe evidence as to her physical condition to others. I 
did not travel with her and Major Armstrong and her sister 
on the Sunday; I remained in the house. It was quite obvious to 
me that Mrs. Armstrong was in pom* health. I returned to Liver¬ 
pool on the Monday morning, the next day. The next I heard 
from Mr. Armstrong was a letter I received from him before his 
wife returned Irom the asylum. Mrs. Armstrong wrote to me 
twice from the asylum. 1 received a letter from Mr. Armstrong 
after his wife returned from ihe asylum, but that letter' has 
been destroyed. 

[At this stage the witness initialed the two letters he received 
from Mrs. Armstrong.] 

As regards the 1 other I received from Mr. Armstrong after his 
wife came bach from the asylum, in that letter, if I recollect aright, 
he said lie was glad to have her homo, as he thought she would 
be .hotter at home than in the asylum, and would recover more 
quickly in her home surroundings. T may have had a letter 
between that, and Mrs. Armstrong's death, luit the first I recollect 
particularly, was the one announcing her death. I went to her 
funeral. Father, on the day of the funeral, or the day after, I 
had a. conversation with Mr. Armstrong in which ho referred to 
the. will. I cannot remember how the subject arose. We were 
sitting in wis smokcrooni, smoking and talking of matters generally, 
and be said, " I thought T ought to tell you that my wife has made 
a fresh will in which she lias left everything to me and appointed 
me solo executor." 1 said., “ When did she make it,?” Tie replied, 

[ c ^ summer.." 1 did not say anything more on the sub- 
ject. TTo also said, ” Although my wife has left everything to 
me, T intend to use it for the benefit of the children," Miss Ida 

■ . m 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Arthur Chevalier 

Bessie Friend, the sister, showed me a document. It appeared to 
be the draft or the copy of a will Mrs. Armstrong had made, as 
far as I could judge, some years before. I only glanced at it. I 
had not. an opportunity to read it, because the place whore she 
showed it to me was in the house where the children and others 
were constantly passing. I handed it back to Miss Friend. 1 
have a sort of recollection that it was on what lawyers call blue 
draft paper. I have never seen it since. I have soon the original 
of Mrs Armstrong’s will of 1917. Miss Friend sent if to mo by 
post after Mrs. Armstrong’s death. I sent it bade to her by- 
registered post as quickly as possible. (Shown exhibit No. I (>)••".- 
That is the will I refer to. 

1( . 1 „ Cr ?®, s ’ e ^ a 5 n j? ed by Sir H. Cuktis Beotjutt—T he original of the 
, 1 ‘ wlll > 1 believe, was in the possession of Miss Friend all the 
time. After Mrs. Armstrong’s death it was sent to me, and I 
perused it and sent it back again. I have known Major Arm 
strong ever since the year 1891, and from that time I have kept, 
up .a friendship with him until this case was started. Before 
Major Armstrongs marriage I visited him at Hay. Al, (he time 
of his marriage he asked me to be trustee with his future sister 
in-law, Miss Ida Jriend, of the marriago settlement. 1 am still 
trustee of that marriage settlement, and it is still in my possession. 
It is quite m. the usual form of the settlement of property and 
furniture for joint lives, the furniture is to pass absolutely to (be 
survivor, and Major Armstrong settled a policy for .£1000 on Ids 
life, of which, when it fell in, the income was to be paid to his 
wife for life m the usual way, subject to any appointment by 
the husband or wife of the survivor of thorn—both the policies to 
be held in trust for the children in equal shares. After his mar 
na f® practically every year. During my visits l 

realised that Mrs. Armstrong was a highly strung lady* inclined 
rather to worry over trifles, but that they appeared to' bo a very 
happy and affectionate couple. I remember visiting Day in Onto 
,“ r ’ * 919 :. 1 formed.the opinion then that Mrs. Armstrong, al¬ 
though rational, was in a nervous and excited stale of mind. On 
another occasion in August, 1920, I warned Major Armstrong I,hat 
thollg ! )t hls Wlfe might try h) commit suicide. 1 
2l hlm * h f* S , he l wa , 8 clearly to my mind then suffering from dole - 
sions and that she had frequently expressed to mo that she was a 

trouble rr n ~T llke Iy to bring hor husband and family into 
trouble from something she had said. T cannot say T attached very 

no 1 t Cl fhi?k 0 RbA I1Ce t0 * u? accuracy of thi " statement, bfcauso T do 
not. think she was fully mentally responsible for what sho was 

S'that ^hileTw ^ th l ^^ tha ? Rh(> nlight C0lmni|; «" !( 'idc 
was that, while I was m the house during the day whori Major 

Armstrong was at his office, I had to fetch her back'from the road 

where she had gune with the intention, I boliovo, o/ gohm to 

Major Armstrong s office for no reason that 1 could understand; 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Arthur Chevalier 

and she kept coming to me in the smokeroom, where I was 
sitting with the door open, really keeping my eye on her as much 
as possible, with the help of the maid, so that she should not do 

would hi ?! Sh i, tellin g Major Armstrong that it 

would be advisable that lie remove irom his room anything like 

razors, and he did so I do not know that he removed 7 a revolver 
also. I think Lily Candy was there on that occasion. I think 
she was the ma.d I warned to keep an eye on Mrs. Armstrong 
After October 1919, I did not see her again until I was sent 
for on the 19th of August, 1920. As far as I can recollect, Major 
Armstrong met me at the station. I remember his telling me 
that his_wife was out of health and under some delusions-under the 
impression that something she had done would bring harm to her- 

, * and he . r chlI * en - * lornled tlle opinion that she ought to 
have attention When I suggested that she should go away from 
home, and that he should see Dr. Hincks about it, Major Arm¬ 
strong at once went with me to see Dr. Hincks. After that inter¬ 
view another doctor was called in, and she was taken to Barnwood 
I was at the suggest,on of Dr. Hincks that a second doctor was calM 
m. That doctor came ,on the 20th or 21st, on the Sunday morning. 

I got a letter written on the 29th of December from Maior 
Armstrong. In that letter he says, “ We keep fairly well. My 

r’ She < .n CR , not « cfc 80 much rheumatism, but a 
lot of indigestion, with the resulting troubles.” I do not think 

“ an y t J u > ) K more of importance in that letter. The next 
T hi?UH° m Majt,r was on the 2nd of January, 1921 

savs ‘' MvZT 1 e “ fi r W 1 *’ ™ Hereford, and ii 

m/ ’ ^7 deal Ai fluir Thanks for your letter and good wishes. 

There are no regulations as to letters at Barnwood, and as far 
as I know nono are opened. I think I should reply in a cheery 
strain without referring unduly to the letters, hut rather treating 

f 1 ' ,-n Urn - ■ T , saW h6r last week and found he? 
generally better, but, still worried over her shortcomings. I think 

tins will finish on her return home, as she has too much time for 

Im : , r r PC Q ; ’ 0n ;i -T 1 \ nost .?/ tEe trouble exaggerates her present 
stale. She thinks she will not return, and therefore dwells on 

J® " T A ?,. 8( , )0n «' 1 persuade the M.O. that she can 

be removed I wi 1 have her back, as I do not think she will im- 
jtnprovo m the least where she is. When she finds she is really 
back fllio will pirlc up, as she is certainly physically better. It 

zrf: i r r f- 0fiH wf . P ower was funcfei on a l and not organic. 

.1 hey had W call it, neuritis for want of a better name.” Then 

H. AS:;”'""' “ d “ »”• “ d “ » your., 

I got, another' loiter, dated 8th May, 1921, from Maior 
Armstrong, written from Mayfield, Hay, via Hereford, in which 

a week ’ My < i™ r Ar,,1 ' ,ir —'Onco moro I am back—arrived home 
A week a "<>, and am glad to say am quite fit again. You would 

61 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Arthur Chevalier 

not know me for the same person, and I can now face (.lie 
future with a correct sense of proportion, which 1 temporarily 
lost.” That was about four months after his wife’s (loath. Then 
he goes on to deal with the different places ho stayed at, and in 
the last paragraph he says, “ I want some one to c.ome and 
keep house for me during June as my guest while Miss Pearce 
goes to Teignmouth with Margaret. Do you know of any one, as 
I am at my wits' end. Yours as ever, Herbert.” 

In one of the letters I have referred to written by Mrs. Arm¬ 
strong to me, dated 21st December, 1920, she says, “ Dear Mr. 
Chevalier—I am filled with remorse at the thought of the indifference 
with which I treated you, and your great kindness in August last. 
I have ever since I came. Your face is constantly before me and 
your words in my ears. I remember my wicked indifference to your 
health. I cannot think how I could leave thoughtlessly such, a 
husband and children, sister, friends, and nice,os. I did not even 
take comfort from the hymn E, wrote out and put on the dressing • 
table. She is really a wonderfully good child.” And then she 
goes on to religious matters. The envelope of the next 1 cl.tor is 
dated 31st December, also written from Banuvood, and it says, 
<c Dear Mr. Chevalier—A. huge request. Will you, if at all pos 
sxble, come to see me on urgent business to-morrow or Monday'I 
1 never showed you a document in which, your name occurs. Oh, 
do come for love of my husband and children. I am unworthy. 
With kindest regards. Yours sincerely, Iv. M. Armstrong.’' 
There is a postscript to that letter which reads, “ I improve, hut 
do come without delay.” 

As I have already stated, I have seen the 1917 will. S do 
not know, except what I have seen in tho newspapers, what the 
whole estate of Mrs. Armstrong was proved at. If was staled 
at £2300. The first will left Major Armstrong £50 a year up 
to a certain length of time, up to 1933, 1 think. Then (here 
were certain bequests to the children, and, Major Armstrong's 
income ^as to be increased to £100 a year. If (he tnisleos 
chose to give it to him he would have been entitled lo the balance 
of the income over £50 for the maintenance of the children up 
to the time that they became twenty-one. Tlum in 1933 he would 
be entitled to £100 a year, with or without (he discretion of (he 
trustees. The total amount of the estate was £2278, which would 
bring in £100 a year^ so that under tho new will, instead of 
being entitled to £50 with the discretion of the trustees, lie would 
be entitled to the capital, which would bring in £100 a year, 
I know as a fact that until this prosecution was started no attempt 
was made by Major Armstrong to realise any of that except a small 
sum for paying costs. 

Do you not know that the whole of that sum of which Mrs. 
Armstrong died possessed, except a small matter which went in 
costs, is now standing in the names of yourself and Mr. Matthews 

62 ' ' ' 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Arthur Chevalier 

the solicitor for Mr. Armstrong ?—There was an undertaking that 
no other part of the estate should be realised without notice to me. 
i. am right m saying, am I not, that in fact, although Mrs 

tihaTtstotf dl >h°+ I K t f he 22l \ d - of Pebruar y la st year, the whole of 
that estate, with that exception, is in fact intact?—That is so. 

Bt i?°f M MaoGboboh, examined by Mr. Micklethwait—I reside 
at 15 Bear Street, Hay, and 1 am a jobbing gardener. I have 

hlvem7 km f ^ Ma y i . le , U . 1 1 , fr01 ! 1 tlle beginning of October last. I 
, no1, UBed an y 'weed-killer since 1 have been there. Major Arm- 
trong never spoke to me about weed-killer. I never saw hint 5e 
it. When I went there there was a tin containing some weed- 
kdler m a tool box in the stable. I did not look inside it. 

By Mr. Justice Darling — I knew it was weed-killer by the 
description on the tm. * 

Examination continued —Major Armstrong never mentioned 

weTd-killer mS ’ ^ ^ ^ eV6r mention an y method of making 

,, , Cross-examined by Sir H. Cuxms BamraTT-It was only in 
Octobei, 19-1, that I went there. I remember the day in October 

wien . ^ r : ^ artln came *<> tea* 1 saw Major Armstrong that 

morning before he went to the office. At that time the garden 
was generally m a very bad state. I spoke to Major Armstrong 
about shifting some trees. He proposed coming up early in the 
a .ernoon for the purpose of telling me where to put them. The 
ff f blm ' V!ls him coming through the main gate from 
the road just after four o clock. He came straight to me. After 
speaking to me he went into the house to take his cap and coat 
off, _ and name straight out, again immediately. On coming out 
again nito the garden he was with mo right up to the tinwAhen 
Mr- Martin arrived. I actually saw Mr. Martin coming. Major 
Armstrong then lott me and went to Mr. Martin, and they went 
into the house together. They went into the garden first and then 
went into the house. 

Ke-examinod by the Attorney-General— Major Armstrong 
would be with me, roughly speaking, about three-quarters of an 
hour. 1 knew Mr. Martin by seeing him in town. 


William Jay, examined by Mr. Micklethwait— I live at 
Oastlo Gardens, llay, and X carry on the business of a market 
gardener. I have known Major Armstrong for a number of 
years. 1 *mod to be a jobbing gardener, and did work for him. 
When ,1 became a market gardener he still continued to employ 
me. During the war Mayfield was let, and I continued to look 
iaoa t' u hiunk I used weed-killer on on© occasion then. In 
1920 1 R f >t some weed-killer. I got liquid weed-killer on one 
occasion and powder on another, I did not use all the powder; 
about half a tin was left. It was in the tool box in the stable. I 

68 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

O 

Oswald Norman Martin 

but there might be something to prevent it. I believe (.hero was 
some complication with the Yorkshire Penny Bank, who were .mort¬ 
gagees of this property, but he hoped to overcome it by (be 20th 
of October. Completion did not take place on the 20(h of October, 
and I got instructions from my clients, and wrole to Major Ann- 
strong a letter on that evening. I spoke to Major Armstrong in 
the morning on the telephone and asked him whoiher he was ready 
to complete, and he said no, and I replied that 1 was afraid I 
should have to rescind, and he then asked mo to give him another 
week. I spoke to my clients, who were there, and they instructed 
me that they would not wait a week, and that the mailers wore lo 
be rescinded. I told him this, and he then asked if ho might come 
over to my office and interview the two purchasers, to which I 
agreed, and he came over and pleaded with (hem to allow him 
another week to complete, but eventually they did not agree, and 
I sent those letters rescinding the contracts that night in both 
the cases. I saw Major Armstrong the following morning at my 
office, and he again asked me if my clients would agree to give a 
little more time to complete. 1 said I should bo seeing (hem at 
Talgarth that morning, and 1 would see what (hey had lo say. 1 did 
see them, and they definitely refused to give him any more tame, and 
confirmed what 1 had done, namely, to rescind, and I informed 
Major Armstrong of that in the afternoon when T got bath. That 
was the afternoon of the 21st. He appeared to me in be extremely 
agitated about it, especially on the 20th at the interview in my 
office. I could not understand his extreme agitation, as I did 
not see how it could affect him personally. lie then asked mo 
whether I would go to tea at Mayfield that afternoon. 1 said 1 
was afraid I could not go that afternoon, and he (hen asked me 
for Saturday or Sunday, and we eventually arranged that I should 
go there on the Monday afternoon, the 24th. That was the second 
invitation I had had from him to tea, the first one being in ID 19, 
when I first came. I did not actually go on the 24th, owing to 
some unforeseen circumstance, and II; was arranged eventually (hat 
I should go on the following Wednesday, the 2(>th, and to bo (bore 
at five o’clock. I have a motor ear. *1 saw Major Armstrong in 
the morning and I offered to drive him up, but he said he had 
something to do at Mayfield, and ho would be up thorn when 1 
arrived, about ten minutes past five. X was In my usual health 
that day—quite good health. 1 had had lunch that day at my 
home with my wife about half-past one. When T arrived at Major 
Armstrong’s house I met him in the drive. We wen t r round 1 he 
garden, and went into the house about twenty minutes or half- 
past five. We went into the drawing-room on the left as you 
go into the hall. There was a small table by the window laid for 
tea, and by it there was a three-tier cake stand—at least I think it 
had three tiers. After we wentdnto the room the teapot and hot 
66 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Oswald Norman Martin 

vater were brought in by the maid. I sat with my back to th» 
window facing him. It was getting dusk at tL JJf m ■ 
Armstrong poured out a cup of tea and handed ft to me and he 
then handed me a scone in his fingers. ’ nd “ e 

By Mr. Justice Dakling—B efore he did that n j , 

you a cup of tea?—Yes. at he had handed 

Did he ask you what you would like to eat with it?—No not 
so far as I remember; he may have done so but T Mr ,„„V ' W °’ u 
that he said anything. He did say ‘ ExmJe T* 

some remark of that sort when he handed it to me 7 f ’ 0r 

himsMr^^ThrroonTf”^^ - ” 1 d0 n0t kn0W what he had to eat 
himself. I he scone lie gave me was a buttered scone. It 

cut m two and buttered and then the two halves joined together 
I cannot remember whether it was a plain or currant scone 1 ate 
the scone, and then I. had some currant bread and butter T do 
not remember having anything else. The bread and butter was 
handed to me on a bread and butter plate; it was nut down at 
my^ side on a small table, I believe, and I helped myself d It was 
Major Armstrong who handed it to me. I think /ate all that 
While I was there the rector of Cusop, Mr. Buchanan called 
Major Armstrong went, out of the room and interviewed him some¬ 
where else. I did not see Mr. Buchanan, but I heard his voice. 
The. gas had-been lit after we started tea, and about half-way 
through the tea one of the globes broke, and Major Armstrong got 
up and turned it out. That was before Mr. Buchanan came. 
During the tea we were ta king of questions of office organisation, 
and that sort of thing. We were both very busy and rather over¬ 
worked .at the time, and we also discussed some question of the 
removal of a tenant that I wanted.to bring forward 

, »rMr, Justice Dashko-DM you talk about the repayment 
of the deposits?—No, they were not mentioned. 1 J 

Examination continued— Mr. Armstrong did not say anything 
to me to indicate the object of his asking me up. I left his house 
about half-past six. 

The Court adjourned. 


67 



Fourth Day—Thursday, 6th April, 1922. 

Oswald Norman Martin, recalled, further examined by Mr 
Micklethwait— After I left Major Armstrong’* houso T wont, homo’ 
I arrived home about twenty minutes or a quarter to seven. 1 
remember feeling slightly unwell when I got,' to the house. My 
clerk, Allan Preen, was there when I arrived, and I started to 
dictate some work to him until 7.;S0. 1 gradually began lo feel 

more unwell, and when I went in to have my usual meal at 7.'Hi 
Tsaid I thought I should not have any, as I foil, sick. I had 
dinner, however, and we finished about 8.15. I then wont on 
with my work, and I kept on fooling more unwell until 
about twenty minutes to nine, when 1 thought I was going to he 
sick and went up into the bathroom. Preen then went’away 
I was not actually _ sick when J went to the bathroom. ' 1 
came downstairs again. I was actually sick for lias first time 
about 9.10. I was sick about throe limes after that before 1 
went to bed, and eventually I went to bed, and was sick at inter 
vals throughout the night. It was exceedingly violent, and Iho 
vomit was very black. I noticed it was very dark .it the 
beginning, and it was very offensive. The colour of iho vomit 
got lighter as time went on. I also suffered from pain in I he 
abdomen. In addition to the pain in my stomach, my heart was 
very bad and very fast indeed all the night and Iho next day 1 
also had two or three attacks of diarrha-a .luring 1 lie niglit. When 
it began to get light in the morning T noticed (hat mv eyes were 
very sensitive to the light—I could not boar the lighi, " 

_ . iP r " Hincks came to see me on Thursday morning, 27th 
October. He arrived about nine in the morning. lie came to 
see me m the evening again, also the next day, and on Saturday, 
Sunday, and Monday. I went back to work Iho following Tuesday 
1st November. I only wont back for about four hours.’ I never 
had a similar attack to that before. In consequence of what Dr. 
Hmcks said to me I took a sample of my urine on the Sunday It 

mt u a b0t Q le ‘ } i,1o, ! l,if y ll,H ' hottlo produced as the bottle in 
question. It was Sunday, the :S0th, four .lays after (he lea, that 1 
took that sample. I urinated direct into the hoi lie and (hen put it 
into the cupboard m my bedroom. I handed it to Dr. llincks the 
o owing morning, on the Monday. I saw Major Armstrong on 

: hen l W ? nt back t0 work ’ and a,R0 fm <ho Wednesday. 
1 had to see him about several completions wo had on the following 

day after I returned to my work. About a fortnight after T met 
him outside my office, and he then said, “ It may sown a curious ” 
° , a cruel . —I cannot say^ which word it was—“ thing to 
say ’ 6 kut y° u Wl11 have another attack soon.” I said, “ I hope 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Oswald Norman Martin 

retilrneTtothToSto i *i rece a ii 0 d ke a noth AbOUt V after 1 

Major Armstrong. It would be about thTuth^/Vo^ ^ 
Persistently asked me to go to tea either at 
office, until about the beginning of December" I Wkve the" 7th 

he asked -“ - 

110031 and we can discuss this ? ” T i me ^ ls a ™r- 

Ihe deposits. paid to the defendant have never been returned 

dav «iVtw at n 0n 1 f 0t a£t ? r that Ietter was > 1 belieTe > the next 
day the 7th of December. I was unable to go. I was busv and 

could not go, and he rang up soon after five o’clock and^aid. 

Are you coming over to tea, which has been waiting for you 

phoned" ha i ;r, h T U ;J ”, u I , th ’" nk h was from hia offife he tele- 
phoned I lephed that he had not mentioned tea the previous 

day, and that i had had mine, but that I could go over at about 
a quarter to six and discuss the business with him. He said, 
Oh, it did not matter, to-morrow would do, when I could have 
a cup of tea with lnm at the same time,” which of course I refused 
again. % the letter of 6th December I threatened to issue a writ 
unless the deposits were paid by Monday,, the 12th December. 
Nothing actually happened on the II2th as far as I remember I 
think it was on the following day I was served with a writ by 
Major Armstrong against the two purchasers for whom I was 
acting tor specific performance. I think it was on the I2th that 
Mr^S “ftf t0 n* -° r • ha i a8fc tirn6 ’ and 1 said I was staying with 

wih Thil w ir 8 m j Ha7 ’ and 1 had arran ged to go to tea 
,, He the T n asked me if I could put them off and go 

think T lS T i repli6d * hat 1 Afraid I could not. I 
think I had about twenty invitations to tea altogether Arm 

strong s house was about a quarter of a mile or half a mile from' 
the. town of Hay, and about three-quarters of a mile from my 
house. Subsequently I took my tea down to the office in order to 
have some ready excuse for not accepting his invitations Hi« 
olfice is just opposite mine, on the opposite side of the road H 
would only have taken me a minute to go across. After I starter! 

*7 Major Armstrong started having In K 


69 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Oswald Norman Martin 

Cross-examined by Sir H. Curtis Bennett—I was admitted 
as a solicitor in 1913, and I was a year in London and two years 
in Doncaster before I joined up in 19.1 C. 1 was demobilised in 
February, 1919. I joined the firm of Griffiths in IIay in July, 
1919. Mr. Griffiths, junior, had been articled to bis father for 
about six months before he joined the Forces. He came back 
about the end of 1919, I should say, and took up his articles. The 
period of war service would count in Ins articles. His articles 
finished a very short time after he came back, but, be continued I a 
serve actually as an articled clerk, ami iben took his linal a short 
time ago. He is now with me. In October or November la,si, ho 
became a partner, his father having died in November, 1920. Ho 
far as I know, Major Armstrong, who bad been carrying on prac¬ 
tice in Hay as a solicitor, was on quite friendly (erms with. Mr. 
Grifliths. Major Armstrong had a subslantial practice in Hay, 
and he also held the posit,ion of (dork to the justices. 1 remember 
when he came back from war service, but I cannot remember the 
date. I am under the impression that it, was about, two months 
after he came back that he invited me up to tea with Mrs. A run 
strong and himself. That was my first, formal meeting with Mrs. 
Armstrong. 1 had met her informally before. I admit that; 
Major Armstrong proposed me to be a member of the Hereford Law 
Society, but that was merely a matter of form. 1 also became a 
commissioner for oaths. lie signed my papers. It was a great 
convenience to him to have a commissioner in the town. I remom 
ber going to the County Club at Hereford in the autumn of 1920 
with Major Armstrong.to luncheon. . 

Am 1 right in saying that from time to time you have received 
acts of kindness from Major Armstrong?—You can put it that way 
if you wish. 

. Ho; I ask you.?—It depends on what you tad) ads of kind 
ness. I do not think I ever asked Major Armstrong after my 
marriage, except at " the .first '“ At Home 77 I had, to cm no to my 
house. During the life time of Mrs. Armstrong I did rmi show 
the slightest hospitality to her. As far as I know, Major A run 
strong was a stranger to Miss Davies until she became my wife. 
When I went on my honeymoon Major Armstrong offered to do any¬ 
thing to assist me in my absence. It was a mailer of courtesy ; 
I offered to do the same for him when ho went away to Italy. 

Am I right in saying that up to October Hie position between 
you was that you were perfectly friendly ?—One would wish to be 
courteous. 

Hid you dislike Major Armstrong before October, 1921 ?* No, l 
did not dislike him. At the same time as l,here was lids matter 
in existence about this estate, there were other business matters I 
had going on with Major Arn^strong. My relations with Major 
Armstrong in all other business affairs were quite friendly. 

70 , . . ' ' 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Oswald Norman Martin 

Between the 26th of October and the 10th of December I did not 
take any actual action to rescind the contract. Any action came 
iiom Major Armstrong on behalf of his client by issuing two writs 
•f 4 ™, m y clients to carry out the contract. About the 26th 
oi October I was in the habit of going up to tea to my own house, 
but 1 afterwards began to take my tea in the office. I did that 
to have a ready excuse at hand for not going to tea with Major 
Armstrong Major Armstrong had been in the habit of going 
home Aor his tea, and m November he began to have his tea in 
the office the same as I did. That was after I commenced having 
tea in my office. When I went up to tea at my own house I had 
to pass Mayfield. _ Major Armstrong’s house would be about half 
a mile from the middle of Hay. My house would be about another 
quarter of. a mile on. I was in the habit of going to and from 

*7 °& c + e m m / car - 1 admit I was taking very little exercise 
at that time. 1 was very busy. I remember Major Armstrong say- 
mg once or twice that I ought to be careful, otherwise I would 
be ill it 1. did not take more exercise. Major Armstrong did not 
say to me on the day that he asked me to tea that he wanted 
to discuss business affairs with me while we were at tea, but I 
partly accounted for the fact that he asked me to tea to his 
wanting^ to discuss the Velinewydd business. Upon the day that 

Li Wi !i h lVr T a 'i or Armstrong I saw him in the morn- 

ing, and I told him that I could give him a lift, but he said that 
he had to go up earlier, as he had something to do in the house. 
He said he would be there when I came. When I arrived that 
afteinoon we had a walk round the grounds, and then we 
entered the room on the left-hand side directly you enter the hall. 

1 arrived there about, ten minutes past five. It may have been a 
little later. I sat upon the left-hand side of the bay window as 
you go into the room. I had my back to the light, facing Major 
Armstrong, and he had the light in his face. In between us 
there was a small table with the tea things on it. The three-tier 
stand was on Major Armstrong’s left, near the table. I am ab¬ 
solutely certain that Major Armstrong handed me a scone in his 
lingers. The only time he handed me a plate was when he 
handed me a plate with currant bread and butter on it, and that 
was after he handed me the scone. When he handed me the scone 
he said Excuse my fingers,” or " Excuse me.” We were both 
busy at that time, and we discussed the question of working 
at high pressure, but we did not discuss any other matters in parti- 
cu ar. After tea I smoked a cigarette. I had not got my pipe 
with me. I do not remember saying that I was oS colour, and 
that was why I would rather smoke a cigarette. I was not feel¬ 
ing off colour, but I was feeling stale. There was no question of 
rr ^i l11 ; When I left Major Armstrong that night I was 

still feeling stale, but not ill. J do not recollect having any dis¬ 
cussion with Major Armstrong that night about my not taking 

71 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Oswald Norman Martin 

enough exercise, but 1 know that on one or two occasions Major 
Armstrong did speak to me about that. 1 never had any gastric 
attacks in my life before my visit to Major Armstrong's house. 
I have never had any gastric influenza. 1 have no idea what it is 
like. I had dinner that night about half-past seven. As 1 have 
already said, I did not want to have any dinner at first, as I 
felt sick, but I latterly did take some dinner. St consisted of 
some hot dish. I also recollect that 1 had sons'' coffee cream. 
I cannot remember whether it was slewed rabbit that we had that 
night. It was soon after nine that I first felt sick - perhaps about 
ten minutes past nine. I vomited then. While 1 was ill 1 believe it 
was the day after I turned ill—Major Armstrong took a sale by 
auction for me. He also called twice to .inquire how I was. { 
remember telling Major Armstrong after 1 was bettor that I thought 
it was due to overwork. I was trying to account lot' if.. I could 
not think of anything else that would have caused it. 

Was it not on one of those occasions when ho was (‘hailing 
you about riding too much in your car, and saying (hat you would 
be better if you took more exorcise, that, he said, If you don't 
take more exercise you will soon have another attack,” or words io 
that effect ?—No, it was not. 1 agree I may have said to him that it 
was probably overwork and not taking enough exercise, but f 
cannot remember his saying, “ If you do not take more exorcise 
you will probably have another attack.” It was one morning out ¬ 
side my office when ho mot me (hat he said, “ It may be a curious 
(or cruel) thing to say, but you will have another of those attacks 
soon.” 

Neither in examination-in-chief nor in cross examination at 
the Police Court did you use that word “ cruel.” You remember 
it so well; when was it you remembered that hit of it? I cannot 
tell you the exact point of time when I started to think of it, but 
I-particularly remember this particular statement. 

How is it that until to-day, although you were asked about 
this over and over again at the Police Court, you had forgotten 
that word “cruel”? Was “ cruel ” said or not? I have just 
said that I am not sure whether is was “ curious ” or " cruel,” 

I ^treated the matter as a joke then. I cannot give (ho date 
within a month when ho said that, hut it was two or three weeks 
after I was back at my office. Both Major Armstrong and I had 
fairly good libraries, and up to that time wo confirmed (.ho ordi- 
nary friendly relationship of two solicitors in a town, borrowing 
each other's books, and so on. It | H the nano that nfi (ho 28th 
of December, the last Wednesday in the year, Major Armstrong 
came to my office and asked me if Mrs. Martin ami 1 would dine 
with them on the following Friday. He also stated that ho would 
get another gentleman to come to make a fourth at bridge, or 
something of that sort. I subsecfUonily saw Major Armstrong on 
■■■ -72 . ■. ■ ■ ■ 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Oswald Normals Martin 

the Briday, when there was some discussion as to a date in the 
future being fixed for this dinner, but the date was never fixed. 

Re-examined by the Attorney-General— There was no one 
else but my wife at lunch with me when 1 was at home on the 26th 
of October, but the maid had her lunch from the same dish. My 
wife had the same food as I had. No one else in the house except 
myself had any gastric attack. 1 had never at any time in my 
life had such an attack. 

Constance Muriel Martin, examined by Mr. Vachell — I am 
the wife of Mr. Oswald Martin, the previous witness, and the 
■ daughter of Mr. Davies, who carries on business at Hay, in Brecon* 
as a chemist. 1 was married to Mr. Martin on 14th June, 1921. I 
thereupon went to live with my husband at a little villa at Cusop. 
I only knew Major Armstrong very slightly. On the occasion of 
our wedding we had an “At Home/’ at which Major Armstrong, 
was present. The other occasion when he was at our house was 
when my husband was ill. My husband enjoyed quite good health 
during our married life up to the time of his illness. On the 26th 
October he had his mid-day meal with me. I cannot remember 
exactly what we had for lunch, but whatever it was I partook of it 
to the same extent as my husband. The maid would have the same 
dishes for her mid-day meal as we had. Neither the maid nor I. 
suffered any inconvenience or illness after that meal. My husband 
went off to his office again about two o’clock. He went direct from 
his office to Major Armstrong’s house for tea. I next saw my hus¬ 
band about seven o’clock that night. 1 did not notice anything 
in his .condition at that time. My attention was first drawn to 
the fact that he was umvell when we went in to our evening meal 
about half-past seven. Tie told, me then he was feeling sick, and I 
thought he looked a little pale. We had jugged rabbit and coffee 
custard afterwards for dinner. We both partook of that meal, but 
toy husband’s appetite was not very good. He did not eat very 
much. After dinner be went back and started at his work with His 
clerk. He seemed very restless. T thought he was simply tired, 
and J did not take much notice* Finally he said he could not do 
any more, and he rushed out.of the room, suddenly and went 
upstairs, 1 think I followed him then, because I wanted to know 
if^he wished to get rid of the clerk. I found him upstairs. -He 
said he was. not feeling well. He was in the bathroom, waiting 
to be sick, I did not see whether he brought up anything or not at 
that .-time.* After that he came downstairs. He was not very long 
downstairs .when he ran upstairs again, and 1 followed'him* He 
went , into the bathroom. I did not see him actually being sick, 
but I could hear him. After the second rush upstairs he came 
down : again, and 1 observed • that he was very pale and did not 
seem at all ■ comfortable. I told him he had better go .to his 
bed. . I brought his things downstairs, and he undressed before 

' 73 ■ ' 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Constance Muriel Martin ^ 

the fire before going to bed. He was sick again before ho went 

sanS?" He Ti V0 “ ltUlg ’ . Duri “g the night ho vomited inces¬ 
santly He did not seem m great pain, but i think ho must 

T n 1 W “ a V - A - 1) - )UI, ' K0 'htring tl.o war. ] 

noticed that; the vomit was rather dark in colour, hut that was 

not until aiter he had been sick a groat ninny times. J <H<1 
f 3 ®. the first vomits. I also noticed an objectionable smell 
about the room when he was vomiting. 1 did not actually | 0 ol 

his pulse, but he called my attention to his heart actimf 

iound it was going very, very rapidly—a sort of palpitation 
1 then gave him hot water to drink. That did not scon, "o 
stop the vomiting so I got some whisky, as I had not any brandy 

it r . f ky f IU ! water ‘ Thuj * 110 1111(1 whisky, ami 

f?U w* at in * ervals 1 gave him some JSovril. lh, was in bed 

at that time. He was also very cold and shivery. 1 gave him 

extra covering and got a hot-water bottle. In Ihe niormim !>,- 

Hmcks came and saw him. Ho attended him on several occasions 

dirmZ* *W n dld n T 0t inyadt ' ' suffor m y " f ,|U1W ' "vmptoniH aflor 

mn • 5 that day. I was perfectly well. 1 do not think the 

The d l» S a ? ffe [ + ed T fr0m , any , Such aflor that ilirmcr <dtlu«- 

■ab?ut^i t rh? < Si m ?’ k t"' hftd w '“ ,Jm Tll " wla y afternoon 
about eight o clock in the evening, 1 think. That was Ihe dav 

!fl tt hS l ad b6en - t° tea w,rt ' Ma i op Armstrong. He was sirk 
al through the night and the following dav at intervals 
intervals becoming longer and longer. The last occasion llml 1 
remember was as I have stated, about eight o’clock Ihai 2,1 
After that he began to get bettor. On Ihe h’ridav niorniim Major 
Armstrong called. I had not eonuinmicatod with Major Arm 
Sri h f ? 2 2m - TTo ""*l«rteok a sale fo my" ,slmm 

thin ifr W V , notlced anything wrong with my hnshand. 1 

dtener I? o Jn 2 ftr,potito W!W lml «" &«”' a « usual .lurin' 

cunnei . lie did not, seem to want, to <ml -mvi h 1 1 i* » * 

fact eat some of ihe jugged rabbit, and nisi,' .uilTee’cuslard ^ The 

w?®! T R °r°. a * a Pl >r(,xirna,<( I.y eight o’clock. He then went 

2o nr fr ;) ° n - T1,at m ' M a > 1(11 “' a <|uarlcr to 

l m / t hncks ca ™ Hie Tlmrs.lay morning. He H( , n t a 

my husbaml^MvT'^K 0 ^ 0 /' a1 ! loi ', iw rollml al '<‘'r he had visited 
my Husband. My husband took Ihe tabloids every hour or, the 

prescription 8 ° Tte , ' l ?'» "<»* <lay *»« was given another 

ml* • x 1 y ,iavo ha<1 two «>f both the mixtures 

The third mixture my husband got was a white mixture It had 
been prepared by Dr. Hincks himself. 

at examined by Mr. MiOKLimiwAiT—I reside 

at 19 Castle Street, Hay, and I'am a single woman. I was in 




Evidence for Prosecution. 

Una Mary Baker 

Major Armstrong’s employment for some two years. In November 
I took up my duties in the office next to the one in which he was 
working. 1 had tea in the office in the hitter part of November. 
It was about the same time as I started there. The reason why 
we had tea in the office was that we had an oil stove which made 
the air dry, and I suggested having a kettle. I myself made the 
tea in the office rather more than half a dozen times. Major 
Armstrong provided the tea and sugar. He also brought butter 
down to the office from Mayfield, but it. was never used, because 
he usually had biscuits. The butter was left in the office for some 
time until the caretaker used it. I remember hearing Major 
Armstrong ask Mr. 'Martin to tea on three occasions. It was over 
the ’phone that he asked him. On any occasion when Mr. Martin 
was invited to tea we were told to get provisions from the caf4 
next door. 

By Mr. Justice Darling —What did he tell you to get?— 
Buttered scones. 

Examination resumed —I think I got buttered' scones on one 
occasion, and I think his clerk got them on another. Mr. Martin 
did not come to tea on any of these occasions. I think his clerk, 
who is a girl, had part of them, and the remainder, I think, were 
left, in the office, and probably taken away by the caretaker. When 
they came from the cafe they were cut across and buttered. I 
remember Mrs. Armstrong’s death. Before that time I .had never 
seen a will of hers. I saw the will that was proved when they 
got probate for it. L never saw any earlier will of Mrs. Arm¬ 
strong. 

Cross-examined by Sir II. Curtis . Bennett —Anything that 
was done in connection with the will of Mrs. Armstrong was don© 
quite openly in the office. There was no attempt to conceal any¬ 
thing. The. will was sworn before Mr. Martin as commissioner. 
At the Police Court examination I .stated that Mr. Armstrong pro¬ 
vided the tea and sugar, and that. Miss Pearce brought more butter 
down, but that it was not used,. That was my recollection at the 
time. I was not quite sure whether Miss Pearce brought it down 
or whether Major Armstrong brought it himself. 1 am quite 
sure that the buttered scones or buns came all ready buttered from 
the cafe. They were purchased when Mr. Martin was thought to 
be coming to tea. There was no secret about asking Mr. Martin 
to tea. It was quite openly done on the three occasions I have 
referred Jo. It is not; an unusual thing to have tea in the office, 
especially if ladies are employed there. It is quite true, as I 
stated at; the Police Court, that prior to . my making teayin the 
office Major Armstrong on various occasions had tea sent in. On 
those occasions he frequently had buttered scones. 

Re-examined by the. Attorney-General —When was that?— 
When he. was working late. 


75 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Una Mary Baker 

Before you started making tea had the clerks over had tea in 
the office?—No. 


Allan Priest, examined by Mr. Mioklethwait- -1 am a clerk 
in the employment of Mr. Martin, of Hay. 1 remember going 

to ms house on the 26th October about 6,30 or twenty minutes to 
seven. Mr. Martin had just arrived when I got there, tie com¬ 
menced dictating to me till about 7.30. lie seemed worried, 
irritable, and fidgety, and he looked bad. About, 7.30 he wout 
away and came back in about half an hour. lie then wont on for 
a bit longer dictating to me. After about half an hour he left; 
the room suddenly. I saw Mr. Martin again on (he Wednesday 
night, but I did not see him after that until the Friday. 1 saw 
Major Armstrong on the Thursday morning at the office aboul, a, 
quarter to ten. I opened the office at 9.30. Ilia,!; was (he day 
after the tea. I told Major Armstrong lhat; Mr. Mari,in had not 
yet come to the office. He just went away then. 1 saw Major 
Armstrong again about a quarter to eleven, and he asked me when 
he could see Mr. Martin, By that time 1 had received a telephone 
message, and I told Major Arms!rung that Mr. Martin was bad. 
He said he was sorry, or words to that effect. 1 again saw him 
about a quarter to twelve. l’lo came across to hear about Mr, 
Martin, and he also asked about (lie sale. 


Cross-examined by Sir H. Curtis Bionnntt .-J'i, would ho about 

a quarter to ten on the 27th October that Major A mini rung called 
at Mr. Martin's office. He just asked lo see Mr. Martin. Ho 
was told that Mr. Martin had not yet come in. 

I here was nothing extraordinary in 1,1ml,, was Micro, because 
they were both visiting each other’s offices two or three Union a 
but he did not usually oomo so early ns that, because 
Mr. Martin did not usually arrive until about ton. 

Except that he did not arrive until about ten, there wan 

nothing extraordinary in his visiting the office?.No. On being 

told that Mr. Martin had not yet arrived Major Armstrong worn 

?Ti 7 ;v. Jt Ca ^ 6 b - adc about a < l iuu '*' l!r «■» cloven. lie wan then 
told that Mr. Martin was bad. He said something to Urn WToci. 
that he was sorry Ho did not say anything about Mr. Martin 
not taking enough exercise that. I remember of on that occasion, 
but on the finday he said that in his opinion Mr. Martin did not, 
take enough exercise When Major Armstrong came across the 
second time he was asked if he would take a sale in the afternoon 
As a matter of fact, he did conduct that snlo for Mr. Marlin He 
also mentioned that day that Mr. Martin had been to his house I he 
night before, and that he seemed quite well. 1 remember stalirm 
l n S 7 ui 1 ?, C< W rt examination that Major Armstrong also said 
he thought Mr. Martin looked bad when 1m was at iiis house after 
tea He did not, however, say that Mr. Martin was actually sick. 
He then went on to state that lie thought Mr. Martin was not 
76 * 




Evidence for Prosecution. 

Allan Preen 

taking enough exercise. Just at that time there were Dressing 
business matters going on between Major Armstrong and Mm 

0 ,1 w' I he c0 / a P e * ,lon *^e Clifford estate was fixed for the 
2nd .November, the day following. 

Cr J! T : r T t H ° MAS Hmcks examined by the Attorney- 

t*ENKRAL—I am a Bachelor of Medicine and a Bachelor of Surgery 
of Edinburgh. I am in practice at 13 Broad Street, Hay, and 
1 have been m practice m Hay since 1898. I have attended Mr 
and Mrs. Armstrong for a period of years. I remember attending 
Mrs. Armstrong in May 1919. Up to that time I had not been 
asked to see her, but I had seen Major Armstrong. Major Arm¬ 
strong was a patient on my books. It was on 13th May 1919 
that I attended Mrs. Armstrong for the first time. She had con¬ 
sulted me in my surgery about a pain in her right arm. I went 
carefully into her history, and formed the opinion at the time that 
she was suffering from brachial neuritis. I have an entry in my 
books that I gave her aspirin tabloids and Fellowes syrup of 
nypophosphites. I examined her arm very carefully. There was 
no wasting of any muscles. There was pain down the arm, and 
particularly m the region of the shoulder joint. She also com¬ 
plained of pam in the forearm going down to the fingers, and of 
tingling m the fingers—a numbed sensation. I suggested to her 
that she should keep her arm at rest and carry it in a sling The 
next tame I saw her was on the 19th May, when she again came to 
my surgery. She was complaining of the same condition, the 
same arm. _ I examined the arm again, and repeated the medicine 
she was having. I did not notice any change in the condition of 
the arm. I again saw her on the 24th June. On that occasion 
she complained of definite pain in the wrist joint of the same arm. 

I examined it, and I came to the conclusion that it was still 
neuritis, but more definite—of rheumatic origin. On that occa¬ 
sion I altered my prescription, and I gave her appropriate reme¬ 
dies for rheumatism. The next time I saw her was on the 2nd 
July. She was in much the same condition, and I repeated her 
medicine again, the same as I had given her on the 24th June. 

I examined her again. On the 24th of June, when she came to me, 
there was some swelling in the wrist. On the 14th July she con¬ 
sulted me in the surgery, and I then prescribed an alkaline mixture 
with a tonic. She was evidently improving at that time from her 
rheumatism. 

But w»s it for the same arm that she consulted you?—She 
came about her general condition. 

By Mr. Justice Darling— Her condition had improved?—I 
considered that it had. 

Examination continued—On the 23rd July she again con¬ 
sulted me in my surgery. It wa$ for the same thing. I did not 
prescribe any particular medicine, because I thought she was very 

77 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Dr Thomas E. H racks 

much better. On the 9th August I visited her at her house-.either' 

her or the children. I have notes of visits to the house oil the 
9th August, 16th August, and 27th August. On the 27th August. I. 
only called in passing; 1 did not put in a special visit. S cannot 
remember what that was for. Up to that time 1 had been treating 
her for rheumatism; she gave me a history of having had rheuma¬ 
tism previously. Her physical condition at that time was good. 
I examined her heart. She had no evidence at that time of any 
heart disease. From August, 1.919, right down to August, 1921), 
I did not see her professionally. On (he 1st August, 1920, I was 
called for in the evening to go and see Kloanor Armstrong, one of 
the children. Mrs. Armstrong was present, on that occasion. I 
had some conversation with her. I cannot remember anything 
being wrong with Mrs. Armstrong at that time. The child had 
a speck in its eye, which I removed. 1 believe 1 am right- in saying 
that Mrs. Armstrong attended to it and bathed the eye. So far as 
I noticed she was able to converse with me rationally at that time. 
On the. 15th August, 1920, I saw Major Armstrong. Ho asked me 
If I would give him a sleeping draught, for his wife, as she was rest¬ 
less and unable to sleep at night. 1 asked if he wished me in go 
up and see her, and he said no, there was no need. S gave him a 
draught, which consisted of bromide and chlorine. There would 
be about half a dozen dozes in the bottle I gave him. I did not. 
go to see her that day. I have no entry in my hooks uni.il the 
22nd, but to the best of my recollection 1 saw her twice; once, 1 
believe, on a Wednesday, and once on a Sat.unlay night-. I believe 
that would be Wednesday, 18th, and Saturday, 21st. I came 
back from Birmingham that day; that is how I recollect it.. When 
I saw her on these occasions she was suffering from delusions. 1 
visited her in regard to her mental eomlition. 1 examined her 
heart. 1 believe I would do that on the Wednesday or Thors 
day. I have no notes of this. There are no entries in* my hook at 
all of having visited her that, week, but i have a recollection that. T 
did so. When I examined her heart on that, occasion I found 
she had a mitral systolic murmur. That means that, there i n 

something wrong with one of the valves of the heart., which might, 
arise from various causes, f cannot, say whether l examined 
her urine on that day or not, but I would pVobahly ask for a speed 
men of her urine. I know that I examined her urine before she 
went to the asylum. I found that there was albumen present iu 
it. That indicates that there is some disturbance of the function 
of the kidney. At that time there was organic disease ojT the heart, 
anyl kidney, in my opinion. T did not at that time* form any 
opinion of what the cause was. Her mental condition was the real 
thing I was called in about. 1 should describe her speech as being 
incoherent. 

On Sunday, 22nd, I again visited her in the morning, but T 
do not think I examined her particularly in the early morning. 



I 


Evidence for Prosecution. 

r Thomas E. Hincks 

although I believe Dr. Jay no <Ii<|. j 

day. I met Dr. Jaymi in nini.sullal.i ( m t)i-Jf a ^ ln a ^ out mi< 3- 
where about twelve o’clock mid day. w , ’ 1,at _ was some- 

rately. I was told that she had been vo^r^n^A* 16 * 
called in for the purpose of being the. K ( j or , r ,j V , ’ ^ a ^ ne was 

sign a certificate. Ho did not .unko'^i*?* “ eces ««T 
physical condition, as compared w ii|, | 1U { “nation of her 
further than to codify dial she wan ii(, (<> |- r „f n i a con dition, any 
heart again when 1 returned i„ Mm afU)1 ..,“ av “; [ examined her 

Dr. Jayne and I signed a <vrl ilieale at the vni 1 i° U ® e 0 clock, 
was decided to send her In Darn wood, un. .. Y lsl k> 'when it 

I actually wont to the asylum with her wf a P riTate asylum, 
mid-day visit 1 luvd arrangement a | (l n ,nko nt a ^ er the 

and I returned to Mayliehl later after I , a " oufc a car and driver, 
about three o’clock, i wuv her s ,m a in T „ . mad ®. arrangements, 
condition had changed for th- worse" , r °7 e( ! ™ at har general 
was the colour of her faro; she was ttm S noticed 

the lips, and had a sallow rumple\. J ’ ' She was blue about 
in appearance. I. examined her , | r n was aall °w and pallid 

fuilse—a pulse of 1-0. A n.nna! , jJ T.^ ^ * ra *> id 
was told si 10 had boon vomit in"-, an( j' s i ° U .J; , )e a ^put 80. 
present. She o-oiujihunod of pain In (,j K » m^ 611 ^ waa 

toms oooasionod aimVl.v (o m<\ I hosilniiMl * f^ 8e s y m p~ 
it was safe, to romovo" I,or ; o.lm i l ^ ^al whether 

inquired about lu'r hislorv, sud n JVH j 0 j ( j s i eX -reinely ill. I 

those bilious attacks. I eamm, remember " t u“ ^ fAJ 0 

it was Major Armstrong who told t U kI.c y &?* t 

a “ a ;A!“' *■ would'. have 1.. ^ "t tuldT 

either Major Annsirmig or ,Mrm Armstrong 7 It would be 

Vou were told by one or other of them Mow „s, a , . 
bilious attacksil- I recoiled rmw dm told me" | M i4lf S? * r °“ 
one or her bilious aUneks, Thu. was aider I hid L1 m WaB 

sulfenng from delusions. lioth Dr. Jayne m,,/ f certiiLif Lf 

Ihe original eorlihealo date.; *• |, u,„ lm< ler«v^' mu - - 

Krnost Hincks, a pc mm rcMutered,” !UH | so on" ", ff’ • 1 ^ 01 f aS 
separately from any other practitioner. She informed m^th^ 
she was a disgrace to her family, had wrecked her husband^ 1 iff 
had boon a had mother he/ children. Those, 
knowledge, are untrue dd There is a dimity ®l £&£ 

IT rohm'eufly, Her husband st ;L s t T„ t ” 

the 14th sho told him that she would leave home l>n„. ause a warrant 
was out fm # her arrest.” The „Umr --rI ifi.-n,1 0 The 

quc«lio!m a, |lt ftli ,<H ’ H si ,n l''*! Vi n “ WW, ' , ' iI ’ not answering 

1 / !■' o 1 "’ 1,11,1 'h’hiMonw mi to her u'V n condition and 

bchavrom, stating that she lived an un DltrisMiDi Hfo, Jmd been 
unland to her children, and had dafrauded I radivsiicfiplo. “ From 
tacts communicated by husband, daluaionH dcv*'h^p|, ( j j n u, e past, 
week. She is being watched. Imiyn H |„, has ••bfranded 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Dr Thomas E. Hincka 

men, and is liable to arrest. Every one is out to trap her.’* 
Then the statement of the prisoner is this—“ She is careful hut 
anxious, always temperate and industrious. She is a total 
abstainer. Had she at any time had serious disappointment?- - 
General strain in family ear© and household management during 
and since the war. No relations are insane. lias she mani¬ 
fested any symptoms of insanity ?—Sloeplessness for ton days, 
nervous excitement, slight irritability for some months past. 

What circumstances are supposed to cause disorder?.Change of 

period of life. Delusions that she is being followed about, has 
neglected family and husband, and is liable to arrest. Has patient 
shown violence towards herself or others?—-No signs of violence; 
on the contrary, apathy to surroundings and acute introspect ion. 
Has she refused food at any time?—The day prior to reception, 
21st or 22nd. Health generally good, but of liver tendency. Has 
she been under medical treatment ?—Dr. T. II inc-lm, of Hay. Up 
to what time has she continued her ordinary employment-? * Day 
before her reception.” 

By Mr. Justice Darling —Of what was she certified ?—Of 
unsound mind. 

Examination continued —I wont, with her to the asylum in (ho 
car. 1 took a basin in the ear. M,iss Friend accompanied ns in 
the car. There was the driver and myself in Front, and Miss 
Friend and Major Armstrong and his wife inside the earn When 
we got to the asylum Dr. Townsend and myself examined Mrs, 
Armstrong after she had been put to bod. Wo wont carefully over 
her symptoms. We examined her heart,, and we discussed (.ho com 
dition. There was also a lady doctor, Dr. Smith, present. A 
specimen of her urine was examined, and was found in contain 
albumen. Her pulse was rapid. She was In an exhausted con¬ 
dition. The nurse drew off the urine with a eaiheior. I think 
we agreed that there was a systolic murmur of (he heart. The 
apex-heat was outside the nipple line, that is to say, it had some 
degree of dilatation. It was displaced—with dilation in one of 
the chambers of the heart. 

By Mr. Justice Darling— That caused the murmur?-- ! did 
not know then, but in the light of what 1 know now from the 
•autopsy I think that that was the cause of the murmur. 

Examination continued— -We examined her thoroughly. The 
cyanosed condition was very marked round (he lips. That Indi¬ 
cates a failure of circulation. The skin of tier abdomen was 
sallow. 

By Mr. Justice Darling—H aving regard to what you know 
now, is that an important matter?—It is an important matter. 

Examination continued— I would describe her mental condi¬ 
tion at that time as melancholia, with delusions. The only cause 
to which I could attribute the melancholia at that time was her 
age, associated with change of'life. At that time I had not in 

80 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

I>r Thomas E. Hxncks 

mind any question of toxaemia or toxic action of any sort or 

1 * h6r m the care of Dr ' Townsend, and drove back 
with Major Armstrong and Miss Friend. I do not think I visited 
Mrs Armstrong at_ Barnwood at all. In January, just before 
the llth, 1 saw Major Armstrong, and in consequence of what he 

as'fo Ws 6 1 » n* 6 a n 0tt T ° n the , 14th January to Dr. Townsend 
ab follows.— Dear Dr. lownsend—Clad to hear that Mrs Arm- 

Srono-Tir 1116 T 6ntally and P^Uy- ^om what Major 
Aimstioug tells me she appears to have lost her delusions and 

that she, U 7? 7 ‘ , 14 WaS i Iaj0r Armstrong who told me 
that she had lost her delusions. 1 wrote that, I believe, in his 

presence, in my surgery. Major Armstrong came to my consult¬ 
ing room to see me on this subject. I received the following 
reply dated 13th January“ Dear Dr. Hincks—Mrs. Arm¬ 
strong has improved both mentally and physically, and Major Arm¬ 
ful vot n0 w W c,I d ? H Tn 0f \ a r in ? her ^ ^“y opinion,'she 

aeaSit^rZlf * lially ‘ - She ls constantly making accusations 

against husclt of having misspent her life and failed in her dutv 

SiTltv of'IqfiT 5 md her cl i ildr f^ and ahe ^ she has been 

. 0 uuty of sdfjhlmoss, m you see her delusions have not gone Her 

f r tbL an r 31 Kn 1,0 n h T 6 ’ and 80 under the circumstances 
I think it will be well to get from the Committee on Monday next 

a i a T, e . of * bB ?“ lce on trial for three months, and during that 
^ Possible that with the change to home she may return 
to hei normal mental state, and, on the other hand, should she 

reoertffi^r lm P°ssible, she can return to Barnwood without 

recertification. We consider that the paralysis of feet, arms and 

SteTell 6 ” n 7 functional It is very much better, but not yet 
quite well. On receipt of that letter I communicated with Major 
Armstrong. I remember that he took exception to the suggestion 

th«r1 - a n- Ut -In three months on Iea ^- I cannot say 

that 1 advised him either ■way. - 

By Mr. Justice Darling—I believe he said that his idea 
was that it would retard her complete recovery. 

(exhibit*' nTS \ < : S ^ med ~} tben Vote on the 14th January 
if «r,«r+- 18 * De , Dr - Townsend—Many thanks for form 

wheihe? 1 ? n 1 °\/° r , J a ? ° n l6ave ‘” 1 do not remember 
whethei m the letter to me a form of application for 

re ease on leave was enclosed. I know that Mrs. Armstrong 
returned home on the 22nd January. I saw her on X 25th 

dav'T nrL Ma3 l f f f1 ' J . did , not visit her professionally that 

I? P] ( ¥ l ’ nse ^ to call in the evening to do a little operation 

thL M, Slm 0ar( ° : T 1 f”-.Armstrong was .present and I row her 
then. She was in the drawing-room when I went into the house. I 
naturally felt a little uncomfortable the first time I met her after 

S ; b6CaUSe 1 kne - Hbe“l h n Ted my 
having sent her there, and I wjis a little anxious as to how 
she would receive me. However, she came forward and shook 

(1 

. . 81 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Dr Thomas E. H sucks 


hands with me, and she said, “ Wood afternoon ” or “ Wood 
evening. 1 ' I replied I hoped she had completely recovered. She 
said she thought she had. I noticed nothing wrong with her 
that day. On the 30th January I saw her again at Major Arm¬ 
strong’s request. 1 visited her on that occasion as a doctor 
visiting a patient. Her mental condition was very much im¬ 
proved at that time. Her physical condition was also good. J[ 
found really nothing wrong with her. 1 cannot remember whether 
I listened to her heart on that occasion or not, lint probably I did. 
I,have got no note of it, but at any rate who complained of nothing, 
I here was no physical disablement that she complained of ut; 
that time or that I observed. Major Armstrong had ashed mo io 
keep her under observation. I again saw her on the (itli I'Vbruary 
and also on the 11th. I believe that it was on the 11 th that I saw 
her in the drawing-room, and she complained to me of I he return of 
those_curious feelings in her foot. She described them as Hprimm 
pressing her up from the ground. 1 recollected this letter (.lmt' l 
had had from Dr. Townsend in which ho spoke of the previous 
condition as being functional, so 1 tried to persuade her that she 
could walk. I took her arm and tried lo got her to walk naturally 
round the drawing-room. She was unable (.<> <lo NO, 

By Mr. Justice Darling— Hvoii with my holding lmr arm 
and guiding her along she could nol; walk along on 1,1ml. <lav wiihotit 
assistance. 


Examination continued —She said she foil; she bad <ml a 
return of the feeling of springs under her feci;, t am roforrum 
to the nervous condition which l had hoard of when she was 
m the asylum, but which I had not scon for myself. I was told 
about that in the letter of l.'ltli January (exhibit in which 

Dr. Townsend said, “ Wo consider that tlm paralysis of feet 
arms, and legs was entirely functional. It is very 'much bolter’ 
but not yet quite well.” That means there was no organic, disease 

?Lv the T n T^ US 1 S7 f' 6m - 0,1 thi " T saw lmr, on the 

Ihth, I doubted the correctness of that diagnosis. If there is 
organic disease, something like wasting of nerves or something of 
that sort, you would not ho ablo to walk. If it i H only functional, 
Ti 7 ^ U if 6 J 7 try you can walk. You imagine yon cannot walk. 

If she had hysteria that would explain whv slm did not walk-. 

because she thought she could not walk. I tried to walk wilh her 
round the drawing-room. 

T 01 ^ ? Id „ U ®2 011 fmlTU ' i y°« oou] « 1 not it- Wlmt sort of 
gait had she? What made me pay spoeial attention to her ner¬ 
vous system was that she had a very peculiar gait, namely, the 
high-steppage gait. She would raise her foot from the Ground 
and hesitate a long time before she would bring it down nmiin 
and then bring it down with a bang. H 

in, Daruino—L ocomotor ataxia is not exactly 

like that, but it is something like it. y 

. ■ 82 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

7*7 . . Thomas E. Hincks 

bed. I examined her nervous system very careful I v T +« * j 
her l ? ee jerta. The knee jerk. t„. totally »W ^Abe.nTot 

k^r^rzs'd" 
z? is 1™,^“, .v h r *‘rr 

on. ..net take notice ot. iZZ “t1ce“ 1 “ip^/ he” 

? l8 t0,d me !hs ™ "able to nee h „ fi„™. 
vt" 6 ,." P 1 *? 1 "* “>« P™- K ™» not total “AS, 

it was difficulty m using them. She had that in both hands J 1 
cannot say whether it was on that occasion or not hut on one 
STS let"? ‘"Pi 1 * “P * penholder, and LtdBr.atdffi! 

lvn+^r n C ^ 0in fa rfc - I remember the abdominal reflex was present 

n«rno.°.*"o”, erjt"^-* "? oth ™- ™« ™.in»tionZ, P forSS 

purpose of ascertaining her mental condition. At that time T 

abSt tfi r em US< Whr r T w! n h ourished J 1 noticef1 nothing particular 
about them When I left her on the 11th February I left her 

in bed. I did not prescribe anything for her. She could move 
her legs freely from the bed to the ground, or from S groTd 
to the bed at that time, but she had a difficulty in raisiSrhTr 
heel when she was lying flat on her back. I did not forn? any 
•onclusiye opinion about her on that occasion I went into her 
neryons system because it raised a question in my mind as to 
the accuracy of this .previous diagnosis. At the same Time I had 
not formed any definite. opinion as to the diagnosis. ' - 

T t,J ?® 1 riRlted her was or i Wednesday, 16th February 

When * or on that.occasion, but I cannot tell by whom" 

Jenl rmed she ms k bed. I was told she had been vomit 
, 0 complained of pain over the abdomen I examined 
the abdomen. It was intensely painful to pressure- she woffid 
not allow you to exert more than the slightest pressure over 

systolic mitral murmur there. The action n f th« rTlL 
and th. apecc-beat, the 

" 83 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Dr Thomas E, Hincks 

we call the nipple lino; that in to say, it was displaced outwards 
Ihat indicates dilation oi the hoar i. Hot* pukso was 120 {Shu 
looked very seriously ill. Slio had an anxious expression on her 
lace, her lips were cyanosed, blue, and. it was about n<> w (| ri j 
I began to notice, I can recollect, l-ho discoloration oi‘ tlte skin 
but it got more marked in the hitter days. Thom was some dis’ 
coloration oi the lace and abdomen when she went into Um 

w . llioh ?• (li(l . u ot pay very much attention u> 

at the time, but I noticed it again on. (his occasion, it was worse 
than when she came back from the asylum. She ne\er had ves-v 
good colour, what I should call a good hcaNiiy colour. ffi 
colour on that occasion in February was about equal to what it wus 
when she went into the asylum, but towards the latter end of 
her illness it assumed a much deeper bronze or copper colour ] 

wT\ n 0W W T e ^ r ** was ° n Lllal ' ‘toy. tod, in 1,1 hi cuur.su oi 
her last illness I did examine her urine. I round (lull. {.Imre was 
albumen m her urino. 1 cannot rcmcndicr whether I ovamined 
her vomit at this time. I do not remember whether she wins 
suffering from diarrhoea or not. ,1 made up a MU,, of medic m 
for her on the 16th. It consisted of A drnn Jbiuarbonaleof m] 
oi tmctuie oi oiangos, and 1, oi spirits of chloroform, water lo 
L 0 ™ 068 : , .°“ e tahlespoonful lo he taken in wider wilh half 

teaspoonful of lime juice until 1,he. vomiting ceases.” [ (ind thal 

J eVJ • X1SUf > l1 ' U wrUiu f,, nnN of bilious vomiting' 
Up till that time since her return I'rom the asylum I saw no delii" 

Borl 0r + K al ) y + - Slgn ° f th0 '"ton. Of her mrndal (rouble at al, 
During that time after sho came back from the asylum her u 
anxiety was to get better. T was never worried will? r^rd lo n! 
question of suicidal tomlencies during the lime | was in nil ? 

i; r , H r 

slightest misgivings about fun* at (Imf n» n it . , ( , ut ! m 

»»««" %%?£*?£'','% zrS-’iz 

3 .. l7 "‘ 

SM: ASM* 

everything thnt you ettompte.l h , give' 1, ?’ „’ t!n! 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

OO-nA r\ ji Thomas E. Hincks 

getting X^iTbtXXsi” ™ she ™ g™d»»lly 

“e sns* F d.- F d * 
rd.x%b“ d r^ 

rtr s h x «?U35?r £ r- ix t“ 

a superficial layer of skin Ti- «p m .* i. s over tlle tongue, 
round the tongue and round the thioF mouth and 

eonree of .ny%e™„, mX, 3p3X taX*.*Y.«33 ^ 
tion. 1 saw her again on the 19th T hhi• ji . a * a ^ a Minina- 
complained of a lot of fla ulencv T ^ leV6 u that Was the da ^ she 
do not believe she evL took IdL ^ her , 8ome tabloids - I 
medicine at all. The tabloids worJ h ! &USe , sbe was talcing no 
That is a thing I u e , 3 dZ J f ld ohanoaL 

the nurse to give her L*enemn L J't \ & F ° tt that told 
do it with. She was constant^F d 1 ent h f r the s yP hon to 

The pain was in the abdomen.' 7 1 sairhSr IgS o7thehoth ^Sh' 
was gradually crafting WAm . ^ on ^Uth. She 

She was not Ibfe to tZ n any'fooddif I ***” f- d Weaker - 
fully wasted „ „d r , i, y 100<i then. She was getting fright- 

21st The h ' 6red 80 - me nut rient suppositories on the 
made up in theCorin'of'^unno^f ^ concentrated nourishment 

by th. LTi “ThTi3 ”s* h S th ' 7 T r ”” r* 
the 16th or the 17th she Ll 1 t ' w f as 1 know ’ from 

* 7 DknLrao—Did Nurse Alim keep „ or „„„ 

report !-&h, kept , proper report, whieh I frL 

teonre^tlur't'Tlf'rSt'w^ ^ A ™- 

the time—persistent vomitin I m l t was V0 “W n S all 

Sa F?xrrSk'i 

TPrfrlo^r F . w wnougn, 1 told mm. I think on fh« 

aS i Ss,,T.r,3;; g a*l u d r ,or ^ *» d 33s 

but I hare «o eu&y “ it “ “ *" m0rni " s ° 1 *>» 22 » d . 

Fr 1 ’*■ 73 »Yn.,i* 

aw? ™x,3sx d x„ fs FrFi 

say exactly when it was, but it was somewhere' before ten o'clock 

5L.T-rsr~ 14 ™ ld * 1 <** 

d she would not regain consciousness, she might last the day out’, 

85 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Dr Thomas E. Hindis 

but 1 could not tell. Later in the day I had a message from Major 
Armstrong to say that she was dead. It was in the course of 
the morning, but I cannot say what time it was. I gave a 
certificate. 

Whilst I was visiting her from the JUH-h every day onwards 
to the 22nd her physical condition was such that she was not able 
to get out of bed. Certainly alter the Idth she never left her 
bed for any purpose at all. The nurse, of course, can give Insider 
evidence on that point than 1 can, but from my knowledge of 
her condition I should say it was impossible for her to leave her 
bed certainly from the 18th onwards For any purpose whatever. 
I do not think she could move her legs at all during tlm last 
four days. On the 11th when i saw her, and went, very carefully into 
the use of her legs, she had a lot of weakness in thorn, and I 
should say for the last four days they wore useless. As regards her 
arms, I remember she had <1 illirni(.y in feeding herself at dm 
beginning of her illness; she could not eonvoy a cup lo her lips. 
That would be about the Khh or 17l.li, I should say the beginning 
of her acute illness. I certainly do not think' she rotiid have 

fed herself at all during the last four days of fun* life. That eon 

dition is known as paresis. Shu may have boon propped up in 
bed during those four days, but she could not lift herself up. 
The certificate that 1 gave‘was to tlm effect (had denih was due lo 
heart disease, and the period 1 gave for it was twelve moulds; 

nephritis, six months; and gastritis, twenty one days. Sim had 

not been actually under my observation tlm whole I woke inonihs, 
but she had been under my actual observation sinoe Angus!, 1920, 
When I found the condition of her heart in August, 1920, S formed 
the opinion that she had had this heart disease probably six 
months before I saw her. 

_ And six months before Angusl, 1*130, would briti*? us lo about 
February,, and so you put heart, disease for twelve months'f- Yes: 
these certificates are never very accuralo. 

This certificate was to give the cause oT death ; it wan not a 
disquisition to a learned society?—No, it is to give 1 ho (tenoral 
cause, as near as you can toll. You do not certify'; you sav to llie 
best of your knowledge and belief. 

Nephritis is inflammation of the kidneys, Bright’s disease. 
Albumen in the urine, is an outward and visible si,'to of kidney 
disease sometimes, and of Bright’s disease. T knew ihe had Ihat 
when Rhe wont, into the hospital. T had found albumen in bet- 
urine in August, and again in my laler examination. ,An rc-ards 
what I say about, gastritis in fbo‘ eortifieato, I knew she bad been 
ill more or less twenty-one days. At, that time my opinion was 
that, the acute gastritis was caused by a toxmmia, ihat is lo say, 
a collection of poisons in the blood due lo inefficient kidney action, 
and that the Bright’s disease in the kidneys wan secondary lo the 
heart disease, which itself was probably caused by rhmimal ism -— 

. 86 . 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Dr Thomas E. Hmcks 

which I then considered was rheumatic in origin. The first 
trouble was the heart, which was working inefficiently, and I put 
that down at the time to a rheumatic condition. If the heart 
works inefficiently, yon first of all get congestion in the kidneys, 
and then finally some disease. If the disease does not abate you 
get poisons collecting in the blood, and you get what is called 
toxaemia, of which gastritis m one of the symptoms. At that 
time, except for the rheumatism, I had not got any other origins 
for the heart disease or heart inefficiency. 

By Mr. Justice Darling —Toxaemia is poison in the blood ? 
—Yes. 

You did not then suspect that it had been introduced by some¬ 
body?—Oh, no. 

Going back to the matter as we know it to be, we know that 
arsenic was found in that body nearly ten months subsequently. 
What is your opinion now?—My opinion now is that her illness 
when she went into the asylum was caused by arsenical poisoning. 
She had a remission of heart symptoms while she was in the asylum, 
and her last and final illness was again due to arsenical poisoning. 

Her last illness after she returned from the asylum was caused 
by a fresh dose of arsenic ?—A fresh dose of arsenic. 

Examination continued— When you say a fresh dose do you 
mean a single dose on one day or not?—No. I have not been asked 
the question, but my own opinion is that the paralysis which she 
suffered from was due to arsenical poisoning, and the recurrence 
.of her nerve symptoms shortly after she returned from the asylum 
was due to a large dose of arsenic being given. 

: By Mr. Justice Darling —About what date would that be?—I 
should think it would be about seven days. The symptoms were on 
the 11th; say, a week or ten days previously, about the 3rd 
February. That is only a guess, but it is my opinion. 'The 
later symptoms and the acute gastritis were due to continued large 
doses of arsenic. 

When you say. “ large,^ what do you mean?—Not absolutely 
poisonous, but continued; perhaps a grain administered from time 
to time; and the fatal termination was due to an actually poisonous 
dose. 

What sort of quantity ?—Anything over 2 grains. 

Examination continmd—l£m.[ Armstrong was a teetotaller., ' 
From time to time she took homoeopathic medicines. When she 
was so acutely ill in February the nurse asked me if.I had any: 
objection JjP her taking some homoeopathic medicine. I asked to 
see the bottle. Two bottle® were produced, as far as I recollect; 

Brucine was written on one, and on the other Ignatia/* 

I am. speaking just from recollection. I ascertained at the. time 
that these were homoeopathic medicines. I believe it was Major 
Armstrong ■ who. showed me the bottles. He told me that she had 
been in the habit of taking thiS drug when she had her bilious 

, 87 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Dr Thomas E. Hxncks 


attacks, and lie asked me if 1 had any objection to her continuing 
it. Naturally 1 did not know anything about it, so 1 said no, 
not until to-morrow, but in the mean time i would look i(, up. S 
did so in Martindale’s iC British Phannaeopuha,’ 1 and I Found i( 
was quite^ harmless. They are both an alkaloid oF strychnine or 
niix "vomicaj they contain alkaloid strychnine. In the small 
minute doses that they were prescribed they wore quite harmless. 
I believe they are both prepared from one and the same plaid, (he 
plant from which strychnine is prepared. The botlio was just a 
little phial holding about an ounce. (Shown bottle.) That is (he 
bottle. I think the other one was a smaller one. Huy eonlaincd 
liquid. I do not know anything about taking a pilule ami a drop 
or the tincture with it. ' 


. Supposing this lady had within her reach or in a cupboard 
m her room a number of bottles containing anything, do you think 
m her condition it would be possible for her to have adminislored 
them to herself during the last (hroo or lour days of her life? . 
Absolutely impossible. I am Familiar wiili Dr. ’Andrew Dlarke\s 
pills. They are pills which Dr. Andrew Clarke, aflnnvards known 
as Sir Andrew Clarke, gave a prescription Fur. | e H u remember 
those pills being in use twenty-five yearn ago in Edinburgh | 
know,, roughly, what they contain—iron, aloes, ginger, myrrh 
soap, and possibly nux vomica. Soap is used as a vehicle for (hal 
and other drugs. You may use chalk or a number of oflior vehicle* 
for compounding the pill, to make (he pill stick tngelher. | have 
a similar pill that 1 prescribe. 


The Court adjourned. 


88 



Fifth Day—Friday, 7th April, 1922. 


Dr. Thomas Ernest Hinges, recalled, further examined by 
the Attorney-General— In the course of my examination of Mrs. 
Armstrong I examined her eyes. The pupils reacted normally. 
That is a test in nervous cases. I found they acted normally to 
light and accommodation. By accommodation I mean when you 
look at a distant object the pupil dilates, and when you look at a 
near object the pupil grows smaller. Such action was present- in 
Mrs. Armstrong’s case. Mrs. Armstrong never bad any sore 
throat during the course of her illness. I am not sure that there 
was any rise of temperature above the normal throughout her ill¬ 
ness. 

I know Mr. Martin. I have attended him professionally 
since he came to Hay after the war, in 1919. I attended him 
first of all with reference to a wound he had had. When X 

first attended Mr. Martin he was suffering* from facial paralysis 

on the right side of the face. He was "unable to talk, clearly, 
and he was also suffering from deafness. This was due 
to a wound he received in action in France, involving a fracture 
of the jaw. That has not entirely passed away to-day. To a 
slight extent there is still some trace of facial paralysis. The 
speech has improved, I did not attend him for anything else,.up 
to the 21st October, When I had the opportunity of attending 
him for his facial paralysis I observed that his general condition 
of health was wery good. On 2.7th, October, in consequence'.of a 
message I received, I went to his house about nine in. the morning. . 
He. was in bed. I examined him. I was told the history of his . 
case. I knew that, .there had been vomiting and. some diarrhoea. 

H© had an anxious expression on his face. His face was pallid 

and .his . eyes were suffused, that is to say, injected. They looked 
red what one would call bloodshot. His tongue was clean and 
his temperature.was normal. I examined the abdomen, and there 
was tenderness in the stomach region above the naval and below 
the rib in the centre of the abdomen. There was, no tenderness 
oyer the appendix, nor was there tenderness‘over the liver on the 
right. ^ There was no enlargement of. the liver. : There was no 
distention of the abdomen. In fact, beyond .the tenderness I have 
mentioned, the abdominal symptoms were negative. His pulse was 
rapid, 120. The. heart sounds were normal, but a very, rapid 
action. lhe normal rate of a heart for a man like Mr. Martin 
is 76. to 80. There was a utensil by the side of the bed which 
contained a yellowish green material, which I examined. . It was 
vomitI was told that he had been vomiting incessantly all night. 
My opinion at that time was that he was suffering from a bilious 
attack, and I prescribed accorcflngly. I prescribed bicarbonate 

■ 89 . 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong, 

Dr Thomas E. Hincks 

of potash and liquid carbonate of magnesia, an<l a little tiny drop 
of spirits of chloroionn, and so on, and lemon juice, or somoUiim' 
of that sort. I also had a mustard plaster [ml. on It is stomach 1 
and I prescribed 2 grains of calomel. I saw him again in the 
evening. He was still vomiting. Ills pulse was still rapid but 
his condition was slightly better. I saw him on tlm foliowimr 
morning, the 28th. He was still complaining of Nick ness, but l 
believe not actually vomiting, although ho was I’celing very sink 
all the time—nauseated. I thou proscribed a mixture of bismuth 
and tincture of rhubarb. His pulse was still rapid, and there 
was still some tenderness in the abdomen. The tongue was per 
fectly clean. There was no other symptom beyond what I have 
already described. The diarrhoea was not continuum' 1 saw 
him again on the 29th. I inquired whether the bowels had moved 
or not. The calomel had not acted. 1 gave him an aperient mix- 
ture. He was much bettor on the 2<>fh, hut his pulse was still 
high. The symptoms wore all the ordinary symptoms of a bilious 
attack, with the exception of the rapid pulse.' I could not account 
for it on the theory of the bilious attack -the const,ant rapid notion 
after his sickness had ceased. The noxt day, the .‘tilth, which was 
a Sunday, I decided to take a sample of Ids urine. 1 saw him on 
the Sunday morning. I took a note of his symptoms. lie was 
much better that morning. I wont again on Monday, dlst, to see 
toTolIeS containing the urine I had asked him 

Wot v , X - the buUl ° <lmvn lo Mr - levies, the chemist in 

Hay, direct m tbe car. lie is Mr. Martin’s father in law. In ft v 
presence the cork of the bottle was lied up with string and sealed^ 
f nC L/ a a )e * ail< l labelled it myself, 1 gave instruct ions 

to Mr. Davies to send it to I,ho Clinical Research Assertion fm 

eetelT 8 ’ *“? V Vr0t V < ' ovu, ’ 1 "g loiter to he sent, as well. | r „ 
ceived a reply from the Clinical Research Association on We,In s 
day, 7th Noyomher. In my opinion if is not, possible LdT aT 

the™rine G " ° f blhOTUmoHH l'e arsenic fo„„ ( | 

By Mr. Jostiom Daki/inu— I do not unite understand 
arsenic to be ionnd anywhere in tlm body would have lo be a,l 
numbered, because the body cannot secret,; arsonief No " 

Emvmrnum nmtimmi—U there any normal form'of illness 
that would can so the arsenic to bo found in tlm urine million/ t’i. 
being actually administered ?—N'o Hiero ’in mine T n » H 

own medicines. The medicines V ^ £ STmIE^ 7 

Martian T , - ne m tbe . or(hnar y l 'ourse. On |,bo :!0lh,-[ sent. Mr 
_ Tt a . ionlc > conm8tln g of ammonia and mix vomica 1 think’ 
ness ST' A*“ tlm6 ,lurin » «.o course of Mr. Martin’s ill’ 
the \ Sen< any nie,1ici,U) 11 od' contained arsenic. h’rom 
ifflrtin>i» r 'ii° n urine * bave fowowl the <)|)inion flmt Mr 
arsenic. 8 C&USed by ^ a ooniiderablo dose of 

90 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Dr Thomas E. Hmcks 

Mr. Martin told us of one symptom that he had. He said 
that he did not like the light ?—Yes, that is so. 

Do you attach any importance at all to that as a symptom or 
not?—Not a special symptom; it is a symptom that may occur in 
any serious illness. As I already stated, during the course of her 
last illness Mrs. Armstrong had difficulty in co-ordinating the 
use of her fingers. She was unable to pick up anything. 

Now we know that arsenic was found in Mrs. Armstrong’s 
body afterwards—taking those symptoms of the hands and fingers, 
and the want of co-ordination, . does that make anything 
occur to your mind that the muscles failed ?— It convinces me that 
she was suffering from multiple neuritis, a form of neuritis dis¬ 
tinct from ordinary, simple, localised neuritis. 

I want that put into a more homely form. Is there some 
cause which causes multiple neuritis in both hands?—There is 
toxaemia. There are various poisons in the system which cause 
multiple neuritis, for instance, diphtheria symptoms after in¬ 
fluenza. Then there are other poisons that will. cause it, .and 
notably one of the most important is arsenic, and, in my opinion, 
this was arsenical multiple neuritis. 

On Thursday, 27th October, the day I was called to Mr. 
Martin, Major Armstrong came to my surgery door. He asked' 
me what was the matter with Mr. Martin. I cannot remember 
whether i% was in the morning or the afternoon. I said he had 
got a bilious attack. There was no reason for which he called 
at. all except to ask that question that Lean recollect. 

Cross-examined by Sir H. Curtis Bennett—I have been.in 
practice since 1898—for twenty-four years. I have had a very 
considerable experience in general practitioner’s work, also a great 
deal of experience of the ordinary maladies, from, which mankind 
suffers. Leaving out of question this particular case, I .have not. 
in my private practice looked after a person who has been suffer¬ 
ing frorn arsenical poisoning.. There was a case in the Queen’s 
Hospital in Birmingham, under my care, being treated for arseni¬ 
cal poisoning. . That was during ..the Boer War. It was one of 
those cases coining from beer ; it was during the time when there 
wore a number of such cases.in the Midlands. It was taken acci¬ 
dentally. I believe the person recovered. I was house surgeon 
there for six months, and, as far as I '■ remember, he ..was under 
iny care, say, three out of the six months. 

Apparently, then, for the whole of that three months that 
person wa% suffering from taking arsenic, and no more arsenic 
was administered during the three .months ; is .that. right ?—That 
is right. 

Then the effect of taking arsenic is that the person lived 
about three months?—I .cannot say what happened after I left the 
hospital, I did, not treat that case from its. inception, andvl •• 
cannot tell anything about the early stages of the case. 


91 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Dr Thomas E. Hinds. ° 

. Ouiing the time you were treating l.lio case, or any of tlio 
time you were treating the ease, was the person sulToring from 
vomiting?—No, I cannot remember if. b 

Just think?—If you. mention the symptoms I can (<IJ 
Neuritis symptoms, you said?—Yos. 

And you do not know how long hol'oro you saw llial, patient 
the.arsenic had been taken?—No, I do not know at all. I know 
if m the course of my attendance on any person I have sus¬ 
picion that there has been foul play and that person dies, I l ulvo 
to inform the coroner or the police. 

By Mr. Justice Daklinu—I f you suspected foul play, whether 
the patient died or not, you would toll the police, would you not?— 
Not unless I had sufficient evidence. 

pross-examination continue! Quito right; you would ,r„ 
during life, but if on reconsideration you formed' Iho opinion id 
the time of death that there had been .luring the course of Unit 
person s illness anything in the nature of foul play you umlor- 
stand what I mean by that—you would undoublodiy, I } un pure 
either inform the polieo or the eoronor?- 1 should. " Durin- Mrs’ 
Armstrong’s life, and at the time she died, there was nothin.* in 
any of her symptoms that were not consistent in my opinion will, 
natural causes, so far as I knew them at the time. 

,, Of course I am not dealing wilh what you know now. Durim* 
the whole course of tho time you wore attending her, rhdit un to 
and including her death, there was nothing, was there, that you 
could see which, was inconsistent with natural causes? No 

^Otherwise you would not have given a certificalo? 1 N |mnld 

not have given a certificate. Tho certificate I gave was divided 

helrt^iseas^T f TI ' e thin .K.J <'‘ud.i!ied her death from was 
heart disease I formed tho opinion that that honrt disease had 

been caused by a long course of rheumatism. Before I formed 
that opinion and put it down as part; of the death eertifieato l 
was satisfied m ray own mind that tl.oro was a mi Hie ion t history 
of rheumatism to account for her honrt, disease. The mud; ihlw* 
was nephritis, six months. I formed lhal opinio,, as 0,e result 

woo^ 7 e * ammat,10n °. f M ™- Armstrong before she went to Barn- 
wood and my examination or her when she relumed when 1 
found albumen present. Tf them was millieient rheumatism lo 
account for heart disease, tdie heart, disease would aeeoitut for 
the nephrite. The acute gastritis f p„|, down as twenty-one 

■fr,uV * ^ CU i C ^ a ^' ri<m w,u b ni nry opinion, at that time 

following on the heart disease due to kidney trouble . 

neriod°ef^ hac K *° tho hmri) «K*«w» caused by ft lore* 

L ! l t ima * lsr ll 1 whlch satisfied yourself was surfieient fm 
the heart disease?—There was no other evidence 

was mid tw r th A at 6 ? flonco? - Th «™ wns til at evidence. T 
J91B to IMS Armstrong^,,iTered from rheumatism from 

J 1J18 ' 1 was not £ Iv en any the rletails such as wo got 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

> Dr Thomas E. Hincks 

fioxn Miss E riend. Ih&f w&s fho tim© when IVIfijor Armstrong w&s 
serving, lhe first time I ever attended Mrs. Armstrong profes¬ 
sionally was in May, 1919. She was then suffering from neuritis 
in the arm. I believe it was the right arm. At the time I formed 
the opinion that it was functional, that is to say, imaginary. 
People who imagine that they have such a thing as neuritis, of 
course, really feel pain, although in fact there is no organic 
cause for it. 

And when first of all you saw Mrs. Armstrong your view 
(and, of course, you could only form a view upon it) was that that 
was an imaginary neuritis?—I did not make any definite diag- 
nosis at that time. 

I did not ask you that. All I asked you was your opinion 
at that time from your examination of her was that it was 
imaginary, and I understood you to say yes 1— Yes. In May, 1919, 
Mrs. Armstrong told me that she suffered from rheumatism, and 
had suffered from it for years. I again saw her in June, July, 
and August of that year. I attended her up till the'27th August’ 
1919. On the 24-th June I formed the opinion that it was not a 
functional condition, but a very rheumatic localised neuritis. It 
was on the 24th June that I formed the opinion that it was not 
imaginary. The rheumatic localised neuritis was in the wrist. 
I next saw Mrs. Armstrong on the 1st August, 1920. I did not 
examine her on that occasion. She had got chilled in the house. 
My special attention was not drawn to her on that occasion. On the 
15th August, 1920, Major Armstrong came and asked me for a 
sleeping draught for his wife, because she was restless and could 
not sleep, and so on. I saw her somewhere about the 18th and 
21st August. I have no definite notes in my book of symptoms; 
my entries in the day book are attendances and the medicines I 
prescribed. I am therefore speaking of something that took place 
over eighteen months ago. I Have' a great number of cases of 
that, kind to deal with. On the 19th August, the night before 
Mrs. Armstrong went to Barnwood, Major Armstrong was present, 
and also Mr. Chevalier. Miss Friend was in the house. It was 
clear that night that she was suffering from delusions. It is quite 
possible that the question of the change of life was discussed as 
being partly the cans© of it. It would not be altogether extra¬ 
ordinary in a nervous woman that .at. thit.-time she might suffer 
from delusions. I did not know at that time that she had suffered 
for some time apparently from indigestion. I cannot recollect 
being told.*that. I do not recollect whether I read the form 
which was filled up by Major Armstrong before Mrs. Armstrong 
was admitted to. the asylum. I was of opinion at' that time 
that Mrs. Armstrong was suffering from, delusions,.but not neuritis. 

Did you not know that when she went to Barnwood she was 
suffering not only.from localised neuritis, but general neuritis?— 
-No, not.at that time; there was # no symptom of it at that time. 

93 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Dr Thomas E. Hincks ^ 

On the journey to Barnwood Mrs. Armstrong vomited. She was 
always a pallid woman during the time I knew her. 

There would be nothing otherwise (or your attention. would 
have been drawn to it) out of the common in hoi' looking more onto 

—«L il U t pS. p ‘ rti ” ul " *• 

I am anxious to cover this time of August, 1920. At that time 

Strw/? n ° thl , Ug “ , h f r symptoms you found wiiich was ino.on- 
msUnt, as you have told me, with natural illness?—No, there was 

And may I take it that the form of delusions that. Mrs Arm¬ 
strong was suffering from at that time was mehuml.olia ?—Yes' 
lou told my friend the Attorney .General that, you did'uot 
think at that tame of toxaemia—that is a poison, hoi. me nut it 
another way so as not to be misunderstood about it. A person 
may_suffer from toxaemia as the result of so.no poison taken or 
_cbuinistered, or the result of auto-intoxieal ion IVum himself?- 
He may. 1 u - ' 

+ , 'f P erson n ) a y be . m such a condition for a number of yours 
that he may poison himself ?—Yes. y 

~ Jr ' £ us ^ icb Darling—Y ou do not mean intentionally? 
bir H. Curtis Bennett—N o. J 

. B y Mr - Justice Darling—A very decayed footl. 
poisoning of the blood?—Yes, an I o-intoxication J 

of rhZZl^^ t T- COn ?T e ‘ , - <>r yWU ' S ol ' imligcstion or years 
of rheumatism—that is right, is if, not?— Yes, ahsolulelv ‘ A 

person may become poisoned as Iho result of nol only noison'lnkon 
or administered wilfully, hut aflor years of illd.oa ll. „iu-l» m 
years of indigestion and rheumatism. ftH 

By Mr. Justice Darling—Y ears of indigestion or rl.mm,,, 
tism may cause toxmmia, but. years of iudigoslion or r |oi m ! ! ' 

would not cause poisoning by arsenic. ' WUI 

Sir H. Cun its B ennm t t W i i- h ,. JVntv , , , 

gesting that for a moment. no,M> ‘ 1 * iH ^ 

Cross-examination continued —In Aucrust 1920 (\ ^ * 

. . 

may be set un bv iII~hm.HL m*' aN „y°. u ?t iy > to x«Hma, 
rheumatism; that 'is right, is’ it nJt?— Y™** ° 1I,<h ^' Kl ' i<,n !Uu! 

nersimM v,» foI - loW f, at eto P twthw > assuming, if 'you wil ! a 

quitriikely! --hi be 

neuritis? That is ono of’the 1'f' 1 u'° m ! >(sri f )ll<ir al or general 
is it n n t( mi no 01 1,tl0 Wft y s 1,10 pomon may show itself 

causing multiple 1 n e uriti^ ertam ^ definit0 p0IH0IW w<> recognise-as 

94 





Evidence for Prosecution. 

Dr Thomas E. Hincks 

a dinitfnZ t0 1 nt0XiCa , ti0I i f^— 1 caanot say I have ever eeen 
a definite case oi_ neuritis following auto-intoxication. 

suffering?™ Sa ^’ ^ y ? Ur ex P® r * erice ’ you have never seen a person 
oaUon g g6n6ra neUrltlS? - Yes ’ but not due to auto-intoxi- 

Have you seen such a person?—Yes. 

r^,i? 0 n/^i® UgSeSt - th6 , pe >f n ° nly got ^ nt0 that condition as the 
esult of taking poison?—No, certainly not. What I mean is I 

have seen a case of multiple neuritis following—I certainly did not 
attend him—I have seen three or four cases following neuritis but 
never due to a septic tooth. b Dut 

A^ie you prepared to swear that a person suffering for years 
that" 'ootid**™. “It “d having got toxemia from 

™»ritr £ r„m Sat 

And general bad health?—No. 

or ml n«^ U tn * per8 ,° n COuld not suffer multiple, 

ZUZ t P F 1 * f • ’ ^ en .® ral iritis as a result of auto-intoxi- 

cation ?—1< rom certain specific poisons. 

I leave out specific diseases—diphtheria and such like—from 
general bad health for years, rheumatism for years, neuritis and 
indigestion for years ?-I cannot say that. In my’opinion there 
neuritis 6 SOmethm ® be y°nd mere indigestion to cause multiple 

Something beyond indigestion, I quite agree. I am not 
putting indigestion by itself. Do you admit that a person suffer- 

toxsemiA?—Yes geStl ° n ^ rheumatism for y ears may suffer from 

And a person suffering from toxaemia may suffer, may they 
not, from multiple neuritis?—They may. 

That is all I have been putting to you?—Yes, there is 

a but there and a very big but. I say the only case of multiple 
neuritis I have known following toxaemia has been due to some 

definite well-recognised poison. By poison I do not mean-_ 

Uh, no, I understand; some specific poison?—Some toxin pro- 
auceci by a definite disease. r 

Bui when once a person la suffering from .toxaemia,. 1 under- 
stood you to say that person may suffer from multiple neuritis, 
But you do not think they would; is that right?—I am not quite 
definite on that. .. H 

1 want you to be?—There are certain conditions that may 
produce multiple neuritis, and toxaemia be caused, but ordinary 
indigestion is not one. ' J 

No, I do not put that as one. I am dealing with all the symp¬ 
toms—indigestion, rheumatism, and continued bad health for. 
years. . . Take all those things into your consideration, a person 
suffering from- toxaemia as the result of all those different things 

' 95 ' ■' 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Dr Thomas E. Hxncks ^ 

for a number of years, are you prepared to swear that that person 
may not sutler from multiple neuritis? 

, Justice Dabling—A ll this is very general, having ward 
byisenir’ 1 S “ d MrS ' Armstrott « rottl1 ^ llil!(1 « ,f l><»i««« caused 

Sir H Curtis Bennett—Y es, in February. 

JusTI °® Darling—W hat wo are concerned whh is w fiat 
killed her—whether she was killed by murder or nob, and you d 0 
not the “v^ hoUl o r hied of poisonin- by other inoaim. 

v Curtis Bennett—! am defending a man who in 

charged with murder, and for some reason or other the All-ornov 

General has gone with considerable detail into (he syttiidunm m 

&*■ 1M0 ’ f. n*i h™. a, “.^'Src 

from arsenical poisoning at that lime. In my opinion p { 

f and ’ uuk - 

Mr Jusnca Daw.ihg- 1 do not suggest that you should stop 

T ^™ NI ‘ ! ' rT —l am obliged to vour lordshin 1*1 

I want to deal rf I can with the whole or'hit in oah an<t ml !arl! of 
It hat, boon asked whelhor she was muIT i'i*in>>• from u ; i 

po.jo.mg in August, I<WO, <„■ .. I hi «n ,lh wil ,™! 

iurther .tor wh.t your lor.lAi,, L« „,ul. [ J, j , ", L 

medical-evidence upon it. M G, 10 tal1 

may "have got'it iii So wiy'l'taJu pr’u, y!nCn!u\ [' ™ koll’vm' if 
a person may as a result suffer from wound ' ' " ' 

1 understood, ho may. Ju'fliaf a fair way it m,Url 

T £ , w f7 lo l nit d, (hat certain ioxmmin would nroihico if I m 
I do not behove rheumatism is one. 1 'io.lu.e , 1 , bul. 

Indigestion and ill-health ?-~No I do m.i »„.i;. •, • 

January and February am id«n i u i , ° U ,! M m H y»iptomN in 

h.d ™l, T,” "ItlT, ".«•*■>. 1 

Barnwood. 1 know that !>.• t’„' , N ,' was progressing at 

the opinion dumm the'linm -h ,lw ‘nd and Dr. Soutar formed 
power i„ the arms"and feot° ar!°l 7.“" f ^T *"' ^ J‘"» «f 

described, were functional' TI M ' ,a l w ' rmnl ‘ion, as if wan 
believe, during i&'SL/'K ! 

wrote to me the letter (exhibit 26) in wh r C lavs ‘ J ow, f m<1 
strong has improved both mordallv 77/1 i Rays— Mrs. Arm- 

isrfsfAs ;:=r r .”;*':r K h r i & 

„„ ins hrm”v.j,tt:i\ri;r,iu™ 




Evidence for Prosecution. 

J)r Thom** & IMmilw 

towards her husband and children, and she says she haw !«'*'«> K l ' ,1, .V 
•of selfishness, so you see her delusions have not «<>»«'• 1 •*"'»* 

are the sort of delusions she was suffering from m Augudl. He 

goes on— cc Her great anxiety is to return homes ftiHi H<> under 
the circumstances 1 think it will be well to got from tiw tom., 
mittee on Monday next a leave of absence on trial lor three months, 
and during that time it is possible that, with a change h> Ihhui\ 
she may return to her normal mental state, and, on Urn other hand* 
should she relapse and become impossible, she can return to Barn* 
wood without re-certification. We consider that the paralysis of 
feet, arms, and legs was entirely functional.^ That lot for wan 
written at the end of the time at Barnwood. I did not examine 
Mrs. Armstrong at all on the 25th January, I called to are Mink 
P earce. 1 remember Major Armstrong asking mo about that time, 
to keep an eye on Mrs. Armstrong. My attention was particularly 
•directed to Mrs. Armstrong by Major Armstrong asking me In do 
that. The 50th January was the first time 1 weal, to nee her after 

that. Major Armstrong asked me to go. 1 weal, again cm 

the 6th February, and again on the 11 bit February. <ht 
the 11th February Mrs. Armstrong complained of h! ill suffer - 
mg frona her feet and hands, and from (his feeling <»f 
electric wires, as she put it, under her foot. She had m»t got 
these symptoms when I saw her on the 30th, and, I bolmvts not on 
the 6th, I place it on the 11th when she had U tone oympfnmm 
She was perfectly well and able to walk about, when 1 find wiw her. 
Any symptoms she had from her attack, of multiple neurit hi while 
she was in the hospital had, in my opinion, entirely vanished 
after her return. They then came back again. 

So that that condition which apparently had gone- on oyer the 
months m Barnwood and was in existence to Home degree on tlm 
Idth January when the letter was written, vanishes undVomoa hmi 
again; on the 11th February you find it?—On the llfh February 
J am certain of.ifc. The high-steppage gait, in it bvmmum nf 
peripheral neuritis, however caused. hi peripheral imnrbm 
nmltiple neuritis, you generally find that the muscles of fhr 
os the legs are very fonder. I cannot say whether I found find 
here or not. In multiple neuritis you very fremmutlv ~<d uni u 
!<>ss of the use of tin, hands and feet, hut /numbm^of Jm" La! 
ol the stun; you can pnek a person in the akin ami thev wmBf 
know ik, tnxl, rl they arc not looking, will not fool i(, Thai 
not, present m tins case. I <l„ „,»k my that U,<, pah, in lU, , (1 .i*" 
•of the wi ves ol the logs was not present; T did not lest f„ r if 1 

rufcr'v °^ kin f, V, n,n1il l» 1 « neuritis. I di<l tiol, notiro „„ i} 1( , 

11th, hebruary the blueness of the lipw. 1 

"5Tou do not. deal wil.h the ankle clonus. #1 
toms that I wnomber. I have asked I,he exports to deal wiThT' 1 ’ 

11 rn T r, C °? <llll0n . Jn wh . ,ch y°« Mrs. Arm«lr„ne !„ 

11th did not necessitate, m your^.pmion, another vi«it at mm 8 t 

m 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Dr Thomas E. Hindu ° 

all ?—No. Her condition at that time was not suo.li that 1 thought 
she was dangerously or very ill. The visits entered in my day.' 
r™ * r f actua l visits. As the result of my examination on the 
Llta February I did not consider Mrs. Armstrong was in such a 
bad condition of health that I would have to call again lor s (mi0 
time. I was telephoned for on the l(ilh February. 1, was reckon¬ 
ing on visiting her once a week. It was an urgent message from 
Major Armstrong’s house that made mo call on I ho Kilh. At that 
time Mrs. Armstrong was pallid. The colour got hotter later on 
hut at that time she was merely pallid. She had lwon robbing 
and vomiting a great deal. If a person has boon sulTorim' for 
some hours from violent retching and vomiting you do got‘"’norm 
ness of the muscles of the abdomen. I cannot recollect whether 1 
examined her vomit on that dato. 1 always do examine a vomil if 
it has been kept for me. If I did examine if, (hero was nothin^ 
to fix it in my mind. Nurse Kinsey was there on that occaNimr 
It was Major Armstrong who suggested her. J remember Nurmi 
Kinsey telling me that she thought that Mrs. Armstrong ought, to 
have a whole-time nurse. I do not think she mentioned a menial 
n ^ rs . e ' * not recollect Nurse Kinsey stating that she was 
afraid Mrs. Armstrong might commit suicide. I never bail anv 
fear of suicide with Mrs. Armstrong. On the IS||, Mrs Arm¬ 
strong was losing flesh as the result or not being able to retain 
any food. The eordes indicated nothing except that she was 
acutely ill. You get that in very serious illnesses. I have no 
recollection of telling Major Armstrong on I,he 19th or 20lh || l0 
Saturday or the Sunday, that Mrs. Armstrong was slightly boiler’ami 
that I thought she was turning the corner. I never remember anv 
improvement m her condition at all from the Kith onwards ‘l 
have already stated that I am quite rlear Unit; Mrs. Armstrong could 
not have walked after tho 18th, and, in my opinion, she could not 
have fed herself during the last four days of life. No other doctor 
attended her m that last illness. When T went on the morniim of 
the 22nd she was unconscious. Major Armstrong was (here 
There was nothing that he could have done by stay mg'on 

As regards Mr, Martin, in my examination.in chief at the 

WTT f° Urt i 1 !n ld ’ J - mfu, ° hl< l uil ' ioN what he had been eating, 
oHof>i if 0me m the opinion that ho was suffering from a bilious 
attack brought on by ovorwork and lack of exercise.” The symri- 
toms were consistent with that, with the exception of the ran <1 
pulse. If a person has been suffering from very violent sickness 
and vomiting you very often get a rapid pulse, but it very soon 
subsides. There is nothing in a rapid pulse immeuiately after 

at ’all* Tn niting - At i^° tlTno T saw tho vomii il was not offensive 
J® L Ther ®, was nothing more than ordinary bilious vomiting. 
Vomiting as the result of taking arsenic would ho very offensive, 
would 8 ”f gest *£. you that vomiting as the result of arsenical poison- 
would, if anything, he the othefr way. Arsenic has an antisupUe 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Dr Thomas £. Hincka 

effect, has not it?-—Yes; but the odour will not depend upon that. 
The odour of a vomit will depend upon chemical actions that have 
been going on in the stomach. 

I suggest to you that the very offensive smell after a vomit is 
consistent with a very bad bilious attack, or liver attack, and that 
the very offensive vomiting is not consistent with the antiseptic 
effect after three and a half hours of arsenic in the stomach 2—1 
cannot see that the arsenic will have any antiseptic action on the 
contents of the stomach and any material that is poured out from 
the secretions in the stomach. 

But do you say the other way round, that it would make the 
vomit offensive ?—I believe it is more offensive than ordinary 
vomit in arsenical poisoning. 

As in the. case of Mrs. Armstrong (I mean the illness in 
February), go in. Mr. Martin's case, there was nothing in the 
symptoms, excepting the pulse, which was inconsistent with what 
you thought it was—a bilious attack?—In Mr. Martin's case there 
was nothing. 

It was only, as in Mrs. Armstrong's case, the fact that arsenic 
was found in.the urine that made you form the opinion that it was 
due to arsenical poisoning?—That aroused my suspicion. 

A question or two about the arsenic. What was found was 
l/33rd of a grain; is that right?—Yes; that is what was reported 
tome. 

By Mr. Justice: . Darling— When was the urine taken ?— Sunday 
night or Monday morning, the 30th. 

The suggestion as to when the poison was given was the 
26th?—Yes. . 

Then it was four days after the suggested taking of the 
arsenic?—Yes. 

Cross-examination continued- —There are many ways, are there 
not, in which a very small trace of arsenic can be found in a 
person's body without that arsenic having been wilfully ad¬ 
ministered as arsenic?—It can. 

And there are a number, are there not, of medicines that do 
in fact contain minute quantities of arsenic?-—There are. 

1 /33rd of a grain, if that were all, would not affect a person 
at all ?—No. . “ 

Is arsenic one of the impurities of bismuth, for instance ?— 
I am not a chemist; I do not know. 

If you would rather I leave these questions to Dr. Wilicox, I 
certainly jvill?—I would. 

^This depends, does it not, in the case of Mr. Martin, on the 
finding of 1 /33rd of a grain?—The whole thing depends upon 
that. 

If it were not for that, there would be nothing in it?—No. 

Re-examined by the Attorney-General— Let me clear this 
up upon the facts as they stand? One of the medicines that you 

99' 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Dr Thomas E. Hinck# ° 

had gi>en to Mi. Martin, so you told us, did contain some bismuth? 
—Ves. 

What day was it on which the bismuth was given ?—On Friday 
28th October. . J> 

By Mr. Justice Darling— What happened then?—I gave him a 
mixture containing an ounce and a hall’ of lao-bismuthol. 

Re-examination continued —Lot mo understand what the modi 
cine was; give us the prescription?—As it is entered in my book 
it is “ Lac-bismuthol, an ounce and a half; compound Iinature 
oi rhubarb, six drams; water to six ounces—tahlospoonful every 
four hours j that is half ail ounce (ivory four liours. 

Did you make up that medicine yourself? I made up thul 
medicine myself. I should say that the hie-bmnmUml is a slock' 
mixture made up in bulk by Phillip Harris. 

So has it got some chemical strength that ideal,ilics it in some 
way?—Yes, it is a definite strength, so much carbonate of his 
muth and so much carbonate of magnesia and aromatics. 1 lliinh 
it is 10 grains in each dram. 

By Mr. Justice Darling —In your opinion would it contain 
any arsenic at all?—No. 

Re-examination continued^- As I understand it, at your .surmwv 
you keep this solution of bismuth, if 1 may call if 'so? Yes a 

stock solution made up. ‘ ’ 

Do you use that from time to time in medicines Ihat you dis 
pense for other patients?—I have used a lot or if lately. ‘ 

It is used by a number of your patients?- Yes. 

Have you any reason of any sort or kind to complain of that 
solution of bismuth?—No, I have not. 

. i ? n l “A? q T tion about ' Mr - Martin’s sickness. You wen, 
asked about the odour of the vomit, and you said llm odour would 
depend upon the chemical action going on in llm sloniach. 1 
think I am:right?—Yes. 

If arsenic is taken in the stomach docs it ad, at all upon Ike 
stomach?—On the stomach wall. It would prod,mu a hmmorrham* 
an extravasation of blood and destruction of the stomach wdf 
nrn^m 18 er0 T n °! t,ho Iln!n P membrane of flm stomach ami 
Fnm +hJ h ;' wnor . rha " e . mto tl10 ^mnnch, and if is that hmmorrhago 
into the stomach mixing with (ho gastric juices which gives the 
foul smell and the odour to the vomit, and also tlm discoloration. 
ii * £ 0ln £ to 'Wiis notion caiwin^ |,ho injury to tho 

Sleet °on tL St0r r a nr m ° ***** of 1,Ioo<1 ’ ‘M^ve any 
eflect on the colour of the vomit?—Yos, that produces a hw«m 

Ed. fr ° m ^ aCti ° n ° f th ° Ra " trio i uico " in the stomach on the 

f - A wa , nt , you t0 oome fc aok to Mrs. Armstrong’s ease. Mv 

ilEf v 6d 7A aom , e questions as I did also, about the 1919 
■Il»«. Too told th,t on tho ?«h J„„o T „ n , th „ “m" 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Dr Thomas E. Hincks 

that it was a true localised neuritis?—Yes. It was in the wrist 
then. 

. Was there any outward sign .of it being in the wrist at that 
time?—She had pain on movement and swelling in the joint of the 
wrist. 

You have told us you thought that that was in the right arm? 

Yes, it was in the same arm that she had complained of pain in 
before. 

You told us that in 1920 you saw Mrs. Armstrong — in fact, on 
1st August, when you went to see the little girl?—I did. 

At that time did you have some conversation with her and 
see her ?—Yes, I did. 

I think you have told us what you found her state of health 
to be?—Yes. 

lell me whether she showed at that time any appearance or 
symptoms of suffering from severe auto-toxaemia ?—No, none at all ; 
she was apparently in quite good health, and took an interest in 
the child, who was suffering from something in the eye. 

My friend has been discussing with you the possibility of a 
multiple neuritis, as you call it, arising from poisoning ?—Yes. 

If poisoning is the cause of this multiple neuritis, must it 
he acute or not?—It must be acute. 

And if it arises from either fever or, as suggested, from 
rheumatism or indigestion, would those symptoms, if they are 
causing this neuritis, be acute?—I do not admit that they do cause 
neuritis, not those particular poisons, but they would have to be 
acute; it is always after some acute infection of some kind; there 
are certain specific ones. 

When you saw Mrs. Armstrong on the 1st August, 1920, 
were there any signs of her suffering at that time from acute 
'poisoning?-—No, there was no sign at all. 

By Mr. Justice Darling—S omething has, been said about 
functional,.' which appears to be imaginary, neuritis?—Yes* 

Can functional or imaginary neuritis cause toxmmia?—No. 

Re-examination continued— At this time when you saw her on 
the 1st August, 1920, was she showing any signs of this rheumatism 
continuing for which you had treated her in 1919 ?—She did not 
complain of any.' 

When was the last occasion on which you had been called to 
deal with her rheumatism?—That is difficult to say: some time in 
1919. ■ 

Having had an opportunity of thinking over the symptoms, 
do you find any similarity in the symptoms which you found in 
August, 1920, and the symptoms which you found in February, 
1921 ?—Of course I do. On the 16th February I found a repetition 
of the symptoms that she complained of on the day that I took her 
into the asylum. On: the 11th February there was a repetition of the,.’ 

. . . 101 ■■■ 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Dr Thomas E. Hincks 

symptoms that I now know appeared after her admission info the 
asylum. 

Come to the 25th January, 1921, which wan tlm lirnt occasion 
on which you saw her after her return from Barn wood. <> n that 
date was she or was she not well able to walk ?- Perfectly woll able 
to walk. *■ ‘ ' 

Speaking generally, was there a marked difference between 
her condition on the 25th January, 1021, and her condition when 
she went into the asylum on 22nd August, 1920? Yes, mentally 
she had improved very much indeed, J 

„ And * physically ?—And physically; she was nreUy (if when F 
first saw her. ’ 1 J 

Now on th© 11th February, was that; the dal.o on which the 
mgh-steppage gait occurred; 1 think you have given it. to us 
already/'—Yes, th© nervous symptoms returned. 

* Yfl 1 ! 0 , 11 give us opinion or wluil, her condition was on 

the 11th February as cwnparod with Iho condition in which vou 
saw- her on the 25th January when she lmd just come out of tlm 
asylum?—On the 11th February she was suffering from multiple 
neuritis. As far as I am aware, there woro no symptoms or mul 
tiple neuritis when I saw hoi- on the 25fh January 

You were summoned again on the l(i|,h, ami' then von „ aw 
her again on the 17th February ?—Y, w . 

I want to ask, because of a question my frioiul pul, wind, 
brought about the pain she was suffering from limn in Iho all 
domen; what sort of pain was iH-Vory intense; she would hardly 
aliow you t° place your hand over tlm abdomen. 7 

FehrnJr5 r 'ul USTICE ^ABLiwa-What data was Ibis? -On Iho Ifilh 
twd 7 '- 1 - T , 8UggeSt t,hat lt ww <bm t.o vomifino- m 

waJ Ji+h\t CU ° m l * ho intenfit ' ! ,ain was suffering. U 

a jj ' 6 ^ ea ^ difficulty J could cram ino her ahdouion at, 

f? .„ Re - em ^a,tion continued— Lot me clear up again Ibis mms 

out from the *° lho T 7 ''"' 1 ’ <lT,<1 H ° ° n * Wl "'" «>•« ’nmo 

trom the home you saw her from the 251,h Jamiarv rbdu 

suicfde?—Not S? J$g£L ^ ^ m!f,giv!ngH a( ' aI > a1aa ' 1 ' 

trati^ N i5 rR ' 7 A, T' St,, T ff r0ft,1y an ‘ 1 w, "lling to accept your minis- 
Bv V p h T bettor?—Sho was very anxious t;o get Jailer. 

. 7 11 p mTTS Bkwnktt—T think you Raid yesterday Ih-it 

she would not take the medicines?~,Sho obioetod vu-v 1L +, 
taking medicines; she did not believe it, H * 7 T ''l-" 1 U 
believe she had very much failh in myself -d Iho | ‘ r , n< * 

m.™ „ w „ hlt th0 inm - m- ■'«, 

examination continued— Yah mi A p , , „ „ „ 

102 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Dr Thomas E. Hincks 

We know of it in the Courts; many of us have had to deal with 
the matter. Is the arsenical poisoning that arose in this particular 
case that you are speaking of what you call acute or chronic, or 
what word would you use*?—When I saw it it was a chronic case. 

Just put that a little more painly if you will 1—There were no 
acute, symptoms. The condition, as I remember it, was this, typical 
multiple neuritis following the long-continued taking of small doses 
of arsenic. That was the opinion we came to. 

Do you remember over what period of time the beer had been 
consumed 1—I cannot remember. 

Was it a case of a single glass?—No, no; he had been drinking 
for months probably; I do not mean to say getting drunk. 

Inking the same beer oi a particular brand 1 ?—Yes, a few times 
a day over some months probably. 

Dr. Arthur Allen Deykin Townsend, examined by the 
Ai x orney-General I am a doctor of medicine and a bachelor of 
surgery, and I am medical superintendent at Barnwood House Hos¬ 
pital for Mental Disorders, at Gloucester. I have been a qualified 
medical man for thirty-one years, during which time I have devoted 
myself to mental diseases. I have not paid any special attention, 
as compared with mental diseases, to either neuritis or to any other 
form of physical condition as apart from mental condition. Mrs. 
Armstrong was brought to the hospital on the 22nd August, 1920. 
She came with Dr. Hincks. I saw her immediately on her arrival. 
She was in an exhausted condition. She was put to bed, and on 
examining her I found that her pulse was 120 per minute, her tem¬ 
perature was 100, her complexion sallow, her tongue was coated, 
and sordes round her mouth and teeth. I also examined her heart, 
and I came to the conclusion it was dilated and that there was a pre- 
systolic murmur. A catheter specimen of her urine was taken at 
once and examined, and found to contain albumen. The catheter 
specimen was taken because she would not pass it, or did not pass 
it. She did not pass urine in the hospital until she had been there 
for twenty-four hours. I attributed that to the vomiting and the 
loss of the body fluids. She remained in the hospital until 
the 22nd January. During that time I visited her almost 
daily. There was another medical officer, the assistant medical 
officer, .Miss Janet Smith. She had charge of the cade, but I visited 
her.daily. Dr. Smith is now married and in New Zealand. Dr. 
Smith kept me abreast of the history of the case. Mrs. Armstrong 
was in bed until some date in November. It is recorded in the 
case-book that soon after her admission she complained of loss of 
power in the left hand. On 7th September she said she had lost 
her power in her hands and feet. Up to a point that increased. 
I should think the peak point was reached about the end of Sep¬ 
tember. On 3rd October she wSs given a tonic medicine contain- 

103 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong, 

Dr Arthur A. D. Townsend ^ 

mg citrate of iron and ammonia, a hydrochloric solution of 
arsenic and nux vomica, three times a day. Thai, was ,' v f i 
anaemia, and is a general tonic. She was given that unlTl h 
November. There were 5 minims of arsenic in each dnsm F i v‘ 

mini ms would represent l/20th of a grain of arsenic., so that in 
the eouise of a day she would get 3/2<)ths of a grain That is « 
prepa^tmn or tonic which is'very' commonly modat tlm^ 

By Mr. Justice Dabliho—W ere other patients in (he hos 
pital taking the same mixture at the same timo'F.I could not say 

ttul^mSiein^ P- 

SL^i was given t0 her at a,1; ■"'« .. £« a y 

kind containing arsenic. There was wasting of Urn muscles of |Z 
aims and legs and feet in September. That was Mu> |,i mn K i l0 w ' 
complaining about her loss of power in the arms and logs. ‘ Wldlsi 
she was m the asylum her condition improved. I lor menial con' 
dition improved to a considerable extent! hut she improved ul so 
much mentally as physically. When she came in a specimen of 
d 16 *’. y nne Jf aS as 1 have already said, hy means of » 

catheter. That specimen was examined 'by !) r . Smilh, aitd was 
found to contain a light cloud of albumen. r |’|ie albumen onlv 

e«l 1 T d fOT *??’ tlU ‘ e °’ 01 ' i ' m,r < h ^ 1-Baps. Wl„m 

came she was able to walk aboul, quilo woll unaided 

hands quite freely. As regards her mental stale, the delusions 

Hmmd 0t +d t?gether Pa - Se,L 81,0 VttH NtlU <B-|*r<‘HK 0 <l, and she eon. 
■tmued to give expression to delusions of soIfishnoNs and umvnrMii 

■Sly an< oS f t£’n , lf r ttil0(1 in r h0r <luly (,<) !u ' r »»<I bor 

family. On the 1 11th January 1 reeoivod the letter (exhihit 2fi) from 
Dr. Hindis—" Dear Dr. Townsond-l am glad to hoar lb, M 
Aimstiong is improving mentally and physically From whm 

isux^ounamgs, ana her anxiety to irol. homo in u |(»h i i * , 
duties rpr,. i i. \\ * oorne i.o hi. an, hoi hoiiHohold 

&ttTc£5 b*k£ S"tllhlShi 

him There will Pa n ° ^ <iar a!)< ^ >nn ^ wife homo wi(,h 

«»pic, „ n , - Km] 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Dr Arthur A. D, Townsend 

lusions, that she was unworthy, and had failed to look after her 
husband and children, and so on. 

Examination continued —I replied on the 13th (exhibit 26)— 
“ Bear Dr. Hincks—Mrs. Armstrong has improved both mentally 
and physically, and Major Armstrong is now desirous of having 
her home. In my opinion she is not yet well mentally. She is 
constantly making accusations against herself of having misspent 
her life and failed in her duty towards her husband and children, 
and she says she has been guilty of selfishness, so you see her de¬ 
lusions have not gone. Her great anxiety is to return home, 
and so, under the circumstances, I think it will be well to get from 
the Committee on Monday next a leave of absence on trial for 
three months, and during that time it is possible that, with the 
change to home, she may return to her normal mental state, and, 
on the other hand, should she relapse and become impossible, she 
can return to Barnwood without re-certification. We consider that 
the paralysis of feet, arms, and legs was entirely functional. It 
is very much better, but not yet quite well.” I believe I sent an 
application form in that letter for the purpose of getting the leave 
of absence. If she was granted leave of absence, we would require 
a report about her from time to time. Leave of absence is granted 
by the. Committee of the hospital for varying periods. The reason 
of it is that, if a patient goes away with leave of absence and 
breaks down again, she can be returned to the hospital without re¬ 
certification. During the time the patients are on leave of 
absence reports have to be sent to the hospital as to 
his or her mental state, and at the end of three months, if the 
patient is well, she is discharged. Supposing she became seriously 
ill during her leave of absence, and it was reported, I should 
probably go down and see the patient myself, or send one of the 
medical officers. I presume if a patient was seriously ill and died 
she would be under the care of some medical man while she was on 
leave of absence, and it would depend on whether that medical man 
was able to certify the cause of death. If he could certify the cause 
of death, the ordinary steps would be taken. He would grant the 
death certificate. I should simply have to make a report enclosing 
a copy of the death certificate to the Board of Control. 

On the 14th Major Armstrong wrote—Dear Dr. Townsend— 
Many thanks for form of application for release on leave. After 
careful consideration, I do not wish my wife to avail herself of this, 
and prefer that she be released. As far as I can tell from conversa¬ 
tion and correspondence, her only trouble is caused by the knowledge 
of her surroundings. The original delusions have absolutely ceased, 
and I feel sure that a return to her home and light household duties 
will be beneficial.” It is not true, as stated in that letter,, that the 
original delusions had absolutely ceased. “ I am quite prepared 
to take the risk, and shall be gl^d if you will treat this letter as 
a formal request for release. My eldest daughter leaves for school 

105 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Dr Arthur A. D. Townsend 

on Tuesday, and the next child is with a friorid ovory moniin"_ 

who teaches him. It will take a few days to rearrange household 
matters, but if regulations permit I should like to take my wife 
back on Saturday week, the 22fld inst. Dr. Hineks tolls me ho has 

written you on the subject. ” 

I replied on the 16th (exhibit 19)—" Dear Major Armstrong 
l note that you do not wish me to make application to the 
Committee tor the leave of absence on trial, but that you wish 
Mrs Armstrong to be discharged, and that, you propose' to conic 

t r M T 22nd inst. I am sorry that 1 shall not 

be able to discharge Mrs. Armstrong as recovered, for ibis is 
at the present tune impossible, though wo think she is steadily 
°R,ly yesterday she told mo that her life had been 
of utter selfishness, both with regard to you, lu-r children, 

hnia ; ,i lie ., general , ly ’ and hor groat desire to got 
heme is paitly due to the fact that she wishes to amend in 
the^^future ivhat she thinks were her failures in the past. 

replied*» letter & day or tm> ag0 fmn I)r - to which I 

2 °i th S f a] "° r Armstron g replied—“ Dear Dr. Townsend, 
—Many thanks for your letter of I5th inst., which I quite 
understand. I shall come on Saturday (o take Mrs. Arnml rung 
back home and expect to arrive between one and two 
o clock A friend is lending me his covered car so that she may 

an;.r»»*— **•«*.ii™» 

T !,ff P Ht d * 01l the 21 n ; (exhibit 21 > “ " 1)t,;l ' r Major A rmslronu 
—I note that you will come for Mrs. Armstrong to-morrow 
Saturday. I am sorry that T shall probably he out when you 
come, but my colleague will be pleased to see you. Mrs A nnslron ' 
no^sWrT^bi excited at the idea of leaving, and last night sho had 
back to P you ” 1 h ° Pe thlS Unv08t WlH soon (lfT wlu '» nIi*' gets 

n Major Armstrong wrote* to me (exhibit 22 V— 

Dear Dr. Townsend, — T was worry not {.<> have «een you on 

journey and Mis. Armstrong is none Uio worsen ] l la vo been 
able to disabuse her mind of some absurd ideas, and no doubt the 

others will also vanish. 1 fear from what she has told me Mm 
has been rather a trying patient. Personally I am grateful to 
you for the care you took while she was there. As U, my last 
account, the treasurer has .£«] 18s„ which will have>nm back 
interest since 24th August, 1920. Will you ask the treasurer to 
put one against the other, there may bo a little due from mo or 
to mo, but he. can. ad just, this.” 

I replied on the 25th (exhibit 23)—“ I am very glad to hear 
M y - had a comfortable journey and that Mrs. Armstrong 
is none the worse, and I hope ffiat the change home may succeed 
106 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Dr Arthur A. D. Townsend 

in dissipating any erroneous ideas she may have. I am obliged 
to you for the kind remarks contained in your letter, and I 
only regret that I was not able to discharge Mrs. Armstrong 
as ^ recovered. With regard to the account, this will be 
adjusted by the auditor when he comes. I may say the 
advanced deposit, <£81 18s., in accordance with our custom, is paid 
into our current account, and there is no accrued interest. I 
shall hope at a later date to hear that you are able to report that 
Mrs. Armstrong is perfectly well.” 

There is a final letter (exhibit 24 )— tc Dear Major Armstrong, 
—I was grieved to hear from the matron yesterday that she 
had seen in the Morning Post a notification of the death of 
your wife, and let me offer you my deepest sympathy. I did 
not hear that Mrs. Armstrong had been ill. Was there any 
sudden development? When Mrs. Armstrong came to us there 
was a good deal of heart weakness, but we thought that this 
had to a great extent passed off. Again let me assure you of 
my sympathy in your great trouble.” I was surprised to hear 
of Mrs. Armstrong's death. From her physical condition when 
she left the hospital on 22nd January I had no cause to anticipate 
her early death. I had no answer to that last letter from Mr. 
Armstrong. 

Cross-examined by Sir H. Curtis Bennett —I found a wasting 
in the muscles of the limbs of Mrs. Armstrong in September. It 
increased for a few weeks. That was caused to some extent by 
her being ill in bed and disused. She was a case of acute melan¬ 
cholia^ Her delusions were all of that nature. Upon examining 
her urine I found albumen. It was again examined about a week 
or so after her admisson, but I have no knowledge of any further 
examination. After the 29th I have no record one way or the 
other as to albumen having been found. 

A point has been made about Mrs. Armstrong having been 
discharged at the request of Major Armstrong from your home. 
As I understand it, in the event of a death, all that you would 
require would be a report from the doctor attending, and to be 
satisfied that that doctor could properly give a death certificate?— 
That is all I should require. Once I had that I would not consider 
it incumbent upon me to make further inquiries. The letter 
dated 24th August, two days after Mrs. Armstrong was admitted 
to the home, is my letter. In that letter I say, “ There is no 
material change in your wife's mental state, her heart is distinctly 
feeble, and J. am sorry to say that there is albuminuria, but she 
is taking all the nourishment ordered, and is having a good 
amount of sleep. Mrs. Armstrong is very confused. She rambles 
in conversation, and to-day there is a considerable amount of 
difficulty in getting her to remain in bed, but, of course, in her 
debilitated state this is absolutely essential.” That was my view 
on the 24th August. 


107 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Dr Arthur A. D. Townsend ^ 

, l 8 ' 180 W T r0te the letter dated 15th October-" Dear Major 

_iinstiong — I am sorry we have, come to I Jus conclusion that 
wt ^ rms . tron f 18 suffering from neuritis, which is involving 
both hands, feet, and legs. This gU^ her feolimT h 

What^thf« SLe ha - S ®° ma l0SS of P (nvor all<1 '■"-ordination 
What the exact cause is it is difficult to say. l.| ; j« probably 

Arrow? 18 " . Un . f ° rtu “ atel y» the altered sensation is giving Mrs 
Arm trong the idea that she is being electrified, ami her attention 

feet^and «i ly conc ®* ltratei ? "P on condition of her hands ami 
teot, and as a result she is inclined to tako an exaggerated view 
of her condition. There is nothing in ibis neuritis h, <au.se you 

fa 3 bl f I 1 thou S ht ^ well to lot you know, ami if (here 

is any further development I shall inform you.” 

Dr' ^mf?Q t16 J 2nd 0 , c ,t° bur AI, 's. Armstrong was examined by 
Dr. boutar and myself. The report rends—'" We have con 
rnf 6 fifto-day Mrs. Armstrong’s case, and wore in agreement 
as to the nature of tho case, but you may like to have my 

* u “5 r ”'; ■*.'*'■»«'» K. s 

slv *R5 ”»«w *«* tr*«**•• 

on Tn Jw 18 a ”P ort frora l)r - ««»t a >' to me to bo sent 
*$ that report it says — “ The subjective sensations of 

ordefs a ndt£TVt 01 f plainS i ar ° (!0,u,noa in WimuU dis 
orders, and the distribution and variability of tho objective all era 

SbiiL 86 ^" 7! iich a ? ^ 

< The postures of »'•««, legs, hands, and feel, which 

than OTimrfhff-rofw UmeS, T iU \ d '' Ur pl ' i; flU ff« 0H,: f»m«l.toTml rather 
■ 1”‘ n ° r g amc tiouble. In her general mental attitude towards 
her physical manifestations there is that insist,eneo on them and 

t»ri 9 Hf n ff n f rat +° n °i a, i tcnt ' on towards them which are so oliarae 
teristic of functional disorders.” It was (lie view of Dr. Soutar 

and .me on the 22nd .October what she was sulToriim from was 
functional. By functional I mean a disability or loss of power 
or sensation without organic disease. I fornWl tbo im irE n 
{ r0 ” l what , 1 saw and found, and the general history, that in Mrs 

ofJfnic° ng The 86 T 6nt,irely ,lu ° <:f '° miT " 1 ' w ^ ll,>,,! ' a »yH>inf? 

S ?' , lhe repor * 8"°* « a .v, “ No doubt she had din 

comforts of a neurotic type which may have been the starting 
point of the functional failure of the limhs, ami .lisuso had if 

fH^ 1 ^ amtal i nerl an<1 . < ' on,;in,Ift(1 thero. If was not aide that,, under 
lirection and suggestion, the postures could he readily modified.” 
Dr Soutar told rne that. During the time Mrs. Armstrong was 
ffen • Tn° d Ma]l , )r A - rrasl:ro » 1 R viBiUwl her alx.ut six times, about 
thfl 1 - n , thre ® we , e1 ™- Tt was at my suggestion that ho came at 
Iff ™ mt ® rv!kl ? of time He always appeared to have a natural 
he dfne ^i?’ 8 j? 0 / 11 * 1 ev eryf.hing that I suggested should 

j- r J - tlT ? e Ma J or Armstrong camo he took the oppor¬ 
tunity of discussing her caso with mo when I was at home. Before 

m TT he ®P eciah f' 1 a8 b?d his permission, and ho readily 
agreed. He, allowed her to remain on until the 22nd January', 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Dr Arthur A. D. Townsend 

view be ^pressed was that, as she was better, perhaps 
being ^removed to home surroundings again she would get rid of 
the delusions which were still partially there. S 

A 110 .,?!f" 6 » a Tu! ned - by tile Attoe:nbt -Gbnbeal—I wrote on the 24-th 
mfr’ There is no material change in your wife’s mental state, 
minima ” “f mctl y feeble > and I am sorry to say there is albu- 
, , f Ier he . art was stiH very weak, the murmur was 

present, and her pulse was rapid. That indicates exhaustion. 
Ihere would also be some dilation. I did not attach very great 
impoitance to the albuminuria, but I am always very sorry to see 
albuminuria m any case. It disappeared about the 28th or 29th 
but I could not give the. exact date. The note I have on the 28th 
is Albuminuria practically cleared up.” The letter says 11 I 
beg to acknowledge receipt of agreement and list of questions.” 
lhe hst of questions is attached to the certificates. On the 15th 

M,? b A 1 in I r y ’ - 1 a r S ? rry c we have oome t0 the conclusion that 
Mis. Armstrong is suffering from neuritis, which is involving both 
hands fee and legs.” By “ we ” I mean myself and my two 
medical colleagues. This gives her feelings of discomfort, and 
she has some loss of power and co-ordination. What the exact 
cause is it is difficult to say. It. is probably toxaemia ” That 
was our view at the time. At that time I had' no idea of an active 
poison having been administered to her. With regard to the 
statement, We consider the paralysis of the feet, arms, and legs 
is entirely functional. . Looking at the subsequent history of tfee 
$ a ? e *° ™ e . I think that that opinion was not correct. If 

I had been told that the patient had received doses of arsenic 

^ f ? r \ C °f 1 j g , m i t0 the a ®y lurn 1 should have formed the opinion 
that she had had some toxin. ^ 

.. „ \ ^ Justice Dabbing—Y ou would not now say that her 

■ state at-that time, her disabilities, were entirely functional ?_I 

would quality it by saying that at one period there was an organic 
cause as well. ' 

. Re-eaamination continued— The wasting of the muscles that I 
referred to began, I think, in September, and continued, so far 
as I recollect, to the end of September. During that time I think 
the neuritis was functional. Wasting of the muscles may be due 
to organic or functional neuritis. If it is an organic condition 
nerve condition, you would get wasting of the muscles: if it is 
functional, you would get it from disuse. If It is organic, there 
is something which causes the wasting of the muscles; and if it is 
functional, and the muscles are disused, there is a tendency to 
waste from disuse. J ' 

I want to come to this letter of the 22nd October—" We have 
considered to-day Mrs. Armstrong’s case, &c.” "No doubt she 
had discomforts of a neurotic type which may have been the 
starting point of the functional failure.” Does that mean neuritis 
followed by functional failure?—£>r. Soutar meant neuritis by 
xnfit. ■ ■ 


109 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Dr Arthur A. D. Townsend 

That was the opinion formed on this 22nd October i —22nd 
October. 

After that time, speaking generally, did she make marked 
progress physically'I—She made steady progress physically, 

John F. Davies, examined by Mr. V 'VGHell —I am a member 
of the Pharmaceutical Society, anti .1 carry on business at LI ay as 
a chemist, J have been there for about forty years. My daughter 
is married to Mr. Martin, solicitor. I know Mr. Armstrong, 
Before the war he had from time to time made certain purchases 
of weed-killer and arsenic from mo. A.s regards the purchases 
of weed-killer, I have a record in the ledger. As regards one 
record of the arsenic we have lost the poison hook, and 1 have 
only got it in the ledger, but as regards I ho other we have it in the 
poison book. These purchases began in 1012. On the 27th July, 
1912, on© gallon of weed-killer was purchased. That weed killer 
is composed of a solution of arsenic and caustic, soda, and is sold 
in a concentrated form for dilution with water. The next pur¬ 
chase was on the 23rd June, 1912, 3 gallons of weed-killer. The 
next was on 23rd June, 1913, 3 gallons of weed-killer. Then on 
2nd May, 1914, 1 lb. of caustic soda and lb. of arsenic. Them 
there is an entry in the poison book on 7th June, 1919, 1 lb. 
arsenic. 1 made that sale myself. Mr. Armstrong name* in to 
the shop and said he wanted to buy some arsenic. I asked him 
what he required it for. I To said lie wanted it, for wood killer. 
I told him it would be necessary to use caustic soda, or common 
washing soda, to dissolve it, in which case ho would have*? to boll 
it. ^ He said, he had dabbled in chemistry, and knew all about it. 
I tried to sell him weed-killer, hut; ho said he preferred to make 
it himself. We discussed the amount he would require, and 
eventually I sold him half a pound. Then on 4 th May, 1920, he 
purchased 4 gallons of liquid weed-killer, and on 4th August, 
11920, two tins of powdered weed-killer. There is one more sale, 
llth January, 1921. That sale was not made by me; it was made 
by my assistant. It is signed for in the poison book. That is 
Major Armstrong's signature. When ready-made weed killer is 
sold, the purchaser should sign the poison book. There is one 
other purchase on the 4th August, 1920. Thai; was purchased 
by Jay; we did not get Major Armstrong's, signature. Tt was 
charged to Mr. Armstrong's account. l' have searched for tlml 
sale.. in. the poison book, but I have not been able to find it. 

I remember my son-in-law, Mr. Martin, being seized with ill¬ 
ness in October, 1921. I went to the house on one or *wo occasions 
when he was ill. On Sunday, 30th October, I selected a clean bottle, 
washed it thoroughly, and took it down to Dr. ITincks, T washed 
it half a dozen times before T took it. I afterwards received it 
back with a-sample of urine in it. That was on 4ho Monday 
morning. Dr. Hincks himself brought‘it to my shop. He sealed 
it in my presence with my seal. He also put a label on it. It 
110 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

John F. Davies 

was packed up immediately and sent off to the Clinical Research 
ae^haf/nm^“f' A Shown bottle)—That is the bottle. I sold 
ThA «f • d ° f , whlt ? arsenic myself on the 7th June, 1919 
L the ^ 1 did not sel1 tbe arsenic 

exhibft 33? Th«tf 7 A 9 ] ; 14 f as “? assistant, Hird. (Shown 

presents' 5 thTant? °lT t . r . ade wra PPings and labels. That 
’ appearance that white arsenic does when it is sold 

to a customer. We have to colour it 

An , r .?' os t ei ; amined by sir H. Curtis BmnncTT-The only two 
entnes which appear m the poison book are the entries of arsenic 

Tann fl ,t reo\° n ? 6 7th June ’ 1919 ’ and the second on the 11th 

Januaiy, 1921. I cannot point to any entry in the poison book 

Atm 6 ?* 1011 we e d-killer. The sale was not made direct to Major 
Armstrong, but to the gardener, and we put it in the leduer and 

are Ugh Vh h et SUffiCient ; the ^ Serf'S 

j t -n h -J® no , entry 111 the P oison book of any purchase of 

The d a k niou r nt ei of er b J T ^ a i or Armstrong or any of Vs servants. 
The amount of weed-killer purchased by Major Armstrong over 
these two years is not considerable considering the amofnt of 
ground he had to cover. The sale of arsenic on 7th June 1919 
was a sale by me to Major Armstrong himself. That arsenic was 

coloured by Th« I 1 * 1 - har ?° a I' . It l is essential that it should be 
coloured The arsenic which has been shown to the jury would 

be exactly similar to the arsenic which I sold in June 1919 I 

occTsiL whether or not ibis some of the arsenic I sold on that 
occasion. 1 he purchase which has been referred to of powdered 

gardener^Jay ^ ^ ^ U ® USt ’ was a purchase made by the 

. He said that he purchased four tins, and used three and a 
Halt. Do you say he only purchased three?—That is all we have 
charged for, and that is all he could have purchased, or else we 
have made a mistake. 6 

By Mr. Justice: Darling —As a general rule we enter weed¬ 
killer in the poison book, but when gardeners come for it we do 
not enter it. 

Cross-examination continued—All the purchases of weed-killer 
were made by the gardener. There was another chemist in the 
town from whom he could have purchased poisons, but he finished 
up in the early part of 1921. His name was Mr. Stokoe. My 
recollection is very vague with regard to the purchase on the 11th 
January, 192il, but my assistant says X was present. 

What your assistant says is—" Major Armstrong came in 
asked for ajsemc, and I asked what he wanted it for, and he said 
weed-killer. Then Mr. Davies came forward and told him that he 
would want potash with it to dissolve it.” Do you remember 
mat t —1 remember it, but I remember it in connection with the 
sale of half a pound of arsenic in 1919. If one wanted to buy 
arsenic for the purpose of making weed-killer it would be the 
proper thing to buy caustic soda as well. Major Armstrong did 

111 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

iota F. .Davies 

that. The only record we have of the sale of arsenic in the ledger 
is before the war. 

By Mr. Justice Darling —There is no record of his buying 
caustic soda on the 11th January, 1921. That was a cash transac¬ 
tion. t ? 

Cross-examination continued —There is also no record of ^ his 
buying caustic soda in 1919. That was also a cash transaction. 
Caustic soda is usually contained in 1 lb. tins. The proper pro¬ 
portion to mix weed-killer at is about half and half. ^ I remember 
Major Armstrong on one occasion telling me he had his own recipe 
for making weed-killer. He told me he knew all about it. 
(Shown tin)—That appears to be white arsenic. It is not tinted 
with charcoal. It has our label on it. That cannot be the packet 
that was sold., to Major Armstrong in 1919. 

I suggest to you that the remainder of the packet which you 
sold to him in 1919 is what you have seen coloured with charcoal. 
You have told me you cannot say one way or the other ?—Yes. 

-."■. But it is similar?—It is similar. . # 

I suggest, and at the proper time I am going to prove it, that 
that is the remainder of the purchase which was made on 11th 
January,.. 1921. You say you were not present at that purchase?-— 
I say my recollection, of it is very vague.. My assistant tells, me 
1 was present. It ought to have been coloured. The weed-killer 
also ought to have been entered in the poison book. It would be 
the custom to wrap it up in two papers. That is in case of 
accident; one paper is very easily broken. That packet is 
wrapped up as a purchase from my shop would be wrapped, up* 
but it is white and not coloured. I could not exactly say how 
. long I had the bottle into which the urine was put in my posses¬ 
sion before I handed it over to Dr. Hincks, but I should think 
perhaps two or three months. I am just speaking from guesswork. 
The bottle had contained peroxide of hydrogen, and that is about 
the time that that quantity of peroxide would last. That is what 
I am going on. It had been empty about three or four days, 
I should think, standing in the shop. Empties of all kinds are 
put into the cupboard, but no preparation of arsenic would go 
into that cupboard. Bottles that have contained poisons would 
be put into the cupboard—all bottles to be returned to wholesale 
houses. The reason why I said arsenic would not he put in there 
is because we do not send any empty arsenic cans back, in that 
wav; they a re not returned. Arsenic generally comes in parcels, 
and we put it into stock cans, which we keep. We do not send any 
empty tins back. There are only practically two preparations 
of arsenic which we make ourselves, the liquor arsenicalis of the 
British Pharmacopoeia, and liquor arsenici hydrochloric. They 
go into stock bottles. The place where the cupboard is where 
the empty bottles go, is the place where the washing of the bottles 
takes place—in the same room.^ I did not use any chemical for 
washing out the peroxide of hydrogen, only cold water. It is a 
112 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

John F. Davies 

green bottle, called a Corbin Court bottle. The cork was a new 

S* 8 '. 1 h , ave t0 shape the cork. It fitted the bottle. 

Having got the bottle back, after washing it out with cold water 

and sendmg it away—when it came back from Dr. Hincks I sent it 
straight away. 

sm amined by Mr Vachell When I took the bottle to my 

I did o7lfnn T + ^ P Ur ?° Se ° f - gettin ^ a sam P le of urine 

l did not know what would be done with it to my own knowledge 

7* I i, re ? m i ed - it WO y T ld ^ be s t nt t0 the Clinical ^search Associa- 
ion foi analysis. Under those circumstances, as a chemist, I 
leahsed the high necessity of having a perfectly clean bottle. I 
+7 a d C0l ?¥ * 1 ° see tbat the bottle was clean. I washed it 
Srt ghl UTt h C ean water myseIf - 1 do aot think it is possible 

S£ 1. Z cupw?” b ? p«p«»- 

By Mr. Justice Darling—C an you imagine any way whatever 

bottle?—I cannot ^ ^ qUantity at a11 can have S ot into that 

Re-examination continued—W ith regard to the arsenic pro¬ 
duced I cannot tell whether this parcel was actually sold by me 

+7* 14 6V - ld f tly ca T from us > as it bas our label on it. 
We get the arsenic from a wholesale house. It comes to us white 
When we make a retail sale we ought to colour it with charcoal 
soot, or indigo. ’ 

_ I suppose you at least realise the possibility of a retail sale 

being made without the Act being complied with in that respect?_ 

i am sure 1 did not make one personally, but it is possible that 

sucn a thing could be done. 

John Hiiid, examined by Mr. Micexethwait—I reside at Ash- 
brook House, Hay, and I am an assistant to Mr. Davies, chemist. 

1 know Major Armstrong. I recollect him making a purchase of 
arsenic from me last year. (Shown poison book)—That, is his 
signature. He signed that in my presence. When he made 
that purchase he came into the shop and asked for a quarter- 
pound of arsenic I asked him what it was for, and he said weed- 
fciiler. _ Then Mr. Davies reminded me to colour it with char- 
+L a T 7 hlcb 1 d , ld ,> and ^en I entered it in the poison book. After 
that I pin a label on it—the slip “ Poison ” label on it, with 
Arsenic on it and wrapped it up in two papers and tied it 
with string. It was charcoal I coloured it with. I cannot 
recollect whether I got the charcoal from the bottle in the shop 
or trom.the warehouse. 1 

By Mr. Justice Darling —We keep a small portion of char¬ 
coal m a bottle m the shop. I should say that I would put half 
an ounce or perhaps an ounce of charcoal into the quarter pound 
of arsenic. We do not weigh the charcoal. 

Cross-examined by Sir H. Curtis Bennett— I have always 
understood that arsenic had to be coloured when retailed as a pro- 
1 ■■■■; ' 113 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

John Hird 

tection against accident. When Major Armstrong ^ cam© in he 
told me he wanted it for weed-ldller, and he also said something 
about a recipe for a weed-killer; he said he had a recipe for 
making it. I would wrap the arsenic up in one paper, and then 
re-wrap it in another. Having wrapped it up in the two pieces 
of paper, 1 would then tie it up and put a label on it bearing on 
the face of it “ Poison ” and <c Arsenic,” and the name and 
address of Mr. Davies. (Shown package produced to Mr. Davies 
in cross-examination)—That is a package with a label on the out¬ 
side such as I have described and the name and address of Mr. 
Davies. I notice that there are two pieces of paper on it, one 
white and then the blue one outside. 

I suggest to you that that is part of the sale that yon made 
to Major Armstrong on the 11th January, 1921—half of it. That 
may be so, I supposed—I do not think so. I would wrap up the 
whole quarter-pound in that packet. 

Looking at that piece of paper do you think that if you sold 
4 ounces you could wrap it up in that piece of paper ?—'Four 
ounces would go into the paper. I do not think 4 ounces have 
been in it, but I should say 4 ounces could be got into it. 

If there is any doubt about it we will have a test made at 
the right time; but that is your view, that you could got. 4 ounces 
into that piece of paper ?—It could be done. 

We are thrown back to this terrible position, that., if that; is 
part of what you sold on that day, then you made a mistake and 
did not colour it. That is right, is it not?—I have such a good 
recollection of colouring it. 

...Because it is a usual custom; is that right?—No, not exactly. 
I have not sold much arsenic. 

By Mr. Justice Darling —You have not sold much arsenic, 
and you say you have a good recollection that you coloured it on 
the 11th January?—Ices, I have a good recollection of colouring it. 

Cross-examination continued —Your recollection is that Mr. 
Davies was there, and that Mr. Davies came forward and told Mr. 
Armstrong that he would want potash with it to dissolve it?—Yen. 

Mr. Davies says he does not remember saying anything of 
the sort. Do you think that may be a mistake by you ?—It came 
very clearly to my recollection. 

Thak package is done up as you would do a package 
up, and is labelled as you would label a package, is it not?—T 
cannot say about the blue paper. I do not remember the blue 
paper at all. The label is as I would put a label *on Very 
probably the white paper is the sort of paper I would use. I have 
no recollection of the blue paper. 

Re-examined by Mr. Vachelu —We wrap up arsenic in two 
papers, because one would not be strong enough. I do not r<> 
member using in January last # any blue paper such as is on the 
package produced for the purpose of wrapping up a drug of this 




Evidence for Prosecution. 

. John Hird 

Mr» C \ er ' ,( Siora package)—The brown paper is similar to 
paper I wou d use. I notice that there is a label on the inner 

When\n d A a S ° th6 ° Ut6r P f per ' rt is much safe f to do that. 
I £S>IWt M' mS n r0nS WaS - m the Sh ° p 0n the lltk January, 1921, 

with cl a-cil'’’ Vh, SaJm f• T ! “ ?? 0 not for S e t to colour it 
t 7. ( n « , 1 h a dlstmc t recollection that I coloured it 

I stated before the magistrates that I tinted it with charcoal and 
it was wrapped in two papers. I was examinTd on the 12th 
January, and I was recalled on the 9th February, 1922 On the 
second occasion I said, “ The evidence which I gave before £e 
Couit on 1-th January is true and correct.” Mr. Matthews was 
present on behalf of the prisoner on both occasions, and on neither 
occasion did he challenge the truth of what I said, nor did he at 
any time suggest that I had forgotten or omitted to colour the 
arsenic which I sold on the 11th. Until I came into the witness- 
box to-day I had no idea that it was going to be suggested that I 
had not coloured the arsenic which I sold on the lltl/January last. 

Deputy Chief Constable Albert Weaver examined Vr 

^‘TTlTW 1 , "S' diW constable ’ at Hertford 7 At 

Bro S ,°d Street Her ? if" r* 1 *® P ri “" “ his office in 

oad otieet, Haj, and I told him I was going to arrest him I 

cautioned him. I charged him with attempting to murdepone 1 
Oswald Norman Martin, at Cusop, on 26th October last, by admin 

cent ” g P We°W p‘’ * He repIied > " I am quite W 

-i iT «® pt hl1 ? lr ? the oftce a considerable time while we 
seal ched the office. I asked him to clear out his pockets. I also 
searched his pockets There were various letters and articles 
pulled out of his pockets and they were put on the end of his desk 
JnnlTf^ them into a brown paper parcel. They were left lying 

incident 7 occurred!" 6 ^ ^ »P- ^ 

r ' ^ hat ^ as , nt?—During the search in the office I heard Chief 
Inspector Crutchett remonstrate with the prisoner for touching 
these _ particular articles. The prisoner was moved from thf 
position which he was m then and put further out in the room 
W- the P ro P er ty up in a brown paper parcel. I eventually 

took the brown paper parcel to the police station at Hay after the 
prisoner had been removed there. I handed it tl Sergeant 
Williams, with the request that he should lock it up, and he did 
so m my presence On Thursday, 19th January, I charged the 
prisoner wijh murder and cautioned him in the usual way He 
said, I am absolutely innocent.” 

Cross-examined by Sir H. Curtis Bennett— He said “ I re¬ 
peat what I said before, I am absolutely innocent.” When he 

down m d °t u he 3 /t he “ ade a statement, which was taken 
the tiiino-^ 8 ^ * ^® ard Mr. Crutchett tell the prisoner to leave 
the things alone there were Sergeant Worthing, Chief Inspector 

115 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Deputy Chief Constable Albert Weaver 

Crutchett, and myself in the room. We were searching his office 
at the time. It is a fairly large office. 

Be-exainined by Mr. Vachell— Inspector Crutchett and I were 
searching the room when I heard a rustle of papers, and as I turned 
round I heard Inspector Crutchett say, “ What are you interfer¬ 
ing with that forT* or “ What are you doing there ?” or words to 
that effect. 


Chief Inspector Alfred Crutchett, examined by Mr. Vaoitmll 
—I am one of the detective chief inspectors at Scotland Yard. 
About ten o’clock on the morning of the 31st December hud;, 1, 
along with one of the officers from the Yard, Sergeant Sharp, 
went to Mr. Armstrong’s office at Hay. 

I think you can probably tell us in your own way what look 
place?—We were accompanied by Superintendent Weaver, who 
has already given evidence, and we went into the cilice and up the 
stairs, and knocked at a room door which he understood was Mr. 
Armstrong’s office. A voice said “ Come in,” and. wo word; in, 
and Mr. Weaver introduced me to Mr. Armstrong. 1 So said,' 
c - This Ms-Chief Inspector Crutchett from Scotland Yard,” and 
then said to Mr. Armstrong, Inquiries have recently been made 
concerning the sudden illness of Mr. Oswald Norman Martin a,Tier 
his taking tea with you on the 26th October last at your house at 
Cusop. He was taken ill soon after he left you on iiial. date, and 
was later seized with sickness and purging. A specimen of Ids 
urine was taken on 30th October, and arsenic was found in it. 
These symptoms point to arsenical poisoning. It is known that 
you have purchased arsenic, the last occasion being on the 11th 
January, 1921. It is, therefore, necessary to inquire whether, and 
if so how, and by whom, arsenic could have been introduced into 
the food taken at the tea party. It may be that you would like 
? sta ? ement as to your own actions on the 26th October, 
why Mr. Martin was asked to tea, as to what became of the arsenic 
purchased by you, and as to any other facts that may throw li<dd; 
on the matter, but I must tell you that anything you do say will 
be taken down m writing and may be used in evidence hereafter.” 
Mi- Armstrong replied, " Certainly. This is a very mvmm 

ZTrr f h h p r u Y 1 can - 1 was not ti»2* m-Honio 

rnmi » Y Mr ‘ Mart \ n ’ s ™ne, and I appreciate tho cir¬ 
cumstances call for some explanation from me. I will , na k 0 a 

statement and tell you all I know.” Mr. Armstrong then made 

a statement, which was taken down in writing in his nrosono.o and 

ShaY^Yt’ a Y Super “ tendent Weaver’s presence, by Sergeant 

rected it andsi^Y^YY bj Mr ‘ Armatron K himsolf, ho cor¬ 
rected it and signed it, and at my suggestion he put at the end of it 

&at it was a voluntary statement made without being quest,ionod 

ej fat sT"* *■“ “““ * 

116 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Chief Inspector Alfred Crutchett 

For the rest it is his own dictation?—It is his own. 

Statement by the Prisoner. 

[The Clerk of Assize read the statement as follows :_] 

“ Broad Street Hay, 31st December, 1921. I, Herbert Rowse 
Armstrong after having been cautioned by Chief Inspector 
Uutchett that anything I may say may be used in evidence here- 
alter, wish to make the following statement:—Mr. Martin is a 
bi other solicitor in Hay. He had been married in June last but 
owing to a personal bereavement [my wife’s death in February 
last] _ I had been unable to do any entertaining. I asked Mr. 
7J“' tln t0 kave , a 0U P of tea on Wednesday, the 26th October’ 
* , 1 At that time I had two men working in my garden, which 
had been allowed to get into a very bad state. Their names are 
MaoGeorge, who was working in the garden, and Stokes, who was 
electing a fowl house. They both live in Bear Street, Hay. I 
had no special reason for inviting Mr. Martin to tea other "than 
I had not entertained him since his marriage, and at that time 
I was not entertaining on a very large scale. On the day in ques¬ 
tion Mr. Martin arrived at my house about 5 p.m. I had pre¬ 
viously gone home to see that everything was in order. I took him 
round the garden and showed him various improvements that I 
proposed to make. We then entered the drawing-room, where tea 
had been laid out by my housekeeper, Miss Pearce. As far as 
1 remember, the food was placed in three plates on a wicker stand 
(I can trace [remember] the wicker stand, as I have a more ornate 
one m brass, and my housekeeper had asked which I preferred) 
lhe food consisted of buttered scone, buttered currant loaf in 
slices, and bread and butter. I handed Mr. Martin some scone 
» \ Pla i 6 - H ® t0 ° k s ° me > and I also took some, which I ate, 
“ d J C aft . e ™ds P aced the dish of currant bread by his sid^ 
on the table and asked him to help himself. I shall be able to 
ascertain by going to my house where the scone and buttered bread 
[currant] loaf were bought. I remember Mr. Martin saying that 

r S “■ f r° U /^ e dish of his ’ and 1 know that he ate 
a ? learad ^ dlsh ; Afterwards I asked him to smoke, 

a d I remember that he said he was off colour, and, instead of 

v r aV1 , n - S a P 1 P ?’ he W0uld | • moke a ci £ arette - At the time both Mr. 

we ” Tu rkm " at hi S h P r ^sure on some sales of a 
1 I 16 ’ ^r d * kls probably the reason of his being 
off [below] far. Mr. Martin and I discussed general office organisa- 
ma^ remember telling him that I was .understaffed; I also 
was not feel mg the effects of hard work. It was light when we 
be a an tea, but it soon beca me necessary for me to light the gas. 

correctious^niade by Armstrong. d6leti * nS and th ° Se in ^are brackets the 


117 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Statement By the Prisoner 

and as I did so the globe came off and fell, which caused it to 
break. Mr. Martin left about 6 p.m., and drove home in his 
own car. All the food which Martin consumed was prepared by 
Miss Pearce, and was waiting for us when we entered the drawing- 
room; and either she and [or] the maid brought the tea and hot 
water in when we had taken our seats. Miss Pearce had previously 
asked if the food (which was subsequently placed on the table) 
would be satisfactory, and I had said c< Yes.” The following 
morning I went to Mr. Martin’s office to get various documents 
relating to Captain Hope’s sale, which was to be completed on the 
2nd November. It was a big property sale in which he was act¬ 
ing for several purchasers. I was told that Mr. by one of his 
clerks (I cannot remember which) that he had been taken ill. I 
think now that it was Preene, as I have a recollection of him 
saying that Dr. Hincks had been called and had said that he 
thought Mr. Martin was suffering from jaundice. Mr. Martin’s 
illness was causing great inconvenience, as the completions wore 
fixed for the following Wednesday, and there was a great deal to be 
done. I sent a message to Mr. Martin by on© of his clerks (I do 
not remember which), and said that if I could assist in any pos¬ 
sible way and he would authorise his clerks that I would carry the 
matter through if he were not well enough. The next thing that 
I remember was that, as he was not down at his office on Saturday, 
I called at his house on the Sunday morning after church. T 
saw Mrs. Martin, and she told me that he had been very sick, but 
was better, and would be down at his office on Monday. It was 
not necessary for Mr. Martin to accept my offer of assistance, as 
he was able to attend his office and carry through the com piei ions 
by the stated date. After Mr. Martin’s illness he told inn that he 
had been very sick, and that he had had a thorough clean out. 
Prior to his illness I had chaffed him about his practice of motor¬ 
ing to and from his office, saying that if he did not take walking 
exercise he would be ill. I always walk to my office, not possessing 
a car. I am continually meeting Mr. Martin professionally, and 
he and his wife have a standing dinner invitation to my house 
when a date can be fixed. The first time I purchased arsenic was 
In 1914. I think I hare got the receipt in my garden hook. 
At this time I came across a recipe for weed-killer, con si sling of 
caustic soda and arsenic, which was very much cheaper than the 
liquid weed-killer which I [my gardener] had previously been in 
the habit of purchasing. I therefore purchased arsenic and caustic 
soda from Mr. Davies, chemist, of Hay, and signed tj?e book. T 
remember him telling me that the arsenic had to bo mixed with 
charcoal, and he mixed it accordingly . I made the wood -killer at 
my house by boiling the caustic soda and arsenic in an old petrol 
tin. 1 think I put in all I purchased. It might have been in 
the proportion of equal parts oj each, but I do not remember, I 
think Miss Pearce will remember the preparation. It was all 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Statement fey tfee Prisoner 

used in the garden as a weed-killer. I have always had consider¬ 
able trouble with weeds on the path of my vegetable garden. The 
purchase of a lb. of arsenic in June, 1919, was for the same 
purpose, and was used in exactly the same way. The liquid and 
powder weed-killer were purchased [to my order] by Jay, of 
Castle Gardens, Hay (my gardener ), who attended to my garden at 
that time to my order . I don't even know how much was pur¬ 
chased, and I never saw it. I believe it was kept in the stable. 
In January, 1921, I made a further purchase of ^ lb. of arsenic at 
Mr. Davies's shop. A small amount of this was used as a weed¬ 
killer after being boiled with caustic soda by myself. It was not 
a success, and 1 which explains why I have some left at my house. 
When I purchased this arsenic it was mixed with charcoal. I 
am keeping this to make a further trial later on. I remember 
talking to Mr. Taylor, the bank manager of Hay, respecting my 
recipe for weed-killer. I remember being pleased at being able to 
make my ^ own weed-killer at a much cheaper rate than the pre¬ 
pared article, which after the war was very dear, and I could not 
afford it. This last preparation I carried out myself as before by 
boiling the arsenic with caustic soda in a petrol can. Although 
1 have no motor car, I use petrol for a petrol gas installation. 
From the 2nd September to the 20th September, 1921 [as far 
as I can trace], I did not leave Hay, but on the 21st September, 
1921, I went motoring with Mr. Lee, surveyor of taxes of Derby, 
who took myself and my son to Bath, where my son was returning 
to school. We returned on the Sunday following. I don't fake 
chocolates myself, and have not purchased any of them since I 
bought a small box for my late wife in [August] 1920. These 
I bought in Hay, but I can't remember the shop. They were cer¬ 
tainly not Fullers', which I was of the impression were not procur¬ 
able at [in] Hay. During the period between the 2nd and 20th 
September, 1921, while I was in Hay transacting business at my 
office and residing at my house. I did not leave the town. I may 
have called on friends socially, but I do not remember. I am un¬ 
able to throw any light upon the finding of arsenic in Mr. Martin's 
urine, or as to the cause of his illness after having tea with me 
on the 26th October, 1921. I did not touch the food he ate in 
any way, and partook myself of what was on the same dish. If 
arsenic got into the food, I cannot account for it being there. 
The cupboard where I keep the arsenic at my house contains boot- 
cleaning materials, and is unlocked. Nobody in the house, so far 
as I know,*is aware of the presence of arsenic in the house. This 
arsenic I speak of is the only poison in my possession anywhere, 
excepting, of course, any contained in medicine. I have a medi¬ 
cine chest in my [a] bedroom. I make this statement quite volun¬ 
tarily and without being questioned. H. Rows© Armstrong, 31st 
December, 1921." 


119 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

. Chief Inspector Alfred Crutcbett ■ 

Chief Inspector Alfred Crutchett —examination continued — 
After he had read it he signed it in my presence. I then said to 
him, c< Mr. Weaver has something to say to you,” and Mr. Weaver 
then cautioned him and formally arrested him on a charge of 
attempting to murder Mr. Martin by administering the arsenic 
to him on the 26th October, 1921. To that charge Mr. Arm¬ 
strong said, ‘ £ I am quite innocent.” I then said to Mi*. Arm¬ 
strong, £e I suggest that you empty your pockets and put the 
contents on to your desk, and that property we can take away 
with us and examine later. We are now going to search your 
office.” He emptied his pockets on to a blotting pad on his desk. 
The whole of the property was then put by Superintendent Weaver 
into a piece of brown paper that we found in the room, and 
the brown paper was then put on to the desk, and I 
turned the sides over and put a hand blotter over it to keep it 
together. It was not tied. The ends were open. Mr. Weaver 
then searched the prisoner, and afterwards we examined the 
contents of his desk and the letters that were on the desk, and the 
cupboard on the back of the desk. After the prisoner had boon 
searched I requested him to sit in the middle of the room on a 
chair in the centre. He was sitting on the chair while wo were 
searching the desk. After we had examined the letters that were 
on his desk and the contents of his desk and the cupboard at the 
back of his desk Mr. Armstrong asked if he might sit at his desk 
and examine some business letters that were there. I had seem the 
contents of some of these letters, and, realising that they might', 
need immediate attention, and having no desire to obstruct his 
business more than was necessary, I told him he might do so. I 
called in Sergeant Worthing and told him to sit on the opposite 
side of the desk to see that he did not interfere with anything 
else but business letters, which I pointed out to him, and l also 
told defendant that he was not to touch anything else but the 
letters. The superintendent and I then continued our search of 
the office, and after a few minutes I heard a cracking of paper. 

I immediately turned round and found the defendant had removed 
the blotter from the top of the property, had got the brown paper 
open, and was looking through some letters that were in the parcel. 

I said, cf What are you doing there? I distinctly (.old you not 
to touch anything but business letters.” I requested him to move 
from the desk, and he did so. Sergeant Worthing assured mo 
that he had taken nothing out of the parcel, and I then suggested 
to Mr. Weaver that he should tie it up and put it in his pocket, 
which he did; and soon afterwards the prisoner was nemoved to 
the police station. 

I saw the contents of his pockets on the 4th January. 
Sergeant Williams, the officer in charge at Hay Police Station, 
had them at that time. It was at Hay Police Station 
that I saw them. I examined # the contents in the presence of 

120 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Chief Inspector Alfred Crutchett 

Sergeant Sharp. Among the letters in the parcel I found a small 
packet containing a white powder. There was no rubber band 
on it then. (Shown exhibit No. 32)—That is the packet. It 
was not folded like that; it was folded as a chemist would fold 
teethmg powder It was not wrapped in anything; it was among 
the letters Upon discovering that I sent Sergeant Sharp, who 
also saw the package, to fetch Sergeant Williams. I showed the 
package to Sergeant Williams. I retained possession of that 
until I returned to London on about the 6th or 7th. I handed 
the package to Mr. Webster, the analyst, on the 6th at St. Mary's 
Hospital, Paddington. On the day of his arrest, the 31st 
December, after we left the office we went to Mayfield, Cusop, the 
prisoner's house. I there saw Miss Pearce, and took a statement 
from her, and also Mrs. Price, and we searched the house In 
the library or study, in the cupboard on the left-hand side of the 
fireplace, I found a packet that has been produced containing the 
coloured arsenic. That is exhibit 33. I took possession of that, 
and handed it to Mr. Webster on the 6th January also, along with 
the other things. I # took possession of. In the same cupboard I 
found tins containing some substance. They were labelled caustic 
soda (tins Nos. 61 and 62). Upstairs in the medicine chest in 
a room, which I understand was the room in which Mrs. Armstrong 
died I found a number of small phials of homoeopathic medicine! 
I took possession of those, and they also were handed over to Mr. 
Webster. The medicine chest, I should think, is probably 2 feet 
by 18 inches, and it stands either on the mantelpiece or on the 
wall. It is up against the wall, I know. We also found one or 
two letters which have not been put in, and we took possession of 
one or two small books. We found three diaries on the prisoner. 
I think'they are for 1919, 1920, and 1921. I have not carefully 
examined them. Mr. Weaver really examined the late Mrs. Arm¬ 
strong's room, but I was there with him. There was no draft 
epitome or abstract of her first will to he found, or any will. 

Cross-examined by Sir BL Conns Bennett— The interview 
started on the 31st December about ten o'clock in the morning. 
The visit was a surprise one. . Having made a statement, he also 
volunteered to give us any assistance fie could. No obstacle was 
put in the way of our searching the office either by Major Arm¬ 
strong or his clerks. There was no obstruction at all; we went 
about the business of the search quite unobstructed, (Shown 
jacket)'—That looks like the jacket he was wearing, at the time he 
was arrested. Everything that was turned out of his pockets 
was put into the brown paper packet. The business letters that 
he was allowed to deal with were letters that had been lying on 
his desk, the morning correspondence, which I had examined 
myself. There were also some business letters and private letters 
in his pockets. When we found the little packet which has been 
produced it was not inside an envelope. It had got caught up 
on an envelope by the paper being creased, but it was loose in 

121 . 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Chief Inspector' Alfred CnotcBett 

the pocket. With regard to the search at Mayfield, the first place 
we searched was the little study. We found the tins Nos. 61 and 
62 there. They were in the cupboard on the left-hand side of the 
fireplace. The grey arsenic was right at the bottom of the cup¬ 
board, and the tins were on a shelf about half way up. I think 
there was also some wax and some rat powder in the cupboard— 
two packets of rat poison—and X think there was some polishing 
paste for silver plate. I was in the study the whole time the 
search was going on, hut I was engaged for quite a considerable 
time taking statements from Miss Pearce and Mrs. Price. I do 
not recollect seeing a file marked “ Garden.” I did not at any 
time see in that file a recipe for weed-killer. We did not bring 
the file away with us. Major Armstrong, after the 31st December, 
did not have any opportunity of going back to Mayfield. On 
entering the small study, on the right-hand side opposite the 
window, there is a bureau with drawers at the bottom, a desk 
which comes down, and a shelf up above. I believe when you open 
the bureau there are two little wooden pillars in the middle, and 
between the two pillars there is a little cupboard door. 1 think 
Major Armstrong told us to get some keys from there for the pur¬ 
pose of opening the safe. It is in my mind that we found the 
keys in the drawer of the bureau. We pulled the drawer out 
and made a thorough search. 

Would it surprise you to know that Mr. Matthews, with Dr. 
Ainslie, found that arsenic which I have produced here this after¬ 
noon at the back of that little drawer'?—It would surprise me. 

Mr. Justice Darling —Mr. Matthews and who else? 

Cross-examination continued —First of all found by Mr, 
Matthews and Mr. Chi vers, his managing clerk, left there, and 
subsequently seen by Dr. Ainslie as well. That would surprise 
you?—Yes, it would. 

I suggest to you that there were actually traces of arsenic in 
that drawer as well, and they are there now?—Do you mean white 
powder ? 

White powder?—I would not say that. I did not notice any¬ 
thing. I would not say there were traces of white powder in that 
little drawer when I searched. All I can say is I examined that 
drawer and^ did not find white arsenic, and 1 did not see any 
traces of white arsenic. It was arsenic I was looking for, or weed¬ 
killer. Mr. Armstrong in his statement had told me that the 
remainder of the purchase of the January arsenic was coloured, 
and it was in his cupboard, and that that was the only poison he 
had anywhere. To make sure I made a thorough search, and I 
did not find any. 

I am suggesting^that that is exactly what you did not do, 
that you were searching for coloured arsenic, that you knew by 
the Act that arsenic had to be coloured, and that this trace of 
white powder which was in this drawer did not attract your atten- 
122 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Chief Inspector Alfred Crutdhett 

ticm I—Oh, yes, there were other things that caused me to look for 
white arsenic. 

By Mr. Justice Darling —Could you have told, if you had 
found that packet, whether it was white or grey without looking 
at it?—No. 

If you had found a packet like that would you have left it 
there ?—Certainly not. 

Simply because you did not know whether it was grey or 
white ?—Certainly not. 

Police Sergeant Walter Sharp, examined by Mr. Mickle- 
thwait —I am a detective sergeant of Scotland Yard. I was present 
when the prisoner was arrested. I corroborate what Chief Inspector 
Crutchett and Deputy Chief Constable Weaver have said. On the 
4th January I was with Chief Inspector Crutchett at Hay Police 
Station, and I saw Sergeant Williams hand him a brown paper 
parcel. I then went with him into the front room, and the parcel 
was opened in my presence. Chief Inspector Crutchett drew my 
attention to a small white paper packet which contained a small 
quantity of white powder. He then told me to fetch Sergeant 
Williams, which I did, and the packet was shown to him. Among 
the articles found on the prisoner were certain pocket books and 
little pocket diaries. I have examined them all. Exhibits Nos. 
13, 14, and 15 are three of these articles. The entries are in Mr. 
Armstrong’s handwriting. 

Cross-examined by Sir H. Curtis Bennett- —I notice that the 
1920 diary finished a month or so before Mrs. Armstrong died. I 
also notice at the end of that diary, on the second last page, there is 
an entry, three-quarters of a pint to 2 gallons of H 2 0 W. killer.” 
I did not decipher it as that at the time, but that undoubtedly is 
what it is intended to be. 


The Court adjourned. 



Sixth Day—Saturday, 8th April, 1922. 


Superintendent Weaver, recalled, further examined by Mr. 
Vachell—I assisted Mr. Crutchett in the search at Mayfield on the 
31st December last. I remember the drawer in the centre of the 
bureau between the two pillars very well. I searched for keys in 
that drawer in the first instance. There was absolutely nothing in 
it besides the keys. There was no white powder in it; we should 
have paid particular attention to it if there had been. I only 
pulled it out to the slab that lets down for writing on. W© felt the 
cavity where the drawer fitted in particularly. There was abso¬ 
lutely nothing in it. We also found certain files in that room. 
I do not remember a file labelled “ Garden." I am positive 1 
never saw any recipe for weed-killer in any file. It would have 
attracted my attention immediately if I had, because weed-killer 
had been mentioned so much. 


: ; : Further cross-examined by Sir H. Curtis Bennett—I cannot 

swear that the recipe was not in the files. I have a recollection of 
coming across garden stuff in the files, but I did not take particular 
notice of them. There were three of us searching in that; room. 
There were a good many drawers, shelves, books, 4c., in the study.* 
Every drawer, I am sure, was pulled out. 

. Further re-examined by the Attorney-General— On Friday, 
6th January, the house was locked up. The whole of (ho family 
left Mayfield. It was kept locked, and only opened when necessary 
until after the 18th February, when the committal for trial was, and 
the family went back again then. There were only Miss Pearce 
Mrs. Brice, and Major Armstrong's three children present when we 
were searching the house, hut Mr. Phillips, Major Armstrong's con¬ 
fidential clerk, paid a visit once or twice during the afternoon and 
evening We arrived at the house about 4 p.m., and loft’about a 
quarter to ten or ten o'clock. We were not keeping a watch on 
the house next day the 1st January, nor on (ho 2nd. There was 
nobody from the police m charge of the house after the 31st I 
only heard yesterday that something had been found in the bureau. 

Do you beheve it possible that that little packet, 2 ounces of 
rsemc could have been m that drawer, or in the cavity behind 
it, at the time you searched?—Well, I say it is absolutely im¬ 
possible. I do not think we left an inch of the bureau mxUnldml. 


a n™ HARM n T ElizAB] ! th Price, recalled, further examined by the 
Attorney-General ! was at Mayfield on the night of 31st Decem¬ 
ber when the police came to make a search. That was the dav Mr 
Arming was arrested. On Sunday morning, ™ 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Harriet Elizabeth Price 

r f on^ t0 + the S M Udy to , olean the room up. It would be about 10.30. 
L* ' md tW -° l 1 ' TCr sa ' lt s P oons tha t had apparently been dropped. 

tlssue P a P er - The usual place where they were kept 

sludv Th?Xf 0n the 11 n f ht - haild sid ® of the fireplace in the 
^ dy '- , ohest was usuall 7 kept locked. The key was kept in 
the middle drawer m the writing desk. I went to the drawer in 

anvtMnt a ekl 0r W 3 L f ° 1 f <i th ® key there - 1 did not notice 

anything else whatever m the drawer besides the keys. There were 

a number of keys m the drawer. There was no white powder Tn 

the drawer I pulled the drawer right out, and I could see into 

there Pa ° e ^ dr&Wer had been ’ 1 did not notice anything 

Further cross-examined by Sir H. Curtis Bennett —What I 
suggest to you is that the drawer where the keys were always kept 
ls^the drawer to the left of that little cupboard in the bureau?— 

By Mr. Justice Darling —Are you certain where you found the 
key I- 1 am certain where I f ound the key. The drawer came right 
when I pulled it. I put it back again. I was not interested^ 
what was at the back of the drawer. I do say that standing up to 
the bureau and pulling out the drawer at the bottom of the middle 
cupboard you can see right to the hack of it. I was first all 
asked about whether I remembered the two silver spoons being in 

T b ® fi ’' ep | i aC ® * hl ® It was Sergeant Sharp who asked^e. 

ast night I told Chief Constable Weaver that it was impossible for 
the arsenic to he in the drawer. I have been at thaHilver cup¬ 
board three times altogether. P 

Further re-examined by the Attorney-General —I think the 
firs occasion on which I went to the silver chest was the fiiTp arty 
Jut QoT Al T “ lstronghad after I went into his service on the 11th 

II 7 ’ •; + l ‘ 1 th ! key was ke Pt in that drawer, because I had 

seen it there. Major Armstrong was not present when I went to 
get the silver on that occasion. 

_ i [Evidence was then given by Herbert Skyrmb, an architect 
rotmTry r fietd.? eref ° rd> “ * ^ . of !*«■ of the bed- 

I A T™or G “^ 

manager of the National Provincial Bank of England at the branch 

Mafcfnf mana f 1 r during a11 192L 1 signed on the 5th 

the bLv! ^ 1S year ,\ 1 ha J e a c °Py signed by me of the entries in 
6 books of securities held under date of March, 1921. I produce 
that copy. It reads—“ National Provincial Bank of England in 
account with Major_ Herbert Rowse Armstrong, Mayfield Cusop. 
Security held. Certificate for £450 5 per cent. War Stock Cer¬ 
tificates for £355 7s. lid. 5 per cent. War Stock. Certificate for 

125 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Edwin Alfred Taylor 

£150 War Stock.” It is ail in the name of Katherine Mary Arm¬ 
strong, and was lodged on the 17th March, 1921. The prisoner 
had had an account with the National Provincial Bank for some 
years prior to that. In 1915 the account was put in the name of 
both Mr. and Mrs. Armstrong. XJpon Mrs. Armstrong's death the 
account, of course, passed into Mr. Armstrong’s name only. 

Cross-examined by Sir H. Curtis Bennett —The balance of 
Major Armstrong was sometimes in credit and sometimes a deficit, 
but usually in credit. When these particular securities 1 have 
referred to were lodged, Major Armstrong was abroad. They were 
lodged by his clerk, Mr. Phillips. At that time we had securities 
for Major Armstrong. It was not an unusual thing for people 
from time to time to deposit securities, and when the account was 
in credit to withdraw the securities. When these securities were 
withdrawn on the 22nd February by Mr. Matthews, on the instruc¬ 
tions of Major Armstrong, the account was in credit. 

Re-examined by the Attorney-General —From time to time, 
as I have said, securities were deposited. At the time the securi¬ 
ties were deposited of which I speak in the certificate there was 
no sort of security. The account was overdrawn. 

Further cross-examined by Sir H. Curtis Bennett —Major 
Armstrong was away at the time these were deposited, and the 
account was in debit. Shortly after Major Armstrong came back 
the account became in credit again. It then fluctuated until the 
22nd February, when they were re-collected, the account then 
being in credit, and we having no claim on them. 


Br. Bernard Henry Spilsbury, examined by the Attorney- 
General I am an M.B. of Oxford and lecturer on special patho ■ 
logy at St. Bartholomew’s Hospital, London. I was present on 
the 2nd January of this year when the body of Mrs. Armstrong 
was exhumed_ in Cusop Churchyard. It was removed to a cottage 
close to the churchyard, and I made a post-mortem examination of 
it. Chief Detective Webb, Dr. Hincks, and Dr. Ainsley wore also 
present. I placed some parts of the body in jars, and handed 

fL™ Ja 7- t0 M /' ^ eb i er -. When the coffin was examined thero 
Tf o ^ 10n f °V°-i adher ! n " t0 {t underneath. I removed some 
W P nLt d Ti! Ced m i a bottIe ’ which was also handed to Mr. 
the bol; in rt J “ a \° S ° me . sawdust and wood Savings beneath 
itinabottlel^S 11 ' * e ™ ned a P° rtion of and placed 
teen iarsln ^n , handed to Mr ‘ Web ster. There were six- 
containing various portions of the body shaving 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Bernard, JHL Spiisfeury 

tha^wir/aS expl l ned by the P resellce of the amount of arsenic 
^ f? Und V 1 . those P arts on Mr - Webster's analysis I 
“^«, r COndlt !° n ° f the or S ans to see whether I cSd find 

deJth but l couhfL l aCC ° U ^ tl l e TOmitm g and diarrhoea and 
aeatn, but 1 could find no evidence of natural disease I examined 

SfemSv andThl r ther ““-f- 1 " *7“ USua1 ' the cavities were 
all empty, and the lower cavities, the ventricles were rafW at* 

arged or dilated, and the walls were thin. That indicates that 

?“? £"» b “» ™ dilution ol ,h. he„, thf 2 L 5 

T sh™M * there Was a PP arentl y no disease of the heart valves 
I should say no serious disease. As reearcta tKp Kvat* 

“™* 1 „.ii, „ d 

subsequent microscopical examination I found marWri + - ° 

^ ““ 1 --£‘Z 

they were rather small and discoloured, but well preserved On 

£r d ”" k ' d 6 " d »“ •< 

poison. , cortainlj louTtti 

liver and kidneys would be consistent with some poison lL 7 
no natural disease which would account for this Condition of the 

t , Darling —You considered the condition of 

To thl Lwon of Z 78 attHbutable - t0 the action of the arsenic ?- 
tR o-.action of the arsenic m poisonous doses. 

of poi S on a caselV S A col'Z I? U haV6 T ery ’ vel 7 large experience 
cert 7 nW nf 7 t 7 A ° nSlderabI e experience; almost weekly, but 
TTrvmo riffi occurre nce. I am frequently employed bv the 

Hom ® °® ce and by cor °^rs to investigate"cases of poisons 7 

woulThTvT Tf mUe t~ In Uie th&t edition of the kidneys 

UHne i- • Th0re W0Uld ^tainly l 

fluid contents m one part of the small intestine, high up known 
as the jejunum. The length of the intestine is from 18 to 20 fS 

lartVLtt« S r 1 Tf 6Stin ii . There is the smaI1 -^Sne and tte 

large mtestme. The small intestine is nearer the stonwh it w 

described as consisting of. three parts, the second of which is the 
jejunum. The jejunum starts about 8 or 10 inches below the 
stomach and passes below into the part known “s the ileZ 

portion of the jejunum in wMehTfounJ the Zuid 
7 , p ace d it- along with its contents in a bottle, which was^ub’ 
sequently handed to Mr. Webster. I also found a colleltTon of 

127 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Dr Bernard H. Spilsfaury 

fluid in the ileum and in the caecum. That was three different 
collections. The first collection was found 3 or *1 feci; below the 
level of the stomach, the second was near (he lower end of the 
ileum, and would probably be 17 to 18 feet below the stomach. 
When I speak of so many feet below the stomach 1 am speaking 
of the length of the intestine. The last would only be a short 
distance below the second, a matter of 20 feet, or perhaps a. little 
over, from the stomach. The rest of the large intestine was quite 
empty, and the other portions of the small intestine wore empty. 
That pointed to some irritant condition during life which had 
brought about am unusual emptying of the intestines as the result 
of diarrhoea. 


I do not know whether you can form any opinion as to the 
time it would take these liquids, which you found at (hose three 
points, to reach those points if they had been taken in first by 
the mouth?—Approximately the material found in (ho upper part 
of the small intestine would require from three to six hours; that 
is very approximate, of course. To reach that point the material 
in the lower part of the small intestine would require another few 
hours, perhaps up to ten hours, and I should say that in the 
commencement of the large intestine a period of perl naps twelve 
hours—in the ..caecum, that is. That would ho after the fluid 


was swallowed. (The witness marked the places where tlm three 
collections were found on a diagram.) (I) represents the jejunum, 
(2) the ileum, and (3) the caecum. 1 have been doing medico¬ 
legal work for about fifteen years. I have boon engaged in re¬ 
searches under the Home Office in particular for a number of 
years, for the greater part of that time. 1 liave made examina¬ 
tions of bodies in poison cases, and am familiar with eases of 
arsenical poisoning—the effect of arsenic upon the organs of the 
body. In cases of. arsenical poisoning, supposing you have food 
which contains some arsenic, the time during which the arsenic 
would traverse the body would vary somewhat in different cir¬ 
cumstances, but it would be very rapid in the ease of the passage 
of ordinary food, and would probably be evacuated, the most of 
it, within a period of twenty-four hours or a little more after 
the food was taken. It makes a difference who (her it is taken in 

T S ° id f0r , m ' , Xt is < 3 uio1<or in liquid form; the 
onset of symptoms is earlier when it is taken in a fluid form 

Why do you say that if the food is faker. w R h ftmmic 
its passage is quicker than it would bo if the food won, passing 
m the ordinary course without any arsenic in it ?-hh"anHe tho 
I" ® , a f' 10 “ °. f tlle arsenic leads to tho more rapid passage of 

t&n al The 0f irdtand intestines through tlu, alimontarv 
, naL , irritant action of arsenic is first exorcised in the 

“’ofair^n Inf ^ **■»*'* “ Th«™ 

, nrst of all, pain and naus#a, and later vomiting Tt also 
produces inflammation of the lining membrane of the stomach, and 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Dr Bernard H. Spilsbury 

sometimes produces haemorrhage into the stomach cavity, and 
occasionally small erosions. _ If you had an effusion of blood into 
e s omach caused by this irritant, and the person vomited, the 
vomit would be coloured by bloody sometimes one would see streaks 
ot blood in the vomit. At other times it would be altered bv 
the stomach juice, and the vomit would be a dark brown or a 
dirty brown. After the arsenic has been absorbed in the stomach 
and intestines and got into the blood, it would begin to affect the 
organs to which the blood is carried, the heart amongst them, and 
it would damage the heart and bring about dilatation of 
hea , rt and a quickened action of the heart. The dilatation 
of the heart, unless slight, would be likely to be accompanied by 
a murmur. As regards the kidneys, when the blood which has got 
arsenic m it passes into the kidneys, it would damage the kidneys 
in the way in which I found them damaged here—producing fatty 
disease and interfering with the function of the kidneys, producing 
changes in the urine, albuminuria, and other changes according 
to the amount of urine secreted. The functions of the kidneys 
generally are for the purpose of getting rid of the waste products 
or the activities of the body generally. The liver would be affected 
m the same way as the heart and kidneys; it would be damaged, 
and fatty disease would be the result, and interference with the 
work of that organ would also occur. I am quite familiar with 
Bright s disease. The condition of the kidneys in this case did 
not suggest Bright s disease. The condition was only one which 
1 have described as fatty disease or fatty degeneration due to some 
iorm of poisoning—in this case arsenical poisoning. 

£ ^ USTIO l E Purling—I say that certainly this condition 

of the kidneys and the liver and the heart was due to arsenical 
poisoning. 

, continued —Will you proceed in your own wav 

about the intestine?—The poison when taken by the mouth would 
pass, or some portion of it would pass, from the stomach into the 
u ,pP.® r the intestine, and would there produce indications 

ot its action—inflammation in the upper part of the intestines, 
the appearance gradually diminishing as we pass lower down until 
they may fade away altogether. The other change which will he 
found m the ease of arsenical poisoning will he the empty com 
aition of the large and small intestines as a result of the irritant 
action producing diarrhoea. In this particular case I found the 
empty condition to which I have referred, hut I could not recognise 
any inflammation of the intestines on account of the post-mortem 
changes which had occurred that rendered it impossible to sav 
whether they were present or not at the time of death. In a case 
of arsenical poisoning the passage of the food would be more rapid 
than under ordinary conditions, and, of course, it would be still 
more rapidly if the food taken was fluid and not solid. I have 
been m Court and I heard that during the time Mrs. Arm- 
strong was at Barn wood Asylum'hhe was given from 3rd October 
K 129 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Dr Bernard H. SpiMmry 

to 4th November a tonic mixture containing 1 /20th of a grain of 
arsenic three times a day. I have worked that out for the total 
of thirty-one days, and it amounts to between 4 and 5 grains. 
She was released on the 22nd January, so that that left 
part of November, all December, and twenty-two days in January 
a total of seventy-nine days. I do not think that a tonic con¬ 
taining arsenic during that month of October and the first few 
days of November could have had any action upon the body and 
the organs such as I have described. Arsenic which was given 
medicinally would not have any poisonous action at the time 

Li? glV6 f J 1° P roduce , Ganges which I found, and that 
rsemc would have completely left the body long before she left 
the asylum on 22nd January, with the possible exception of some 
traces m the nails and in the hairs,- it might be possible to obtain 
races roin there, but, apart from those, it would have completelv 
disappeared. That arsenic taken medicinally would only have 
what is known as a tonic effect. That arsenic' given in the form 

effect unon rhe ^S 61 ' f 1 “ gredlents , could not have any poisoning 
etiect upon the walls of the stomach or the ileum or the leiunuin 

th T thingS -, the time sll e ^e asylum iKraces 
ould have disappeared from those organs. As regards the traces 
that might have been found in the hair or nails, they would have 
been extremely minute. ^ naVQ 

‘ r *«»t.™ 

- X* *“» Jtsasj £rx # m “ 7 “ k 

at that time the hair Jn if-1 being ® r0TO in the body 

isteef hi!] JSJ SThSr^Sr)” 8 in- 

was cut off?_Yes. 5 ^ l4 remam 80 affected until it 

Einomination continued —In the os«a +i,„ .. . 

the nail which is being prepared to nn „ S f 0 ° f th® nail, the piece of 
is taken might show someTndication T **? *** *** arsenic 

which would, and a 8 Te rf„T„ ^ arsemc ; « is the only part 
would grow out w’ith it and ^ grew out, that portion 

ceased taking arsenic there Si 7 ^ ^ f' After ^ had 

growth of the nail. WOuld 1)6 110 trace in the further 

arsenic in the mSurribet^een'ortdber^^H ^ 8 admillistr ation of 
have had any bearing at all Tn ?? ^ 4th November can 

130 g aI1 1D ' the arsenic w hi°h was in the body 



Evidence for Prosecution. 


Dr Bernard H. Spilsbury 

was exhumed?—No, it is quite 


which you examined after it 
impossible. 

We know that these exhibits were examined by Mr WeWftr 
and you know of the result of his examination, do you not ?—I do’ 

have hJn° U t r ,lT nWn ’ i f ust a dos ® or doses of arsenic 

have been taken m order to find what Mr. Webster found in the 

organs which you gave to him ?—From the amount of arsenic which 
was present in the small and large intestines it is clear that aTarge 
dose of arsenic must have been taken, I mean a poisonous dose 
possibly a fatal dose must have been taken certainly P within twenty- 
four hours of death, and from the amount of arLic which was 
found in the liver—oyer 2 grains—and from the disease which I 
found m the liver, it is clear that the poison must have been given 
in a number of large doses extending over a period certainlv of 
some days, probably not less than a week. ’ 7 ° f 

TW haVe \ eei1 during the whole trial?—I have. 

, . ^? U beard Dr. HmcksV evidence as to the symptoms 

which Mrs. Armstrong displayed about the time when she 
to Barnwood Asylum in August, 1920 2—1 have. 

Have you formed any opinion as to what those svmutoms 
must have been caused by ?—I have. symptoms 

Will you tell rny lord and the jury what, in vour oninioTi 
was the cause of those symptoms ?—She was, of course, suffering 

on tLTv f f 186 ^ 6 ’ - meIanch 1 olia ’ but in addition the vomitinf 
^ d y of her . admission, the presence of albumen in the urine g 

ac,fte h «tt?l Pr ? S1 ° n °- f T' me are insistent with an acute or sub- 
acute attack of arsenical poisoning, and the rapid disappearance 

Myi?m a fSl^d U b a ’tl W1 ? m i a W6ek aft6r the ad mission to the 
asylum, followed by the development of peripheral neuritis Doint 

clearly to an acute toxemia as the caus 6 P of these s^iptoms. ? 

_Oan you attribute this symptom as likely to be caused bv a 
particular poison ?—They strengthen my view that the symptoms 
taken as a whole were due to poisoning by arsenic. 7 P 

In AutZt 0716 “ atte : ^ich I want to call attention. 

tLi UgU fl 92 °’/l U dld ^mention the heart symptoms at that 
time. I do not know whether yon attach any imnortaneA tA 
what we were told were the heart symptoms in 1920 o/not ?—Yes 

The' r»L d Jim 1 ! j n L 7 b r madv ftence I failed to refer to them’ 
fullv accounted heart ,, and the murmur which was heard are 
arsenic * d f ° r “ h ® Same acute poisoning, such as 

Did you observe the evidence given by Dr Hinnies iu-„ 

October “ifel 8 S an de att att k Ck f Wh i- Ch ^ Martin had on the 26th 
symptoms ?-T; s , I di? diarrh “ a ’ VOmitin S’ a » d other 

... Are ? ou able t° f or m any opinion as to what was the cause of 
that, having regard to the facts that we know about it, including 
the result of the analysis of the urine ?—Certainly g 

In view of the presence of arsenic in the urine to the extent of 

131 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Dr Bernard H. Spilsbury 

, Mr A of a °ram, four days after the commenceimmt of the illness, 
in some 15 or 16 ounces!—I forget the amount of urine. _ 

One-thirty-third of a grain in 17| ounces of urine! lhe 
illness from which Mr. Martin suffered, in my opinion, was acute 

arsemcal to the 1/33rd of a grain of arsenic found 

in the 17A ounces of urine. In your opinion, could you find any 
normal cause for that amount of arsenic to be found m the urine! 

Mr Justice Darling —It would have had to be taken into the 
body in’some way?—It would have had to enter the body some way, 

by the mouth or through the skin. 

It would not be a by-product of the body?—No, it is not found 
in the urine in ordinary conditions—not l,ho merest trace. 

Cross-examined by Sir H. Curtis Bennett In dealing with 
the email intestine in my post-mortem examination 1 worked down¬ 
wards from the stomach, gradually opening up the infcstim- as 1 

went down. , . » .. ,, , 

Except the two portions of fluid that you have sputum, oi that 

you found in the small intestine, do you say that, the rent of the 

small intestine was absolutely dry, or fchalthoro was ]u«t a draining 
going on all the time?—There was no dram <»1 fluid winch would 

I do not suggest that ; a drain of fluid which as you are gradu¬ 
ally opening up the small intestine would grad unity (low (town 
No - there was a deposit on the inner surface of lhe intestine which 
one might have scraped off with a knife—nothing which would he 
likely to travel down the intestine. The emenm ih really the be¬ 
ginning of the large intestine. It is where the small lntostmo 
loins the large intestine and the passage becomes larger. There is 
a sort of little well, which is the caecum. Everything winch is 
going to be expelled goes into the caecum. I found a considerable 
amount of fluid in the caecum, but I cannot say the exact; amount. 
It was certainly more than I found in the small intent me. Mr. 

Webster can give the actual weight. . 

The condition of emptiness of the small intestine and ot the 
body generally would be duo, or might be dins might it not, to 
one or two causes, either that, the person who has died has had very 
little nourishment for some time, or, having had nourishment, that 
it has been got rid of owing to diarrhtx'.a?— If it was merely the 
result of not having much nourishment, for some t ime before death, 
I should still expect to find in the largo intestine whatsis known as 
formed faeces; solid faeces. If it; is due to diarrhoea, the material 
would he expelled from the large intestine, and it would bo either 
empty or would contain fluid. 

Supposing a person having, as this lady was, imlk food and 
Benger’s, and so on, and is vomiting a great deal, you would not 
expect to find any solid faeces formed?— If it was only a question 




Evidence for Prosecution. 

Dr Bernard H« Spilabury 

of vomiting, and as long as some was retained and passed down the 
intestine, I should expect to find a certain amount; not very much, 
but a certain amount. 

I want to ask about the arsenic passing through the body. Am 
I right in saying the question of time during which arsenic would 
pass through the body varies a great deal in different oases?—Of 

course, yes. . . ' ,, 

You have given us a time which you think is, I suppose, me 
medium time?—An approximate average time. 

But it does vary very much?—Yes, it must do so. 

Of course, it varies, does it not, very much first of all as to 
whether the arsenic is taken with food or without?—Yes. ^ 

It also varies very much with whether the arsenic is taken 
in fluid form or in a more solid form which has to dissolve?—Yes, 
and also, of course, whether it is taken with or at the same time as 
solid food, or whether the food itself is fluid. 

I do not want to go into detail in the matter at all, but am I 
right in saying that there are many cases, I dare say some known 
to you personally, but also reported cases, where large doses of 
arsenic have been taken four, five, six, or even seven days before 
death where you found a large quantity of arsenic remaining in the 
body after death ?—Yes, there are, even as long a period, I think 
you said, as seven days. 

Seven or eight days?—Occasionally, yes. 

When I say in the body, I want to go a little more particularly 
into that. Are there not cases where a person has taken a large 
dose of arsenic six, seven, or eight days before death and you would 
find a quantity of arsenic absorbed in the liver?—Yes. 

Where you still found traces of it in the caecum?—Yes, certainly 
traces in the caecum. 

Everything can be discovered, I know, by Mr. Webster, how¬ 
ever infinitesimal, but a real trace?—Yes. 

Supposing a case where arsenic has been taken in a large dose 
six, seven, or eight days before death, would not you expect to find 
fatty degeneration of the liver and kidneys?-—-Yes, I should. 

And very probably some signs of dilatation of the heart? Oh, 
yes, certainly. 

And during the period from the time of the large dose until 
death you would not be surprised, would you, to have more or less 
constant vomiting?—Well, if it were a period of six or seven days 
from the taking of a single dose, I should not expect the action on 

the stomach to continue severely all that time. 

I quite agree. From time to time during the six or seven 
days would it be very extraordinary if vomiting did go on from 
time to time with remissions?—I should not expect so much re¬ 
mission as, if anything, a gradual diminution in the vomiting and 
an improvement in that symptom. 


133 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Dr Bernard H. Spilsbury 

At any rate I may take it that you would expect for a period 
more or less constant vomiting?—Yes, at first. 

And you would expect that vomiting to get less before death? 

—Yes. 

May I put diarrhoea in the same category as vomiting, that 
the diarrhoea might cease for several hours, ton or twelve hours at 
a time?—The same applies to that rather later in the illness; the 
diarrhoea would probably diminish, and might cease from mere 
exhaustion some time before death. 

That is a case where a largo dose is taken where the person 
lives five, six, seven, or eight days; I am assuming some long 
period, I do not care whether it is live or eight days, where after 
death you find fatty degeneration of the liver and kidneys, dilata¬ 
tion of the heart, and you also find arsenic in the emeum? —Yes. 

And in the liver I think yon said too?—-Yes. 

Therefore, it is quite clear that a person might take a largo 
dose, a poisonous dose of arsenic, and live for a period of seven or 
eight days?—Yes, exceptionally, it may happen. 

1 am not suggesting it is a regular thing, but if is more than 
a possibility ?—Certainly. 

I have not got to search into something which happens only 
Once in a century, or anything of Lb at sort?—No. 

It is well known?—Yes, cases are quoted. 

I have some of them in case you wanted mo to quote (hem. Let 
me take another case where a person has taken a large and poisonous 
dose at the same period, five, six, seven, or eight days before death; 
do you not in ail cases where that has been done, whore sickness and 
vomiting has gone on almost right up fill the end ! am not sug¬ 
gesting right up to the end, up to the last twelve hours but where 
there has been some remission of vomiting (hiring I ho passage of 
the days, at the end of three or four days, then starting again with¬ 
out any fresh dose; a dose taken, say, upon a Monday, vomiting, 
sickness, and diarrhoea going on perhaps fill the Thursday, then as 
easing up over the Friday and possibly Saturday, flam coming on 
again, and death ensuing upon the Monday or Tuesday Following? 
—I should not expect (bat as the result merely of the action of the 
arsenic, unless there was some other disease present which would 
give rise to vomiting of itself. 

Would you say that that could not happen from the taking 
of a large and poisonous dose of arsenic?- - No, but I say 1 should 
expect to find some other disease. 

Am I right in saying that what, sometimes happens <whon there 
is a remission is this, that the arson it; becomes encapsulod or 
encysted in the mucus?—-That has been described, I think, in one 
case, but that was a rapidly fatal dose, as far as my recollection 
goes. I remember a case where a cyst of arsenic was found, but 
I think that is where a large dpso of arsenic was taken, and it 
ended fatally within a very short time. 

134 




Evidence for Prosecution. 

J>r Bernard H. Spibbury 

Mr. Justice Darling —Do you remember the name of the 
case?—No, but I could turn it up for you in a book on Toxicology. 

Cross-examination continued —I remember a case in which a 
cyst of arsenic w r as found in the stomach. It would take some 
little time to turn it up, but, as far as my recollection goes, the 
patient died of acute arsenical poisoning unusually rapidly. 

Meanwhile will you tell me if I am right in saying that the 
arsenic does not get dissolved, but gets encapsuled?—Encysted. 

Encysted in the mucus of the stomach. That would cause a 
remission of symptoms, would it not, until that arsenic freed 
itself and became dissolved?—Yes, it might. 

What I am suggesting is this—a large dose of arsenic, a 
poisonous dose, setting up the ordinary symptoms of diarrhoea, 
then a remission for a period of twenty-four or thirty-six hours, 
then a starting again of the vomiting. What you told me in 
answer to that question was that such a case would not be im¬ 
possible, but you would expect to find some other disease present ?— 
Yes; I think, in connection with the action of the mucus, that 
would tend to delay the onset of symptoms rather than produce a 
remission of them. 

May you not get the arsenic to become encysted in the mucus 
after it has started to take action, some started to take action, 
the rest becoming encysted and therefore delaying action ?—You 
might, but whether the action would be the action on the stomach 
or the action after absorption is very doubtful. It is very likely 
to be action after absorption of that part which is dissolved. 

Might it be the other ?—-I should not like to exclude it entirely. 

Then you would not like to exclude the case I have put of 
a patient taking a large poisonous dose of arsenic on Monday, 
suffering from vomiting, sickness, diarrhoea, and so on, on Tues¬ 
day, Wednesday, and Thursday, then remission, I do not care 
whether for twelve or twenty-four hours, but slight remission, and 
then coming on again ?—I do not think I can agree to that—three 
days’ sickness from a single dose and then a remission due to this. 
I do not think it would occur. 

Two days?—I doubt that very much indeed. 

I understood you to say you did agree with the symptoms I 
put to you, but you expected after death then to find some other 
cause for it as well as the arsenic?—Yes. 

That you still say?—Yes. 

Mr. Justice Darling— He said, I agree to two days’ sickness 
after one cjpse, then remission. 

The Witness —Then a remission of this period due to this 
condition of the mucus. 

Cross-examination continued —You are putting now that the 
whole of the symptoms are due to arsenic in the answer to my lord? 
—-Yes, of course I am. 

But supposing a poisonous dose of arsenic and something else, 

' 135 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong, 

Dr Bernard H. Spilsbury 

then what I have put to you would not be—I do not want to use 
too high a term—it might occur?—Yes. 

By Mr. Justice Darling —What do you say might occur?_ 

Under certain conditions of disease in the body a dose of arsenic 
might be followed by acute symptoms for a time and then a 
remission of symptoms, vomiting diminishing or ceasing, then 
later on a return of vomiting. 

Under certain conditions of disease in the body, you postulate 

that ?—Yes. 

Cross-examination continued —What have you in your mind 
when you say that?—Such a condition as the pre-existence of 
chronic disease of the kidneys—Bright’s disease. 

Anything else have you in your mind?—That was an illus¬ 
tration that just occurred to me, 1 would not like to say there are 
not others. 

Let me deal with that. Assuming for a moment that Mrs. 
Armstrong was not suffering from arsenical poisoning in August, 
1920, there were undoubted symptoms, were there not, at that time 
of kidney disease?—There wore symptoms of kidney damage, if 
I may.use the term in that sense. 

Am I not right in saying in kidney disease?- 1 think i prefer 
to use the term fC damage ” rather than the other. 

I want to see if I understand it, if you do. Dot's it moan 
very much the same thing?—Not in my opinion, 

I want you to leave out of your mind what, you now know 
about the finding of arsenic and go back to August, 1920; Mrs. 
Armstrong undoubtedly suffering trout acute molaneholia, a woman 
who has suffered at that time five years, 1915 to 1920, with more 
or less bad rheumatism and occasional neuritis, and also a woman 

who at that timers suffering from some heart trouble?.1 do not 

know that there is any evidence that she had Nome heart trouble 
previous to this period. 

I am talking of August, 1920. Dr. Oine/ks’s certificate of 
death certified that in February, 1921, she had suffered in his 
view to be fair to him ho says it is bound to be a oortuin amount 
of guesswork—from heart disease for twelve months? That; was 
his view at that time. 

And he formed that view bee.auso of his examination in 
August, 1920?' Quito so. May 1 sav that, as the result of the 
post-mortem examination 1 think you will find ho lias allured 
his view as to heart disease. 

Would what you lound post- mortem do away with what Dr. 
Hincks .said ho heard, which 1 understood was a mil^ral systolic 
mm min ?—No, it does not do-away with it; it only ex plains it 
m a different way, 

A initial systolic murmur may bo caused by rheumatism?— 
Yes, or it may bo caused by dilatation of the heart. 

That is why I want von to ^et out of vour mind for the pur¬ 
pose of -.my question what was found in ‘ the body after death. 

130 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Dr Bernard H. Spilsbury 

Assuming a person is suffering from rheumatism for about fire 
years, and neuritis; is suffering from what Dr. Hincks thought 
she was suffering from, heart trouble as the result of rheumatism, 
a mitral systolic murmur in the heart in August, 1920; you find 
also albumen on examination; do you not think that that woman 
at that time may be suffering from kidney trouble—Bright's 
disease?—If you put it no further than that, yes; if we stop there 
only, I agree. 

Suppose without the knowledge that arsenic was found after¬ 
wards-?—No, no. 


What do you want to add to it?—The change which occurred 
so rapidly after she entered the asylum. 

Getting rid of the peripheral neuritis ?—First of all, the dis- 
appearance of the albumen within a week. That to my mind 
excludes Bright's disease as the cause of the albuminuria. 

Am I not right in saying in kidney disease you do get 
from time to time relief from albuminuria?—Yes, you do, but 
it is not a sudden disappearance and a complete disappearance. 

You see there is no evidence that any examination was made 
for albumen at all from the 29th August, a week after she went 
into that home, until she came out again?—I was certainly under 
the impression she was examined systematically. 

The Attorney-General—I think my friend is wrong about 
that. ^ Dr. Townsend told us on more than one occasion during 
this time, the autumn, examination was made; indeed, I think he 
said at some date late in November. 

Cross-examination continued —You agree that a person may 
take a fatal dose of arsenic five, six, seven, or eight days before 
death and suffer for some time with sickness, vomiting, and possibly 
diarrhoea, and gradually sink and die. That is one thing that 
may happen ?—Yes. 


And that may happen, may it not, without there being any 
organic disease?—Yes. 

Merely from the result of the fatal dose of arsenic which does 
not kill up to eight days?—That is so. 

The other case which I put to you, with which I understand 
you to agree, is that & person may take a fatal dose of arsenic five, 
six,^ seven, or eight days before death, may suffer for a certain 
period of time, I care not how long, with vomiting, sickness, and 
diarrhoea, may then have a remission, and then vomiting may 
begin again, but then you would expect to find organic disease as 
well as arsenic present after death ?—Yes. 

And the organic disease which you would expect to find in 
that case—what you had in your mind—was kidney trouble—- 
Bright's disease?—Not merely trouble with kidneys, but Bright's 
disease.. 


One more question upon the # first of those cases that we were 
discussing. Do you know a book by a man named Wood, an 

■ 137 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Dr Bernard H. SpHsbury 

American?—I think I have referred to it once or twice, but I dr> 
not know the book well. 


Am I right in saying that in very extreme cases, and only in 
very extreme eases,. a person may live up till fourteen days after a 
fatal dose of arsenic?—It is conceivable, and I dare say cases have 
been recorded. 0 

that is all I put, fourteen days. Would you agree that it is 
quite likely cases are reported to that effect?—1 dare say that 
is to say, under special conditions. 

In such a case would the symptoms be intermittent • they could 
not go on continuously, could they, for fourteen days?—Not severe 
symptoms, no. ” 


The symptoms would have to be severe, less severe, more 
severe, intermittent, and so on?—I should not like to use the term 
intermittent; I would rather say the symptoms would change in 
character in the course of the illness. 

You have already told me that with regard to five, six, seven 
or eight days, those are quite possible cases ?—Certainly, yos . ’ 
.. ^ 'want to get that quite clear in case anything later on" is 
said about them; they are not cases which are terribly infrequent- 
they are not the sort of case where you have to say, (his is the 

years? Oh, no; they are not, by any moans com¬ 
mon, but they are not by any means rare. 

They are not by any means very infrequent? —No. 

I may have misunderstood the evidence yesterday of Dr. 
Townsend, although I was listening very care fully to it. Do you 
draw_a distinction between a supression of urine and retention 
of urine?—Oh, yes. " 

They are clearly different things, are they not,?—Yes. 

The evidence is that after Mrs. Armstrong was admitted to 
.Barnwood urine was drawn off?—Yos, as soon as she entered. 
And then that there was no further natural urine for twontv- 

four hours?—That is right. y 

Would not that be rather retention than suppression ?_Either 

complete suppression or great, reduction in the secretion of urine. 

Am I not. right in saying that, a woman being taken to an 
asylum,, realising that, she luis gone to an asylum and having 
had urine drawn off upon arrival at, that asylum, it, would 
not foe a very extraordinary thing, would it, for her to rota n 
urine for twenty-fours hours?—In the ordinary way it, would be 
very unusual. 4 * no 

ordJ„™ 60 in <,h ° or ' lirii t ry way - 1 <1() no* want you to take the 

lrsufferto f T ( r an l am <l0ali »pr With a woman who 

f 1U ncu ,e 1111,1 who is taken to an asylum 

mav imf to! /‘ 0W surraun < in K H ’ tl10 surroundings of an asyfum; 
may not that; cause retention of urine?—She certainly might not 

^urroundtoM 1 butV'T ’n° r OI ^ orin K’ 1 “S”®. with the unusual 
urroundmgs, but I should not, expect it, to be retained for so 

138 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Dr Bernard H. Spilsbury 

long as that; it would be impossible to do so, 1 think, in most 
cases. 

Do you not know cases where in fact any woman’s urine has 
been, under circumstances such as I am putting to you, retained 
for longer than twenty-four hours and where it has had to be 
drawn off, and very large quantities drawn off where it is ?—I have 
known cases, yes. 

As the result of her condition of mind and new surroundings? 
—Yes, it is possible, certainly. 

And of no other disease?—Yes. 

So it is possible that this was mere retention in that way?— 
Probably with diminished secretion. I grant that as an alter¬ 
native, certainly. 

I am a layman dealing with medical matters, but with sup¬ 
pression would you not expect to find, when the urine starts again, 
bleeding ?—It depends a good deal on the cause of suppression. 

That would be a very ordinary thing to find where there has 
been suppression ?—If the suppression is due to acute Bright’s 
disease, yes; but there are other causes of suppression in which 
you will not find that. 

There is no evidence of bleeding in this case, so I will not 
worry about it?—If there had been it would have been noted. 

The condition she suffered from may have been due to reten¬ 
tion, not suppression ?—Retention with reduced secretion; I think 
that is important. 

# Dr. Townsend, I think, expressed the view that retention 
might have been due to the vomiting, loss of fluid?-—Yes, reduced 
secretion in fact; that would account for the reduced secretion. 

You agree with what Dr. Townsend said about that; that 
might be the cause ?—Yes, I do. 

For how long after taking the fatal dose of arsenic would 
you expect to find arsenic in the urine?—It depends, of course, 
largely on the size of the dose and the amount which is retained. 
You are speaking of a non-fatal dose, are you? 

What is the longest time that you know of where arsenic has 
been found in urine where a possibly fatal dose has been taken ?— 
I think the longest in my experience is a matter of ten days, but 
I fancy that a period of three weeks would about cover a non-fatal 
dose. 

Reported cases?—Yes. 

Ten days in your own experience and three weeks as a possi¬ 
bility?— Yet' F 

I am not suggesting for one moment that the 3/20ths—about 
.1/ 7th— of a grain per day that Mrs. Armstrong had at Barnwood 
had anything to do with her death ; I never suggested anything of 
the sort, but what I want to know is, supposing a person is suffer¬ 
ing from arsenical poisoning, v^mld the giving of l/7th of a 

m 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Dr Bernard H. Spilsbury 

grain a day aggravate that condition or not ?—I do not think that 
it would do that, but it would tend to retard recovery, 

I want you to think a little bit about that. The case here 
is that Mrs. Armstrong in August, 1920, when she entered that 
home, was suffering from the effects of arsenical poisoning ?—Yes. 

Assuming that that is correct—I am disputing it, but, assum¬ 
ing that is correct—would you not expect the giving of 1 /7th of 
a grain every day for thirty-one days to such a person would 
aggravate the symptoms?—No, I should not. I think the course 
of the patient in the asylum shows that that was not so in this 
case, because the neuritis was improved. 

Exactly, because I suggest to you that she was not suffer¬ 
ing from arsenical poisoning; that is why that 1/7th of a grain for 
thirty-one days had no effect upon her?—I am afraid I do not 
agree with that. 

By Mr. Justice Darling —You think it would not have had 
any effect any way ?—Except that I think it might have retarded 
recovery somewhat. 

Cross-examination continued —You will not help me any 
further than that; you will not go so far as to say that it might 
have brought out again symptoms if there had been arsenical 
poisoning before?—I certainly do not think that. 

You think it might have retarded recovery; that is, assuming 
she was suffering from arsenical poisoning'?-- -Yon. 

Assuming she was not suffering from arsenical poisoning, that 
administration of 1 /7 th. of a grain for thirty-one days would be 
likely to have a tonic effect upon her, would it?- "’Yes, it would. 

You would find that her bodily conditions would improve; 
that is what it means, does it not?-—Yes, (.ho appetite would, im¬ 
prove, the general bodily health would improve. 

For instance, the use of the hands and feel., the neuritis gener¬ 
ally, would tend to get better?—Yes. 

Is not that what happened here?—Yes. 

Now the arsenic which was found in Mr. Marti if h urine; that 
was l/33rd of a grain?—Yes. 

About a fifth of what Mrs. Armstrong was being given quite 
properly each day at Barmvood Asylum ?—Yes. 

Great care has to bo used in taking samples when you are 
going to test such things for poison an d to liml them in small 
quantities?—Yes. 

Great care in the bottles used, and so on?-Of course, always. 

One-thirty-third of a grain of arsenic is a very small quan¬ 
tity, is it not?—Yes, it is. 

. '/A very small quantity, to see it on a piece of paper?—To see 

it in a -dry form. 

It is not very much more than a speck?— It is more than that. 
It is a very small quantity In deed ?—Yes. 

140 ' 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Dr Bernard H. Spilsbury 

That being such a very small quantity, very great care has to 
be used in the taking of that sample in every way ?—Certainly. 

I am not suggesting every care was not taken once it got into 
the hands of the officials, of course, but I mean right from its very 
inception. It must be essential that the bottle in no way could 
have had arsenic in it?—Yes. 

There are many ways, are there not, in which arsenic may 
be properly found in a person’s urine; I mean from a course of 
taking this medicine such as Mrs. Armstrong was taking?—Yes. 

Are there not many things which are in general use which 
contain very small portions of arsenic, nothing like a fatal dose, 
but very small portions, 5 grains to an ounce, for instance?—I 
should say not in that amount. What do you mean by general 
use ? 

I had in my mind glucose?—You mean foodstuffs? 

Is that not right?—I agree glucose has been prepared and has 
contained quite a large amount of arsenic. 

Glucose does sometimes contain arsenic?—Yes. 

And glucose, of course, the jury know is very much used for 
sweetening purposes ?—Yes. 

In jellies and things of that sort?—Yes, it may be used for 
that purpose. 

I am going to deal with the medicines which Mr. Martin had. 
Am I right in saying that arsenic in very small quantities is often 
found as an impurity of bismuth?—It is found occasionally as an 
impurity of bismuth in very minute traces, but most bismuths 
supplied by chemists, wholesale and retail, are arsenic free. 

I notice you say most; you mean most, do you?—Yes, I think 
the amount when it is present is almost infinitesimal. 

Sulphate of magnesia—would that contain arsenic?—I doubt 
whether it would; again if provided for medicinal purposes. 

Is that magnesium sulphate?—That is right. 

Is that produced as a by-product of arsenical sulphuric acid ! 
—Yes, it has been produced in that way. 

Is not it a fact that in magnesium sulphate produced as a 
by-product of arsenical sulphuric acid, arsenic is present as 
arsenic and not as an arsenious compound ?—Yes. 

And a dose of this sort of about I ounce would contain I/6th 
of a grain of arsenic acid ?—Yes, it might be prepared in that way. 

Is not it sometimes prepared in that way ?—If it is prepared 
for medicinal use in that way it would be subsequently purified. 

What arrangements are used generally for cleaning bottles!— 
All sorts of acids, sometimes nitric acid; I use a mixture of sul¬ 
phuric and chromic acid. 

3)o those contain arsenic?—Crude sulphuric acid does, and 
sometimes it is difficult to get it completely free. 

Then in acids used for cleaning bottles there may be a trace 
of arsenic?—Yes, 


141 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Dr Bernard H. Spilrbury 

Peroxide of hydrogen; in arsenic a constant, impurity of tw» 
—Certainly not a oonst.niil one. 1 3 naU 

Is it an impurity of iff • IL has been found in it,. 

That ia what wan said to have been in this bottle - peroxide of 
hydrogen ?—Yes. 

Artificial colouring which is used-- that sometimes contains 
traces of arsomc, does it nol—used for cooking purposes or used 
for colouring such tilings as port winof—1 hope not - I <Jo not 
think so. ’’ 

Is it usual in coloui ing ?----Home pigments consist of an arseni¬ 
cal preparation, but they are nol used in the preparation of food" 

All I want is artificial colouring of oilhor food or drink?— 
Certainly no arsenical preparation would ever he used; I mean 
properly, of course. ’ 

There may be a mistake like the case Dr. Hincks was talkimr 
about of arsenic in boor?—Quite. ° 

You may get a largo quantity in food ?—-There is always a 
possibility of accident. J 

You got largo traces sometimes in fond and drink which cause 
death?—It has boon so, of eourse. “ cause 

Like the arsenic in beer? Yes. 

By Mr. Justiom Daiuuno-IIow did it, get in the boor?— That 
was from gluooso which was used in making the beer. Since that 
time a departmental inquiry has led to regulations, which have 
rendered that, almost, impossible of recurrence. 

Onm-cminination continwd-AMw the regulation of always 
signing the poison book, hut, you get; poison? Those arc in the 
hands of many people. 

The last matter is the vomiting; the question of the colour of 
the vomit doponds, docs it not, a groat, deal in the early stages 
upon what people have been eating or drinking?,. Obviously the 
first vomit is the food. 

I do not moan only the first vomit. Tim vomit for I,ho first 
hour or two?—That again depends on how of I,on you vomit, in two 
or three hours. 

But the first two or three hours may depend a great deal upon 
what you havo been eating and drinking?_Yes. 1 

And you may get quito naturally in the early stages of vomit¬ 
ing a dark vomit as a result of what, you have eaten?_Yes. 

Nothing to do with blood at; all ?’—Yes. 

When you get blood-stained vomit, that usually is in the later 
stages, is it not, after there has been considerable straining ?—Are 
you speaking of arsenical poisoning? 

No; of ordinary vomiting?—It is not; common to got blood¬ 
stained vomit as a result of ordinary conditions. 

You do sometimes, very violent seasickness,’ for instance?— 
You may, if it is very severe. 

Very severe sickness will give blood-stained vomiting?—It is 
possible. ° 


142 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Dr Bernard H. Spilsbury 

natural thing be for the vomit to be lighter and 
lighter as time went on?—No, it might become dark from the 
presence of a large excess of bile. 

^ A ^ d eventualiy d .° you g“ erall y get it light? In the ordinary 
?r^L C ° UrS \ vomm ?g. Wl11 ° ome to an end when the stomach 
y v U have r6tohl “f without any appreciable amount of 
vomit/—Perhaps mucus will come up. 

lighted Wh^Xvl - hin V£ V ° miting tbat that usuaIly becomes 
lighter .—What theie is will become watery m appearance. 

Watery and light?—Yes. 

a hJ U E ing + a f P r s °- n is sufiering from a serious bilious attack, 

?n b fh* b ^ f k i 1S Xt common t0 have offensive vomiting 
m the eariy stages from that*—It might be offensive, certainly- 
again it would depend_ partly on the nature of the food. 7 ’ 

And partly how bilious you were, I suppose?—Yes 
Ther ® la n °tbtog in itself, is there, in the fact of vomit being 

thfngto IT 1 ' at t \ 6 1 SUggest is ^ a * ordinary 

tning to happen m_ a bad bilious attack ?—Yes. J 

Re-examined By the Attornet-Gbneral—T he twenty-four 
t r lr efe , rred t0 “ be “g toe time that food with arsenic^in it 
would take to pass through the body had reference to the passage 
through the body to the rectum. I include in that the liver and 
the kidneys as well as the intestines, and so on. I would not 
expect that all traces of arsenic had passed away from the organs 
in twenty-four hours. I think I said already that the pefiod 
tL^ody WeekS W ° UM Pr ° bably eIapse before it disappeared^ from 

My learned friend has been putting to you some cases in 
which he suggests that there might be a poisonous dose taken and 
the person live for some seven or eight days after. In the case 
ot a poisonous dose taken and sickness in the two or three following 
„ a 7 s ’., and toen a remission of the symptoms, and then further 
activity afterwards, I think your answer was that you said that 

m certain conditions of disease in the body that might be so ?_Yes. 

+w to want to understand, in answering my learned friend 
on that, they are conditions you postulate on which you mat -a 
your answer ?-Certainly, any pre-existing disease 7 

r>r.i»r.T,A PP0 ^ ng a perfectly healthy man or woman has taken a 
f - d ° S ,?’ W °, uld lfc be possible to have, as suggested by my 
learned friend, sickness for two or three days, then a remission 
and then a further activity of symptoms again where there is no 

davTtJr ? a ret Tj 1 ° f th f VOmitin g’ but in those two or three 
days the pmson would pass from the stomach down the intestines 
and gradually disappear from the alimentary canal, and the 
effects would pass off, and the effects then would be more from action 
on the heart and kidneys. 

Do you think the suggestion made by my learned friend is a 
possible explanation of what happened in the case of Mrs. Arm¬ 
strong on 21st February?—Her falal illness? 


143 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Dr Bernard H. Spilsbury 

Yes?—No, certainly it would not bo the case. The post¬ 
mortem examination showed only a fatty disease of the liver and 
kidneys, fully accounted for by arsenical poisoning, and no pre¬ 
vious existing disease such as would have accounted for such 
remission of symptoms and then a relapse. 

My learned friend put the suggestions of a large amount of 
arsenic being taken and being in a capsule or encysted. Explain 
what either of those words means ?—It means that when arsenic is 
taken in a solid form it may occasionally produce irritation of the 
stomach and form a large amount of ropy mucus which covers 
round the arsenic, but in that way the action of the arsenic 
would be delayed, and the symptoms. Mr. Webster found over 
2 grains of arsenic in the liver. 

Does that throw any light on your opinion of whether or not 
the arsenic taken by Mrs. Armstrong was encysted or not?—-It 
clearly shows that it could not have been, because there must have 
been very considerable absorption, and there is no delay in ab¬ 
sorption for that to have occurred, and no encysted arsenic was 
found in the stomach at the time of death. 

By Mr. Justice Daiilino— -There would have boon active ab¬ 
sorption of the arsenic from the stomach and intestines. 

Re-examination continued —Would that have been possible so 
as to accumulate over 2 grains in the liver if this arsenic had 
been encysted?— No, it could not bo in two places. Tt must be 
in either one or the other. 

Supposing a dose of 3 grains is taken, or let us say 3£ grains, 
would it be possible for some portion of that to be encysted, and 
yet to find a large quantity in the liver or not?—blither it is en¬ 
cysted in hulk or it is not. The fact that so large an amount was 
in the liver, the fact of so much disease in the liver resulting from 
absorption, shows clearly that it must have boon absorbed readily 
and some time before death, as regards some part of it at any 
rate. . 

I want to see whether one can separate that. A largo portion 
of the arsenic, could that be taken into the liver and appear as 
encysted or not?—No, I do not think that could he so. As I have 
said already, I think I can make it clear that if encysting was 
going to occur it would occur soon after the poison was taken, and 
not later. The encysting would take place in the stomach before 
it left the stomach. 

■. . m 7 learned friend put to you this ease—the case of 
arsenic taken, a remission of symptoms; then he put as conceivable 
that the person might live as long as fourteen days. “And I think 
you said, “ Yes, under certain conditions ” ?— Yes. 

And I think you said, assuming certain conditions as to 
previous disease?—I was assuming that rather in connection with 
other conditions. 

Then will you put it in y^ur own words with regard to this 
144 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Dr Bernard; H. Spilsbury 

SU f a , h W° the f s has anything whatever to do with 
the case—living for fourteen days after the arsenic has been taken? 
J: P el ® on who is suffering from serious disease in almost any 

mfv T’ h T’ ° r kidneys ’ or is . old and feeS? 

may take a dose of arsenic which probably would not be 
fatal to a healthy person and suffer severely from the effects of 

leftThe bo b dTL n Se die; ^ ^ ^ ^ tleMsT pa2 

111 !,, 0dy ' “* Ue or 110 ar senic might be found in the body 
under those conditions, and nevertheless the poison was the main 

factor m causing death. I examined the live^and kidneys in S 

„ * a hypothesis has no bearing whatever upon the death 

Of Mrs. Armstrong. There was no such remissTonTr change of 
symptoms m this case that I have heard of such as I have^een 
talking of m my. answers m cross-examination. In view of the 
f v Und m M , rS ' ■Armstrong’s body, I certainly 
fncrtL th „ th t her cas . e a Iate or postponed death after hav- 
alsemcwas possible. The large amount present, as I 
have said already, m the intestines also shows that a large dose 
was taken within twenty-four hours of death; and apparently 
there had been previous doses to account for her illness. ? A large 

death* 17 fata1 ’ d ° S6 Was taken within twenty-four hours of her 

TTYnrvf'L^' ^ STIC t E Dabl i ng —Can you say within what time?— 
Trorn the analysis I can only say other doses were taken recently— 
oertamly for some days. y 

Se-examination continued—And finally within the last twenty- 
four hours ?—A possibly fatal dose. 7 

By Mr. Justice Dabling— Tell me what bearing this has. You 
have just dealt with the special case put by Sir Henry?—Such 

Ld 6 fW d nT folIowin .g a substantial dose of arsenic would have 
had time to disappear in most cases from the body. 

Til6n 1 * comes to this, does it not, that it does not come within 
the suppositious case put to you by Sir Henry?—That is so. 

Kc-cxamination continued —Let me put it in rather a different 

remission “ Sir , HeniT haS su SS^ted, if there were a 

emission of symptoms, and recurrence of symptoms, would or 

hesuclTat - U P°“ the analysis and analytical findings 

as w ® re f ® und m this case, or different ?—The findings m 
^ ThatTs nJ 6 account for any change in the conditions. 

that is not quite what I put. The case Sir Henry nut— 

Sngle aS dose ? remiSS1011 “ d recurrence of symptoms ?-Following a 

; w £ uld the analysis of the organs and conditions of the 

No 7 +bflv SUC ^ fJ£° U case ’ or 'would they be different?— 

No, they would be quite different. 

Is there any doubt about that?—No, I say the arsenic would 

Mrs PI Armstronu did^'uot ^ %° m f her chan S es ' I W that 
rs. Armstrong did not pass water for twenty-four hours after 

1 145 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Dr Bernald H. Spilsbury 

entering the asylum except a certain quantity drawn off for test¬ 
ing purposes by a catheter. I would not expect the fact that she 
had gone into an asylum, or anything of that sort, to cause reten¬ 
tion of the urine, except such retention as may occur from being 
in a strange place and not knowing where to go. There may be 
voluntary retention for a time. 

Sir Henry does not suggest that the. medicine she took 
affected her death, but he suggests the medicine she took might 
aSect her progress towards getting better. I am not quite sure 
that I follow your view about that medicine given on October, if 
it had any effect on her either one way or the other ?—I think it 
probably acted as a check to her recovery, and I cannot exclude 
the possibility that it delayed disappearance of the neuritis, assum¬ 
ing the neuritis was arsenical neuritis. 

By that time I think the other symptoms, the vomiting 
and diarrhoea, the rapid action of the heart, and the albuminuria 
had all cleared away?—Yes. 

And was the neuritis all that was left for it to act or not to 
act upon ?—Yes, it was. I heard the evidence about Mrs. Arm¬ 
strong’s condition on the 25th January when seen by Dr, Hindis 
after coming out, and then on the 6th and 11th February, and 
then on the 16th and 17th, and so on, to the dale of her death. 

Do you think those symptoms point to a fresh dose of arsenic 
or a dose of arsenic, or to a remission of symptoms, between the 
date of the 11th February, and the date of her death l —The acute 
symptoms, I think, commenced on the 16th. From that date 
onwards the symptoms and the post-mortem examination result 
point to the giving of a large dose of arsenic, and the reappearance 
of the peripheral neuritis indicate small doses of arsenic. 

By Mr. Justice Darling —They point to fresh doses of arsenic? 
—A number of poisonous doses of arsenic between the 16th and 
her death. 

fie-evammation continued —A reappearance of the peri¬ 
pheral neuritis was found to exist on the 11th. 

Does the recurrence of that peripheral neuritis on the 11th 
point to any dose of arsenic being given before that time?—Oh, 
certainly, in small doses, not to produce acute symptoms, but 
poisonous doses which would gradually give rise to a recurrence of 
neuritis, I should say at least a week or ten days before the Uth 
February. The quantity of 1 /33rd of a grain found in^ Mr. 
Martin’s urine was a great deal more than a trace. There is no 
difficulty for an analyst to find it. 

My learned friend put to you a number of eases in which 
there was a possible case of some arsenic to be found in various 
substances he referred to. I think this bottle (produced) had 
been' used for peroxide of hydrogen ?—Yes. 

' If you were to choose a bottle to b© free of arsenic traces, 
would a duly qualified chemist choose a bottle used for peroxide of 

146 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Dr Bernard H. Spilsbury 

hydrogen; would that be suitable or not?—Yes* particularly suit¬ 
able, because peroxide cleanses any bottle very efficiently of any 
trace of arsenic, and the mere washing it with water would com¬ 
pletely remove such a trace. 

Supposing you had to choose from poison bottles on a shelf, 
and you wanted to find a bottle particularly free from traces of 
arsenic, would you or would you not choose one which had con¬ 
tained peroxide of hydrogen 2 —I doubt if 1 could select a better 
one. 

Further cross-examined by Sir H. Cxjrtis Bennett —I cannot 
agree to the proposition that there is considerable migration in the 
body in relation to the place in which you would find arsenic, 
such as, for instance, from the liver into the caecum, after death. 

I refer you to Witthaus’s woik on “ Toxicology/’ 1911, page 
539 —“ Inferences as to the distribution which existed at death, 
drawn^ from such analyses, are, we believe, entirely unreliable, 
as it is impossible in the present condition of our knowledge to 
form any adequate idea of the degree to which it has been subse¬ 
quently modified by post-mortem migration”?—No, I disagree 
with that. 

By Mr. Justice Darling —Read further on; it says, “ That 
such post-mortem distribution occurs with arsenic introduced into 
the cadaver after death cannot be questioned; and if arsenic 
introduced during life does not travel from one tissue to another 
after death, it is because it has formed an insoluble compound with 
the constituents of the tissues, a supposition in favour of which 
there is little evidence and against which the rapid elimination 
of arsenic during life militates strongly.” Do you agree with 
that?—-No, my lord, I do not. I think that passage is based en¬ 
tirely on erroneous inferences. 01 course, if the body putrifies 
and the organs become fluid or semi-fluid, then the arsenic would 
pass in a fluid condition from one part to another. 

Then the arsenic would move about with it?—Yes. 

By Sir H. Curtis Bennett —And any liquid in the body would 
have the effect of taking the arsenic not already absorbed to different 
portions of the body?—If there was putrefaction. 

No, without that—you say in fluid in the caecum this arsenic 
was found?—Yes. 

That may migrate, may it not, after death ?—If there were fluid 
in the peritoneal cavity it is possible that a migration of a certain 
amount of,arsenic might take place from one part to another. 

Further re-examined by the Attorney-General—I am sorry 
I must put a question on this. I think you said something about 
the peritoneal cavity?—Yes. 

That is outside the bowels, is it not?—The cavity in which the 
bowel lies, and occasionally at the time of death a watery fluid is 
found in that cavity, but none was found in this case. 


147 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Dr Bernard H. Spilsbury 

Yes, but keep your mind, please, on the channel formed by the 

bowel, by the intestine?—Yes. 

What do you say as to migration down this channel?_No 

migration to any appreciable extent would occur after death, but 
if you got puti efaction, so that the wall of the bowel gave way 
then, of course, the contents of the bowel would escape into the 
cavity and spread all over the abdomen. The intestines lie loose 
in the peritoneal cavity, and the pipe, so to speak, may break 
and you get a leak from it into the peritoneal cavity. As a matter 
of fact, in this case the wall of the bowel was intact. 

. . An< ?> lastly, paying every tribute of respect to Dr. Witthaus’s 
writing m 1911, have you durmg the course of the last ten or eleven 
years^ since that book was published had the opportunity of making 
examinations of dead bodies, may I say, by the score, since that 
time?—I think I may say almost by the thousand. 

And without undue modesty, might you say, have your re¬ 
searches during that period contributed to advancing knowledge in 
that ten years ?—I hope so. ‘ 

Has there been anybody who has had a larger opportunity 
from his experience and examinations of forming an opinion on this 
subject ?— There have been many, but 1 do not know that many go 
into toxicological cases. b 

By Mr. Justice Darling— I saw the body of Mrs. Armstrong. 
It was very well preserved. I think that was entirely due to the 

arsenic. 

... y° u see an y signs whatsoever which would lead you to 
think that that arsenic which you found in her liver had migrated 
from somewhere else?—No, the only change that occurred was that a 
ceitam amount of fluid had drained away from the body into the 
coffin, and arsenic, of course, would he in that. I took up some 
sawdust and wood shavings from the bottom of the coffin and thev 
were submitted to Mr. Webster. y 

As to. this theory of migration of Dr. Witthaus—did you see 
anything in. this particular case that would lead you to think what 
you found in the liver had migrated from somewhere else?— No 
impossible, my lord. ’ 


<5 • JoH n Ce Wl3 , BS , TBR ; examined by the Attokney-G-knmiul —I am 
Senior Official Analyst to the Home Office, and a Follow of the 
Institute of Chemistry. I am also pathological chemist at St. 

Mary s Hospital I have for a long period of years had 
experience in making analyses. I have had twenty-two years’ ex¬ 
perience of toxicological investigation. During that time I have 
made a numher_of analyses for Dr. Spilshury, and I have also 
worked for Sir William Willcox. In November, 1921, I received 
a box containing a bottle of urine. When I received the bottle it 
vrm corked and sealed. On thef 3rd January of this year I also 
148 . . ' " ' ' 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

John Webster 

sixteen jars from Dr. Spilsbury. I analysed the contents 
or tne bottle and also the contents of the sixteen jars. Fourteen of 
the jars contained portions of a body, and the others contained 
sawdust and shavings, and some soil. My report is as follows •— 
On 3rd January, 1922, Dr. Bernard H. Spilsbury handed to me 
sixteen glass jars. I marked these 1 to 16 respectively. (1) This 
^/T/ 99 be11 ®? “ K - Armstrong (deceased), P.M. examination 
/1/22. Stomach wall. This contained a stomach, which weighed 
21 ounces. (2) This was labelled “ Be K. M. Armstrong (deceased), 
P.M examination 3/1/22. Stomach contents.” This contained 
the stomach contents, which weighed J ounce. (3) This was labelled 
lie K. M. Armstrong (deceased), P.M. examination 3/1/22. 
Portion of jejunum and contents (smaller piece). Portion of ileum 
and contents (larger piece)/’ 

Were they separated sufficiently for you to keep them apart? 
they were. This contained jejunum and contents, which weighed 
ounce, and ileum and contents, which weighed 2 ounces. ( 4 ) 
I*® ! a !? elIed Be K - M - Armstrong (deceased), P.M. examina¬ 
tion 6/1/22. Csecum and asc. colon and contents.” This con¬ 
tained a csecum and ascending colon with contents, which weighed 
r» 4 xr UnCe8 ' • ^ This was labelled “ Be K. M. Armstrong (deceased), 
P.M. examination 3/1/22. Liver.” This contained a liver, which 
weighed m ounces. (6) This was labelled ” Be K. M. Armstrong 
(deceased), P.M. examination 3/1/22. Spleen.” This contained a 
spleen, which weighed § ounce. (7) This was labelled ” Be K. M. 
Armstrong (deceased), P.M. examination 3/1/22. Both kidneys.” 
This contained two kidneys, each weighing ‘2\ ounces. (8) This 
was labelled Be K. M. Armstrong (deceased), P.M. examination 
d/1/22. Left lung and heart.” This contained a lung weighing 
?<V U w e \r nd . a heart weighing ounces. (9) This was labelled 
Ke &. M. Armstrong (deceased), P. M. examination 3/1/22. 
Fluid from pleural cavities.” This fluid weighed 8i ounces. 
(10) contained a portion of the brain, which weighed 14 
ounces. (Ill) is labelled ‘‘Re K. M. Armstrong, deceased P.M. 
examination 3/1/22. Bone from left femur. Skin from ieft 
^/ sc es of fof* thigh.” The bone weighed 4 ounces, 
the skin 3J ounces, and the muscle 3J ounces. (12) was labelled 
Ke 11. M. Armstrong, deceased, P.M. examination 3/1/22. 

. n.wf hea , d ' „ The hair weighed 3| ounces. With regard 
to (13), the eight finger nails weighed 1/17th of an ounce, and (14) 

!d J en + t + e ’i nai J f 1 / 16th of an ounce. (15) is wood shavings and 7 
sawdust tajten from coffin, and it weighs 6| ounces. (16) is turf 
the bottom of the grave. I examined the contents 
° •+^ 4 .v, th ° Se L ar :l' J tested them to see if arsenic was in them, 
with 4he resuit that I found arsenic present in all the organs, and 
m the fluids from the body. I have prepared a table of the 
arsenic I found. . That table reads—” The amounts of arsenic 
tound by me in the various organs were as follows (calculated 

149 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

John Webster 

as arsenious oxide as 0)(1) Stomach, 2.5 milligrams; (2) stomach 
contents, 2.0 milligrams; (3) jejunum and contents, 1.6 milli¬ 
grams; ileum and contents, 9.1 milligrams; (4) caecum, ascending 
colon and contents, 37.6 milligrams.” That means a little over 
half a grain. There are 65 milligrams in a grain. In the liver 
I found 138.0. That is over two grains; it is 2.12. In the 
spleen I found one milligram. In both kidneys I found 13.2 
milligrams. That is just over one-fifth of a grain. In the left 
lung I found .5 milligrams, and in the heart, .6. In the fluid 
from pleural cavities, .9; and in a portion of the brain, .1. In 
the bone from the left femur I found .01 of a milligram; in the 
skin from left thigh, .25; in the muscles from back to left thi«h, 

. 2!l ; in the hair from the head, .54; in the finger nails, .06; and 
in the toe nails, .03— making a total of 208.*20 milligrams, or 
equal to 3£ grains. It is 3.2 grains, which practically means 
grains. Those were all the portions of the body submitted to 
me. ^ I found arsenic as described in that table. In the wood 
shavings and the sawdust submitted to me I found .26 of a milli¬ 
gram; and in the turf and soil from the bottom of the grave I 
found .35 of a milligram. That is to say, in those two I found 
about 1/100th of a grain. In No. 4, the caecum, the ascending 
colon and contents, I found a trace of bismuth. In No. 5, the 

liver, I found a substance which gave faint reactions suggestive of 
morphine or something of that sort. I have for a period of years 
made a great number of analyses of the organs of dead bodies. 
During the course of a year I will make analyses of the organs of 
thirty or forty dead bodies—perhaps sometimes more and some¬ 
times less. For the past ten years, I should think I have made 
thirty or forty complete analyses each year. That would mean 
some 300 or 400 bodies. In all poison cases arsenic is always 
carefully tested for. Quite apart from whether or not it is a 
suggestive poisonous dose, I always analyse for arsenic, so that 
not only in cases which are attributable to arsenic but in all poison 
cases I test for arsenic. The 300 or 400 bodies that I have 
referred to were all tested practically for arsenic. 

Have you ever known in your experience of a tested body in 
which you have found a larger quantity of arsenic than you'did 

in the organs submitted to you from Mrs. tlnnstrong’s body?_• 

No, this is the largest amount of arsenic I have found in any case 
of arsenical poisoning. I have never in my experience found a 
larger quantity of arsenic in the organs of the body I have tested 
1 do have the jars present in court; they are 
still at St. Mary’s Hospital. I have here with me a little tube 
which shows the equivalent to the total amount of arsenic found 

m the organs, namely, 208 milligrams. 

By Mr Justice Dareing—T hat is the amount which I actually 

t, 111 the bod y- , ^he amount the body must have taken must 
nave been very much larger* 

150 



Evidence for Prosecution. 


John Webster 

Examination continued —From your experience you can tell 
me whether that 3.21 grains would be a fatal dose?—-Yes, 2 grains 
is a possible fatal dose. I have 2 grains of arsenic here. That 
represents the amount found in the liver alone. I have given so 
far the amount of arsenic I found in the specimens submitted to 
me. I also found traces of arsenic in the muscles and skin. 

I want you to tell me this—from your experience—if the 
whole of the body had been submitted to you, do you think you 
would have found even more arsenic?—Undoubtedly I do. 

In your experience have you ever found arsenic in all the 
organs such as you found here—the kidneys, the liver, the ileum, 
the caecum, and so on—arsenic in all the organs, except in a case 
of arsenical poisoning?—No, I have not. (Shown exhibit con¬ 
taining Mr. Martin's urine.) I have tested that urine and I 
found arsenic present. I found l/33rd of a grain in the amount 
of urine sent to me, which was 17J ounces. It is quite easy to 
estimate that quantity. 

Is that what you call a mere trace, or is it a measurable 
quantity?—No, it is a good deal more than a trace; it is an 
appreciable quantity. 

Can you measure that with certainty?—Yes, I can estimate 
it with certainty. . The tests I applied are accurate tests. I also 
made an examination of a number of articles sent to me in a 
hamper by Chief Inspector Crutchett. In an envelope found on 
the prisoner’s person, exhibit No. 32, there was a packet con- 
taining white powder. I examined that powder. I found that 
that little packet contained 3§ grains of white arsenic. I 
examined, secondly, a brown paper packet labelled arsenic,”' 
and I found it contained nearly three dunces of grey powder, 
which I iound to be arsenic coloured with a little charcoal. That 
is exhibit No. 33. The arsenic in that case is mixed with char¬ 
coal according to the statute under which it is sold. I examined 
the contents of the bottle, exhibit No. 26, and I found it contained 
one fluid ounce of a dark brown liquid, which had the odour of 
paraffin, and it was found to be a strong alkaline solution of 
arsenic.^ I also examined the cognac bottle, marked ff Poison— 
weed-killer." I found that it contained about one-third of an 
ounce of yellowish brown liquid, which was a strong alkaline solu¬ 
tion of arsenic. In the hamper there were a number of other 
empty bottles of homoeopathic medicines. I tested the contents 
of a number of those bottles. Exhibits Nos. 37 and 38 were the 
only two bottles that contained arsenic, with the exception of those 
already mentioned. Taking No. 37 first, that is labelledArsen, 
alb. 3X. JJ I tested the contents of that bottle, and I found it 
contained 12.5 milligram^ of arsenic in one fluid ounce. 

By Mr. Justice Darling —It would take fifteen of those 
bottles to contain three grains. One would have to take ten of 
them to take a fatal dose. 

Examination continued —It.ft made up in alcohol. 


151 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

John Webster ^ 

By Mr. Justice Dabling—T hey only take tm a,- j 

of th.t homeopathic medicine at a tim° ? I tUnt 7 ' ,v ' JPS 

adult would be two pilule, or two d “j of t he .mctare “ 

Lxarmnation continued —Exhibif No <c A 

mad, a great number of an.ipe, to ,ee if I could find areeuio ” 

strong^arsenic ? r6tan< ^ “ »* h “' <M S™ Mr,. Arm. 

Sir H. Curtis Bennett —Or that she took it. 
i{ ^ a ™ matw \ con tinued—I have tested glucose from time to 
about twntt m6mber that tilere was considerable difficulty arose 

peroxide o, hgdrogen' “ fbffitatXTSrS 

hydrogen would be an extremely good bottle -o chooHe w!, ° f 

p f oxide ib3eIf would clean the botfJe Very well You 
could not choose a better bottle after having rinsed it out T 
shouH not expect to find any traceable quantity in peroxide 0 f 
hydrogen I have from time to time given evidence 1 T • V 
Tw 8 7 TV anaI - ys ® s for the purpose of testing foods and drum* 
rears h T k! hem . ™ bmitt . ed to , me *<>r analyses over a period of 
dm™ \ ^ 6 had c ? nsiderabIe experience in tenting foods and 

un is' IIUA 1 m ^. ex r r A nce 0ne would not fin<1 anwnio in urine 
rquanSv oTTAT T'f b r a T- Ually administered (or taken) hi 
Also in mv a/ 33ld io tb ® P at) ent whose urine was being tested. 
Also, in my experience of testing the organs and nm-Mm.Jli. 

istered 7 ° l not ®° d a ’.' senic ™ *em unless it has 110011 ' admin- 

™»t prJldTu'l'td" * h ” .. k ‘- 

Cross-examined by Sir II. Cuktis Bennett— I have five m„+ 
ters to deal with. You were asked if you would find arseni^it 
urine unless it was administered or taken or is in +i ia iVT! 0 m 

vessel into which it was put before you tested it?—Yes y ' jQ ( > r 

You have to add that?—Yes, of course. 

In glucose you say you do not generally find anv amemV 
Ton sometimes do, do you not?-I n minute trace? 7 

fa "Sir *b?«™ 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

John Webster 

the brandy bottle and the black bottle, 35 and 36, both contain 
weed-killer, to put it into ordinary English?—Yes. 

One other thing. When you were making your analysis did 
you take only a portion, say, of the whole liver and multiply 
it, or did you take the whole liver?—I did not take the whole) 
liver. I always reserve a portion in case of another analysis being 
required. ° 

What did you take?—A little under one-third. 

Did you test it in two ways ?—I did. 

You took two separate pieces for testing?—Yes, but in portions. 
1 actually weighed the arsenic. I took it from various portions 
of the liver. 

Was it taken from portions?—From portions all over. 

And does that apply to all the rest of your tests?—Yes. 

Taken from portions and then multiplied to get the different 
amounts m the different organs ?—-That is so. 

Re-examined by the Attorney-General —I took between one- 
third and one-fourth of the liver first, and I found an aliquot 
portion of arsenic. I then made another test of another portion 
In the portions I tested I found 32 milligrams. I took two por¬ 
tion® to find whether there was arsenic in both portions, but the 
other portion was done by a different method in order to give a 
cross test, and the two results agreed absolutely. That is the way 
I have tested for years. The test is a reliable one. 11/33rd of 
a grain is certainly not a minute trace. In my opinion l/33rd 
ot a gram could not be introduced by a mere impurity of peroxide 
hydrogen in the bottle before. ' 

■ - Sir William Henry Willcox, examined by the Attorney- 
General— I am a Knight Commander of the Indian Empire, a 
Companion of the Bath, and Commander of the Order of St. Micheal 
and St. George. I am an M.D. of London, a Fellow of the Col¬ 
lege of Physicians, London, and Medical Adviser to the Home 
Office. I am also physician to St. Mary’s Hospital, and examiner 
m iorensic medicine in Manchester University. I have had a 
large experience in cases of arsenical and other poisoning, ex- 
tending over about eighteen years. I have been engaged con¬ 
stantly m cases where it has been suggested that death was due to 
poisoning and in particular I have had a number of arsenical 
cases. _ I have considered the evidence that has been given by 
Dr. Hincks and Dr. Townsend upon the condition of Mrs. Arm¬ 
strong before and at the time of her removal to the asylum. I 
nave been m Court the whole time. I have also heard the evi¬ 
dence given by Dr. Spilsbury and Mr. Webster. I have paid par¬ 
ticular attention as to Dr^ Hmcks’s attendance on Mrs. Armstrong 
, th ® Tear 1919 from May to August. I also noted that he 
attended her little girl on the 1st August, 1920. 

From hearing the evidence |iven with regard to Mrs. Arm- 

153 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Sir William H. Willcox ° 

strong's illness in 1919, when she was suffering from rheumatism 
will you tell my lord and the jury what your view of her condition 
at that time is, and of the rheumatism from which she was suffer¬ 
ing m 1919 ? In 1919 it was clear that she was suffering from 
rheumatic symptoms; the neuritis was a localised neuritis such as 
occurs m rheumatic^ conditions; it was clearly not the peripheral 
neuritis or, as . it is sometimes called, multiple neuritis, which 

occurs m arsenical poisoning, and which occurred later in this 
case. 

Why do you say that?—Because there were no definite symp¬ 
toms or signs m both arms and both legs, but there was a localised 
neuritis m one arm and leg; there was a swelling of one wrist 

joint. 

In view of the condition that you have heard described of Mrs 
Armstrong in 1919, do you think that the rheumatism from which 
she suffered could have caused what has been termed autointoxica¬ 
tion #—It is rather the other way round. Auto-intoxication is a 
term which means poisoning from the body itself ; we all suffer 
trom it to some, extent probably; the rheumatism was an evi¬ 
dence of some slight auto-intoxication at that time, hut nothing 
serious. It could not have caused heart disease by August, 1920 
I would like to make that quite clear. Rheumatic fever in earlv 
life causes heart disease, but not the chronic rheumatism which 
occurs in people of the age of Mrs. Armstrong. 

■ 1“ y ®, ar ® °£ ad olescence a person suffers from rheumatic 

tever, does that affect the heart, or may that affect, the heart ?_ 

It is usually m young people of under twenty when the heart is 
anected; one does not associate heart disease with the chronic 
rheumatism which it is said that Mrs. Armstrong was suffering 
from. I remember the fact that Mrs. Armstrong was treated for 
muscular rheumatism in May and June, and some time in July 

tW ( , A fl g r t U ai l d -f at then * he visits ceased. I do not think from 
tha t Xt 18 P°A sl , b 0 from this rheumatism so described 
1920 r f Ar ™ stron o could have developed heart disease by August, 
illnL llu , Car il n ?V f the VBVton* of Mrs. Armstrong-^ 
1920 tw, it US6d h6 f t0 b -!. 8 - 6nt 1 ~ Barrwood Asylum in August, 
iff+' • the s 7 m P toms it is difficult to say what the nature of 

IdmitteTtf 0r P° ls, ? nm g w f fc was suffering from when she was 
nokfn 7 bu \ they are consistent with an irritant 

C fl b f been taken. I was also told that she was suffer- 

albumen in the urine, and some 
KS. - f hear f ’ an< ? that her skin was pale and sallow. 

theTiffl nTrf* h i aYe be !? the caU8e of the melancholia; no doubt 
the time of. life also partly associated with that. Mrs. Armstrong 

was undoubtedly very ill when she was taken to the asylum. 

,? ln0ks no t ice d a change between the time he visited her 
early in the day, about midday, and the time when he went back 

^ a ^' em0Gn > a ^ ter having mad© some arrange- 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Sir William H. Willco* 

merits- about three o’clock, in the afternoon. Does that indicate 
anything in your mind?—Yes. 

What ? The occurrence of the vomiting is consistent with 
some irritant poison having been administered. 

If an irritant poison had been taken, would you expect to 
find her symptoms more acute at three o’clock than they were 
earlier in the day?—It depends, of course, on the time at which 
the poison was taken. If some had been taken between those times 
I should. After admission to the asylum a test of her urine was 
taken, and albumen was found, and I also understand that she did 
not pass_ urine for twenty-four hours. That indicates that she was 
very seriously ill. If there was suppression of urine the condition 
would be more serious than from bare retention. Suppression of 
the urine would indicate some toxic action on the kidneys, some 
poisonous action on the kidneys, and, of course, it might be due 
to other causes as well. The albumen is also evidence of some toxic 
poisoning of the kidney. 

Following out the symptoms, we know that the albuminuria 
cleared away by the 28th August, and that peripheral neuritis had 
developed m the course of about a fortnight after her admission. 
Do you attach importance to those two features?—Yes, I attach 
great importance to that. 

What do they indicate to you?—They indicate to me that the 
cause of the whole illness was arsenical poisoning. 

. Will you tell my lord and the jury why you say that?—This 
peripheral neuritis may occur from chemical poisons of which the 
common one is alcohol, and which we may exclude here; it may 
occur from bacterial poisons, such as diphtheria, of which there 
is no evidence here; it may occur from auto-intoxication of a 
severe type. 

By Mr. Justice Darling —Intoxication is such a common word 
be misunderstood. Tell us exactly what you mean ?—If 
the body is not doing its work properly, for example if the kidneys 
are not working properly, or the liver, or the pancreas (that is 
the sweetbread), then poisons accumulate in the system and cause 
illness, and that illness is called auto-intoxication. The commonest 
form^ of auto-intoxication is diabetes. That frequently causes 
neuritis. There is no evidence of any diabetes here. There was 
no sugar in the urine. You might get auto-intoxication from 
chronic Bright s disease, but there is no evidence that there was 
chronic Bright’s disease here. 

Examination continued —I attach importance to the clearing 
up of the albuminuria, and the commencement of peripheral 
neuritis. The other causes of peripheral neuritis, such as cancer 
or tubercule, can be excluded here, or beri-beri, which is a tropical 
disease. I attach importance to the clearing up of the albumi- 
the urine and the clearing up of the peripheral neuritis, 
and the redevelopment of that later on when the patient got home 

155 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Sir William H. WiUcox 

in February. The clearing up of the albuminuria by the 28th 
August indicates that the cause had ceased. If the cause of this 
illness _ had been auto-intoxication it would have been still 
operating, and the albumen in the urine would not have cleared 
up, nor would the peripheral neuritis have cleared up. 

Can you explain how it was that the albuminuria should clear 
up and the peripheral neuritis should come on ?—Yes. In 
arsenical poisoning the action of the arsenic on the kidney is a 
quick one; it occurs in twenty-four hours. The action on the 
nerves is a slow one, and takes ten days or a fortnight, or perhaps 
longer, to commence. * 1 

If the cause was arsenical poisoning, arsenic administered 
before she went into the asylum, would you expect to find the 
albuminuria had ceased, as it had, by the 28th August?— Yes. 

And consistently with that, might or might not the peripheral 
neuritis appear?—Yes, I should expect the peripheral neuritis to 
occur the first ten days or so after arsenic had been taken. 

And not before?—No. It takes ten days or so—several days 

—-to commence. J 

_ You have told us that Mrs. Armstrong was not suffering from 
Bright’s disease in August, in your opinion, when she wont to the 
asylum ?—That is so. Bright’s disease is a chronic disease, and Dr, 
Hincks discovered no sign of Bright’s disease up (,o the time that 
Mrs. Armstrong went to the asylum. There wore no symptoms 
of it described, and it is a disease which does not clear up in & 
few days; it is a more or less permanent disease. It lasts a long¬ 
time ; it is rarely curable. b 

Let us pass on to January, when Mrs. Armstrong returned 
home from the asylum. You remember that in the letter of Dr. 
Townsend it was said that they had come to (he conclusion that 
the neuritis was functional and not organic. What do you say 
about that? My opinion is that the neuritis was a peripheral 
neuritis; I have no doubt about it, There may have been some 
functional symptoms superaddedj indeed, I think Dr. Routar says 
that m his letter. ■ 

Is it easy or not to diagnose arsenical poisoning during life? 
—It is difficult; it is very difficult unless an analysis is made; 
the symptoms of arsenical poisoning may be imitated by disease. 

I know that Dr. Hincks found Mrs. Armstrong physically very 
much better on the 25th January •when ho saw hor, 'and then in 
February he speaks of the high-stoppage gait. That, to my mind 
is a very important feature; it is tho most important; .symptom of 
peripheral neuritis. Owing to tho weakness of the feet ihoy drop, 
and the patient lifts the feet up high to prevent the toes catching 
the ground. I am familiar with that symptom of which Mrs. 
Armstrong complained, that she felt as if she had springs in her 
leet;_ it is a fairly common disorder or sensation in peripheral 
neuritis. r 

156 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Sir* William H. Willcox 

Anri t ^? t the :16th s3le sufiered from severe vomiting, 

and there was diarrhoea, and again a very high pulse and svstolic 
murmur, some indication of trouble in the heftoand you remem 
her the rest of her symptoms. Will you speak of those ancksav 
to what you attribute those symptoms 2—Those symptoms were in 
my opmion, undoubtedly due to an irritant poTn and to view 
tbe Presence of this peripheral neuritis I should say that un 
doubtedly those symptoms were symptoms of arsenical poisoning’ 
Poisoning over what period and in what doses do vou 
First I must deal with the recrudescence of the ^peripheral 
r; ltlS - + lhat lndlcates th e taking of arsenic a few days before 
®y mptoms reappeared. I believe they reappeared on the 

the h Tnh brUary ‘- That W ° uId indicate the taking of Arsenic before 
the 11th say six or seven days, but it is impossible to say exactly 

-^evera! days before. Then on 16th February there were symp¬ 
toms of acute latent poison, and those indicate that some poison 

on “■** a * y ° r * i,hin * h »«™ •««»* 

4 nd ^ r0 ™ and a 4 er th a t time the continued vomiting and the 
diarrhoea, pulse, and so on, what do they indicate to your mind? 
These indicate taking of further large doses of arsenic. 

thouSfn^'- f STICE Oakling When ?—It is impossible to say, 
though ceitainly some must have been taken a few hours of the 
onset of the symptoms on the 16th. 

orvaffnfHaving regard to the analysis of the 
ffi t 4 bocy t . ake . n t ® n months after burial, from the distri- 
bution of the arsenic m the alimentary canal, I have no doubt 

death" P Bv 1 fl' 7 fata ' dose was taken within twenty-four hours of 
death. By a possibly fatal dose, I mean 2 grains is usually 

Xf nf a P° s f bl y fata l do*. With regard to the three places 
where Dr Spilsbury said he found a liquid which contained 

witoDr I }fr U “’J he ilSUm ’ and the I entirely “ 

with Dr. Spilsbury s figures as to the time which it would take 

thLvT mC ^ tbrough the mouth to get to those points. I 
think he gave four hours for the passage through the stomach and 
f f ° r tbe passage through the small intestine, and I think 
he gave twelve hours for the caecum. They are very fair figures 
With arsenic found m these places, and having regard to the time 

LTwl ^ t0 gSt fl} ere ’ 1 bave no doubt whatever that a large 
dose was given some time before death—within twenty-four hours 

ThfrtodVnf + rgS q ua ntity, over 2 grains, was found in the liver, 
that indicates to my mind that there must have been a good deal 
of arsenic absorbed during the last few days of life. Two grains 
nr an unusually large quantity to find in the post-mortem in the 

lT;w rSem V VaS a1s ° / ound in the kid neys and other places, 

and tfyat supports my contention. ^ 

, Hoes the finding of that arsenic in the kidneys give any ex- 
planation of what was put down in the certificate—nephritis 

kidney trouble ? Yes, the case itseff, the whole history of the case’ 

157 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Sir William H. Willcox 

shows that the kidneys must have been damaged by the poison. 
Looking at the symptoms which occurred in August, 1920, and the 
symptoms which occurred in February, 1921, I find a similarity 
between them on a great many points. The diarrhoea is not 
described as occurring in August, 1921, and it occurred in the 
later illness, the last illness. Of course, the vomiting was more 
marked in the last illness. In August, 1920, and February, 1921, 

I find from the symptoms evidence of arsenic being taken over a 
period of some days. With regard to Mrs. Armstrong's illness 
in February, 1921, and the condition in which the organs of the 
body were found, I should expect her condition during the last 
two or three days of her life to be one of extreme weakness. 
Having in view that she had peripheral neuritis on the 11th, and 
then these acute symptoms afterwards, she must have been prac¬ 
tically paralysed the last few days. I heard it stated that she 
had difficulty in co-ordinating the movement of her fingers at an 
early stage. That would increase up to the time of her death. 

I know that the certificate which Dr. Ilincks gave was heart disease 
for twelve months, nephritis or kidney trouble for six months, 
and gastritis for twenty-one days. There is a sequence between 
those three causes of death. By that I mean, assuming that this 
illness was due to natural causes, that would be the only explana¬ 
tion one could give on the ground that it was natural causes. Dr. 
Hincks attributed the heart disease as primary, and the kidney 
and nephritis as secondary to that, because the nephritis cleared 
up. If it had not cleared up he would probably have put it the 
other way round. Gastritis was the name given for the vomiting 
during the last two days. If the heart is not working properly 
the kidneys become congested, and then you get albumen in the 
urine. With my knowledge of the case I would not be satisfied 
to attribute the heart trouble, the murmur in the heart, and so 
on, and the dilatation of the heart, to rheumatism. There is no 
doubt in this case those symptoms were not due to natural causes, 
but were due to arsenical poisoning. 

At some time of the case it was suggested, or at least indi¬ 
cated, that Mrs. Armstrong might possibly have committed suicide* :. 
Do you think that these doses or the taking of arsenic over a con¬ 
siderable period of time that you have told us of would be con¬ 
sistent with suicide ?—In suicide one would expect a large' dose to 
be taken, or possibly two, but in this case there was obviously, 
taking of successive doses, a continued dosage, causing very pain¬ 
ful symptoms and not in the least indicative of suicide, but rather 
the contrary, putting it out of court. * 

By Mr. Justice Darling—You say many doses were taken over 
a long time?—Yes,, there were some.doses.taken.in the beginning' of 
February, 1921, and there must have been several doses taken from 
16th February until 22nd February, in the last acute stage of 
the illness. r 

158 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Sir William H. Willcox 

_You feel certain, I gather, that she had a large dose of arsenic 
within twenty-four hours of her death?—I have no doubt about 

Having regard to the whole of the evidence in the case, the 
evidence of the nurses and the evidence of the doctors, and the 
evidence of the analysts, do you believe that she could possibly 
herself have taken that dose?—Do you mean in the last acute illness? 

leaf—No, I do not. 

Within the last twenty-four hours?—No, certainly not 

- ,f 0W * ar b ^\ wou } d y° u go?—Certainly for the last four or 
nve days it would have been impossible. 

Examination continued—It it had been a case of auto-intoxi- 
cation arising from rheumatism and acting upon the kidneys, and 
so on, I would have expected to find sugar in the urine, but there 
° f :t ’ dla . betes bein g on®. With diabetes you 
other fymptoms 6 Urln6 ’ ’ C ° UrS6 ’ is a Wastin S and m “y 

, . Justice Darling — I do not see the purpose of going into 
this, because I understand it is not disputed, and has not been de¬ 
puted, that she really died of an administration of arsenic and 
the only question is whether the defendant gave it 
,, t Tw Attorney-General - 1 think the point which is put is 
that that may have happened m February, 1921, but the illness in 
August, m consequence of which she was taken to the asylum was 
not a case of arsenical poisoning, but auto-intoxication. 

(To Witness) I only want a few questions about Mr. Martin’s 
illness, consequent upon the tea, the illness which commenced on 
the 26th October, 1921. Have you listened to the evidence given 
as to the symptoms from which Mr. Martin suffered on that evening 
and the subsequent days ?—Yes. In my judgment the symptoms 
pointed to some irritant poisoning, some gastro-enteritis, inflamma- 
tion °f the stomach and intestines, due to some cause, I cannot say 
what from the symptoms alone. When I find on the fourth day 
after the illness began that l/33rd of a grain of arsenic was found 
m the urine it makes it quite clear. Assuming that arsenic was 
P-- d V be patient, I should have no doubt about the cause. The 
1/odrd of a grain in the 11^ ounces is a large quantity aua 
arsenic m the urine. From that fact and the other symptoms I 
form the opinion that the illness was due to a dose, a possibly 
poisonous dose, of arsenic being taken within a very short time of 
the onset of,the symptoms. By “ a possibly poisonous dose ” I 
mean at least 2 grains. I observed that the urine which was tested 
was passed ^ late on the 30th or early on the 31st, which was some 
four days, if not a little longer, after it is said that the poison was 
administered.^ That corresponds exactly in my judgment with what 
1 would expect. For some years I have made a particular inquiry 
as to the taking of arsenic and tracdts of it being found in the urine. 

159 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Sir William H. Willcox 

There is a treatment commonly known as the salvarsan treatment, 
used for certain diseases. In the salvarsan treatment there is a 
considerable amount of arsenic mixed with other ingredients. In 
taking the combined medicine the arsenic does not have any 
poisonous effect; the combination destroys the poisonous effect of 
the ^ arsenic. A patient treated with salvarsan has as much as 3 
.grains introduced into the circulation, but by virtue of the com¬ 
bination the poisonous effect is prevented. I had a number of tests 
taken so long^ ago as before 1916 as to the result of this administra¬ 
tion of arsenic and its effect upon the urine of the patients; I pub¬ 
lished a paper on it in 1919. The tests were made on the urine of 
patients who had been subjected for a certain time previously to 
salvarsan treatment,^ and I found that the result on the fourth day 
after giving the patient a full dose of this arsenic preparation the 
identical amount of arsenic occurred in the urine which occurs in 
this case; that is to say, the identical percentage. Therefore I do 
not think that the lapse of four days or four and a half days is too 
long a period to find some arsenic in the urine; you may find arsenic 
in the urine for a fortnight—ten days at least. In the case of Mr. 
Martin, he had had violent vomiting. That does not in any way 
militate against the accuracy of my tests which I made in the other 
cases. 

Can you form any opinion, having regard to the violent vomit¬ 
ing which took place, and so on, as to what would be the amount 
of arsenic which must have been taken four days previously, if 
after the lapse of four days you find l/33rd of a grain in the 174' 
ounces of urine?— Yes, I should say a large dose, probably over 3 
grains. 

By Mr. Justice Darling— 1 The vomiting certainly would get 
rid of a considerable quantity of arsenic, so that you would find 
less in the urine than if he had lived and had not vomited. 

. lamination continued — Applying the results of my experience 
gamed by the administration. of salvarsan, including arsenic, my 
results are in no way interfered with by the fact that there was 
vomiting in this particular case. With that experience and that 
knowledge gained as long ago as 1916, 1 can form a confident 
opinion as to what the cause of Mr. Martin’s illness was. I say 
it was acute arsenical poisoning. I think it is impossible that, that 
quantity of arsenic could have got into the urine by taking food 
under oidinary conditions, running the chances which we all run 
of taking arsenic. It is also larger than one finds from ordinary 
medicinal doses. * 

®y a Juror —Is there any taste or flavour to arsenic?—If the 
white arsenic that was passed round is taken it has a somewhat 
metallic taste, but when mixed with foods it is quite tasteless. 

Cross-examined by Sir H. Curtis Bennett— What is the largest 
dose which is given properly as Tnedicine?—In certain diseases you 
160 J 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Sir Wffiiam H. Willem 

may give fairly large doses. The pharmacopceial dose goes up to 8 
minims, three times a day. That is 8/100th of a grain. That is 
the maximum dose. That is l/12th of a grain. You can work up 
to that quantity three times a day, but if you give it straight away 
it would make the patient ill. Two grains is a possibly fatal dose: 
It is possible for 15 grains to be given and the person still live if 
severe vomiting occurred. r 

I will deal first of all with Mr. Martin’s case. As I under- 

inThn t L y ° U n0t g °! th6 anaIysis of the urine > the symptoms 
lt rni^fv, Wer \ sym P toms of ordinary gastric enteritis2—Yes, 
“ Ugbt have b . een ^ ue to Ptomaine poisoning; they might have 
tnZtZl 0 a fT f f US63 ‘ - Rheumatism would not cause auto! 
intovtoaH but aut °- lntozlcatl on would cause rheumatism. Auto¬ 
intoxication arises from a great number of different causes. Mrs 

A^s rong undoubtediy had chronic rheumatism. That may have 
been caused originally by auto-intoxication or some other cause I 
do not agree with Dr. Hincks that the rheumatism that she suffered 
from might have caused the heart trouble which she thought she 

r stT"? r r„“ A, r t ' - 192 . 0 ' 1 h *™ s 1 ’® £r 

thnnrf,?? f L h t d f en ber m August, 1920, I would not have 

for l£t DTHtoch y th f + . rhe 1 U T tiSm was suffi cient to account 
f L r * nc ^ s saw* I think that that was a mistake. Unless 

there was, as I say, evidence of rheumatic fever in early life I 
should attach no importance to that. y 3 

■i A""* * 0 * ake tbe case . as we know it, and as Dr. Hincks knew 
it, 1915 to 1918, rheumatism; 1918 and 1919, neuritis- 1920 he 
W^ th6 “^ral-systolic murmu r, and he puts that down to having 
been caused by rheumatism. With that you do not agree 1 —I should 

he a hld°more Urther OTldenCe before 1 P ut down to^hat; possibly 

I ^P F * be August, 1920, the day before she went into the 
£ni’nf W0 r n0 evidenc e that I have heard pointing to arsenical 
poisoning Assuming arsenic is given in a large dose vou 

ca^ r <vf l- vomiting and sickness. It is not necessary in’every 
case of taking a large dose of arsenic to get vomiting^ but vou 

of a 2enir yS As’ a Pe ^P heral neuritis might arise from one dose 
IS 0 ' As a . m , atter pt fact, the worst case of peripheral 

Thenl!to>, 0m , arSemc + al neuntls that I know of was afteron e P dose. 
The peripheral neuritis appeared within ten days of the taking of 
the dose Peripheral neuritis does not always follow one dose ‘ 

LT er — 011 aft — ^ 

aft „ r A l* h f t ™ e when Armstrong was at Barnwood Asylum, 
had beeD sean V Hincks, Dr. Townsend, and Dr 
Souta.r, were the symptoms from which she was then suffering symp- 

Sl T l7«t ******** arsenica“pS- 

pofsonin^ y h,!t' s .5 0nsl ! tent > as 1 ha #e already stated, with arsenical 
poisoning, but there is no history of that. 

M . 


161 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Sir William H. Wiilcox ^ 

Try for a moment, if you can, to put yourself in the position 
of these doctors at Barnwood. They do not know what you and I 
know now; they do not know what was found ten months after 
this lady was buried. Seeing the lady in October, 1920, were the 
symptoms from which she was then suffering symptoms which mav 
be imitated by other diseases than arsenical poisoning ?—They may 

There is nothing extraordinary, is there, that those three 
doctors at that time did not recognise that she was suffering from 
arsenical poisoning ?—It was a very difficult case then ThI 
symptoms were consistent with illness other than arsenical'poison 
mg. I enpheral neuritis may he got as the result of a toxaemia 
which is the result of auto-intoxication, or from other poisons’ 
You may get a tenderness of the muscles in peripheral neuritis hut 
not always You get that in alcoholic neuritis* It is a symptom 
which should be looked for, but it is not a very important symptom 
There is no evidence of it in this case. Numbness is also a symp¬ 
tom, and there is no evidence of. it here, except that the term 

pms and needles was used, which is almost the same as numb- 
ness. w 

D .° ^collect when the description of pins and needles was 

m A th6 7 lc ® n " e of Mi88 Frien(J > “d related to a 
time long before August, 1920; it related to 1917. You do not 
suggest that this lady was suffering from peripheral neuritis in 
1917 and 1919?—-No, not then. 

it?—Nb* Cann0t be the numbness fr °m peripheral neuritis, can 

What would be the pins and needles at that time ?—You mav 
get it from rheumatic local neuritis. Dealing with the time after 

.y, me , ba ? k , m January, I suggest that she must have had a 

11th February 086 ° r & &rge doS6 of arsenic some day prior to the 

Assuming you understand I do not admit it—that Mrs. Arm¬ 
strong was suffering from arsenical poisoning in August, the evi¬ 
dence there is of one dose on the 22nd?— I would not like to sav 
°* one dose; of dosage over a short period. 

21st ?ugnsU-T?iaH P sr 8 ° f arSenical Phoning before the 

If there was any arsenical poisoning at all in August the 
evidence is confined to one day ?—If that is a true record. g 

It is the evidence, is it not?— Yes. 

I am dealing, with the evidence. Assuming she was suffering 
from arsenical poisoning in August, the evidence is confined to the 
taking of arsenic on one day—the symptoms. That is right, is 
it not ?—That is assuming a large dose was taken. Arsenic might 
have been taken in moderate doses for several days, and then a 
large dose to cause the vomiting. I agree there is no evidence of 
any vomiting before the 22nd August, but arsenic might have been 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Sir William H. Wfflcox 

taken in doses insufficient to cause vomiting before that day. It 
is usual to have vomiting if a large dose is taken, but there is no 
evidence of vomiting or any other form of arsenical poisoning 
before the 22nd August. 6 

iQ 9 n Theref0re 1 ti m rlg ^ t ’ am 1 not > in saying that in August, 
1920, we are really confined to that one day as far as evidence 
is concerned the 22nd August?—As far as the evidence of a large 
dose is concerned. s 

There is no evidence of a small dose any other day?—That 
would be pure assumption. J 

Mr. Justice Darling—H is point is that unless they have got 

S Zn dn y w °T f SaW " tak ? there would be no evidence of a 
eZwT ; If 7 °u 5” re 1 7mg 0n vomitin S there would be no 
vomiting * & Sma d ° Se ’ because a sma11 dose ^ould not cause 

., . Slr ,?• CuRTIS Bennett—I am relying on any symptom that 
this gentleman can tell me. I am suggesting, and I thought he 
agreed, that there is no symptom of any sort, vomiting or other¬ 
wise, prior to the 22nd August. 8 

The Witness—T hat is right. 

Cross-examination continued —Very well, I will leave it there 
In. February your suggestion is that there was a dose some days 
prior to the 11th?—There was some arsenic taken. 

It may have been one dose ?—Possibly, or several small doses. 
It may have been either ?—Probably several small doses. 

And you form that opinion upon the examination of Dr 
Hincks upon that day?—Yes. 

The recurrence of peripheral neuritis ?—Yes. 

And upon that alone?—And upon the general state of health. 
tie describes her as being very ill on that date. 

But no vomiting?—No. 

Yes 111611 the n6Xt Seri ° US dat8 iS the 16th Februar y> is it not?— 

Do you agree with the answer that I received from Dr. Snils- 
bury that a person may take one large fatal dose of arsenic, Lay 
ffrfdn fn° m . v ° mitl ? g , for a couple of days or three days, and then 

f y and dle at tbe end of five or six days ?—Yes, that is 

an abstract proposition. 

It is possible?—Yes. 

That, I understand from Dr. Spilsburv, might happen with- 
out other disease The other case I put to him was theLemisdon ; 
do you agree with that answer too?—Yes. 

ift+L 11 \ P erS ° n - ? ay taie one lar S e fatal dose of arsenic on 
tne JOth and have sickness on the night of the 16th, 17th, and 18th 

IStZ 8 ’22nd ?—Yes gradUalIy ^ fr ° m exhaustion and die on the 

all S d r C M P erson be ? bl ® Probably to keep down food at 
all, either liquid or otherwise f—It would be rather difficult. 

163 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong 

Sir William H. Willcox O * 

tatSint W0U,d t ” P ““ d °™' but th »» »• * tondoney 

**xsra«: » jkbkl* -—- 

find X*Z S a,rS"inS ““I “?« bu; “ d --H y,„ 

practically empty?_Yes. ' 168 ° SUC 1 a P erson would’be 

arsenic, 7 or 8 grains, h would It^possiWe ni^t r0all7 f lare ° dose of 
to haye happened as I have nut it I q, ’ ,0 . Ilow * or everything 

dose. I, “ft B ™ n » i« * bi| 

probably be earlier. gl * 1,0 S ° Iate » but it would 

«ih7« Si:£ T ra »! nS , ; , 1 Wil1 put it; a little Ie ss than 7 or a ? _T+ 

W The I dI h r d 6Xp6Ct d6ath t0 0ccur earIier than five 1 days ° 8 ' 

considerab^^quantity 111 ^ tf 5™ ? f ?T ^ S a 

got rtd 8 of 1-Yes 1 ;°I shot Id prarticaSr^ol? 1 - °*ih 

alimentary canal. i piaaically none in the 

the livcr - Most of the 

sorbed in^the Tiverl—Biitlhe “i. 08 * °f ^hat had been ab- 

empty of arsenic practically ° h ’ md ,nte8tia “ wouI d be 

General ^t^ ^ *> the Attorney- 

that would be taken?—Yes that ia^Th d ° SeS wouI<1 the most 
sense. * es ’ that 18 rat her a matter for common 

person h who 18 ^ n ° U 14 de P end8 upon the 

is. 1 P Z7”p.Tso»“„ilT“ «>“ » P««>n -Ho 

that h. .odd not ““ tb * *» 

two or* thjree° doses^?—Yes* "o™* 1 “SM tab 

p»»" ! wSt’r&d 

th. ^.d'ttaT’ "dght go to a high., wi„ d0 . 

sino^on; a. X pot the stony to y„ n ? p £ 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

. . Sir William H. WiHcox 

? 1°"?S'dTi„“?5 ar “" ic * 1 “ *■*■*. ™«h 

“ d * dM * 

,iuar"i"* th s%"s t w 8 m b “° * j”? 

last twenty-four hours becausToAre JTA ^ ken within the 

“iL^Lr r, r” timi " s *>»» 

Sunday night ?-Y ea yd &S t0 what happened on the 

During the ten hours that she was there, one motion?_Yes 

»th, u 3 2JS iZiit SL'StJZ&gp - 

,. **■ Justice Darling—S ir Henrv was sDeakl-no- + r 

diarrhoea during the last twenty-four hours She f «. * he 

't-H 411 ; 23nd B Thrt ’™>'ii.boS e ^l a Sf 2 S“ 

Sir H. Curtis Bennett—F irst of all Sir w;n;„ r, . OT ‘ 
two days, so I dealt with two days. ’ Wllham Said to me 
Mr. Justice Darling—Y ou pointed out that Tni>«+- u 
talking about was twenty-four hours th * h t he waa 

The WiTNEss-Then I restricted it to twenty-four hours 
Cross-exammaHon continued— Do you want to reatrh£ ‘ +lw . ; 
and diarrhoea to twenty-four hours?—The reason I said 

Si d .rj „“ d ^““ 1 N ““ «hh «». ~ &Lzt 

AlleJsai^iitMn 6 the e i«'+ !I- d f nc ® I am pointing out what Nurse 
Alien said, within the last thirty-six hours Nurse Lloyd was there 

and she said that during the period of ten hours shR was there 

early kTthe^ ^ T* 10 ^- tW ° vomitin g s > and both of those were 

I agree 5th thai- g ^ two °’ cIock in the morning?- 

* y ° U take thos « ten hours 

Sir H. Curtis Bennett—S he was in charge the Sunday mVht 
from between nine and ten o’clock. Ten .o’clock would be Exactly 
thirty-six hours before death * exactly 

MOP?,? ™ r 5“ be till eight o-elock „ * 0 

G r°l s -f^^tion continued—Dxaiag that time her evidence 
after to 5c” K SSEgg"* ^ 

By Mr. Justice Darling—N othing after 2 a.m. on the 21st? 

' 165 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Sir William H. Willcox ^ 

—Until 8 a.m. It is clear that there was vomiting and diarrhoea 
during the last twenty-tour hours. rrnoea 

Gross-examination continued— You sav it is clear ■ that +w 
evidence of Nurse Allen'i—Yes. 7 ’ ™ 18 the 

Nurse Allen’s evidence is that there was vomiting and 
diarrhoea during the last two days 2—Yes. S d 

m 1 -ff 1 tilat by pointing out what the evidence is of 

Nurse Lloyd tor ten of those hours. The opinion you have formed 

von!fr med U f°?- th t evidence of Nurse Allen as to there being 

and «1«? n“ d w- ar f h0B T the last twenty-four hours?—-Yes 8 

and also Dr. Hmeks, I think, alluded to the vomiting ’ 

I do not think so in the last day. 

Vas w, Mr f^ STIC . E Darling—A t any rate Nurse Allen said so?— 
Yes, Nurse Allen is the most important. 

Cross-examination continued—l am pointing out to you that 
she draws no distinction in the last two days?—No. 7 

As regards the presence of arsenic in the small intestine in 
the caecum and ascending colon, am I not. right in saying that with 

It will° J 1Ch 18 n k6n “ the f0rm of "omotinTes' of 

iLr 11 0t + P ° n i th ? s i ystem and W ! U 1,6 ‘^spoiled or ho absorbed 
, 0 system, but that some of it may become oneystod in the 
stomach?—It may, but it is uncommon 7 th ° 

, If ^ becomes encysted in the stomach, may it not remain in 
that condition for a few days and then dissolve'and pass off again” 
-You mean in the stomach; it might, hut it is very unlikely? 

hut it might become encysted in the stomach, and then after 
two or three days dissolve and pass on. That, is a possibility?— 
Are you speaking of white arsenic? 1 yf 

Yes; I am not speaking of fluid arsenic, of course I am 
speaking of powdered arsenic?-! think if, is extremely 'unlikely 
I cannot deny the possibility, but it is extremely unlikely 7 

wW?,T eXamm f <1 by the Attorney-General—You ‘wore asked as to 

mudf L 1 fi ^ - a Pat,e 7 n | . c .°! ,ll , d take a doso of aRHonic up to as 
do you mlLj ’ 1 hmk you said “ yea An 'l recover, 

stances 1 could mich a hSy dose^ySn; amV winlhl'tou lfaveTo 

Hrat',^ r^kb^~ 

ot 

d ° y ( ' l \? by a large dose of arsenic?—Large medi- 

mueh IrnTn'e +h Ut i thlS il qiute f Nfforont from poisoning; very 

much smaller than doses that occur in cases of poisoning 

Mr. Justice Darmng—You said that a person might possibly 
take 3 grains and recover; that would be only if he vomited? 

oir H. Gubtis Bennett—T hat is right: T was only frying to 
get the maximum dose which ha? been known not to end fatally 
166 1 ■ J 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Sir William H. WiUcox 

The Witness A person might take a large dose of arsenic 
and vomit it all back again and recover. 

Re-examinalion continued —If he took 20 grains and was im¬ 
mediately sick, I suppose that could be done? If you arranged 
to take it and immediately make the patient sick it is possible 
no injury might happen?—He is sure to be very ill, but it is 
possible he might recover. 

Mr. Justice Darling It is like these cases where a man may 
swallow a knife. J 

Re-examination continued —Is the condition that he should 
immediately vomit it up ?—Yes. 

, My fiiend asked you some questions based on the suggestion 
that there was no evidence at all that Mrs. Armstrong had taken 
arsemc poison except during the one day, the 22nd August. 1920? 

*- 1 ©s. 

1 want to call attention to the evidence that was given by 
Dr. Hmcks. Does that point, in your opinion, to there having 
been arsenic administered before the 22nd or not?—Yes, it points 
definitely to arsenic having been taken for several days before the 
22nd, and I should have said that from the fact that peripheral 
neuritis developed early in September. It is that kind of ad¬ 
ministration over several days which is likely to be followed by 
peripheral neuritis. But the fact that peripheral neuritis occurred 
early in September indicates that arsenic had been taken for 
several days prior to 22nd August. 

Furthermore, before the albumen appeared when the urine 
was tested before the 22nd, would it take some time to produce 
the symptom of albumen in the urine after the arsenic had been 
taken?—A short time; it might occur in two or three days. 

So that, taking the evidence of Dr. Hincks and the condition 
of the urine found, if he is right that he took it on the 18th when 

7k f a T ■ r 011 21^* would that point to arsenic taken on the 

15th August ?—About that time. 

Having regard to the symptoms as a whole, in your opinion 
did the dosage, as you have called it, continue for a number of 
days, or was it one single dose in August?—For a number of days 
and then there was vomiting on the 22nd; there was a large dose 
on the 22nd. & 

Why do you say a large dose and mention vomiting at the 
same time?—Because a large dose would cause vomiting. There 
was severe vomiting on the 22nd August. 

Now we come to February. Sir Henry suggested to you one 
large fatal^ dose might be taken on the 16th February, sickness on 
the 17th and 18th, and then gradually weaken and die. And I 
think you accepted that as a possibility that that might happen ? 
—No, not in this case. I accepted Sir Henry’s supposition, but 
I gave reasons why I did not think it applied to this case. 

" 1 want to remind you of some evidence on the last days from 

Sunday onwards. Dr. Hincks*said that on Sunday, the 20th, 

167 ’ 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Sir William H. WiUeox O 

she had nutrient suppositories: they are (riven when i 
swallow Mrs. Armstrong could 7 not La£ow and StddTf 
letam through persistent vomiting 1 —Yes uld ot 

a. ■*** *• Tomiti ”s « —r » 

p r —_„ 0 ,! St £ ““ *»• 

H-in? reg»; a r8e “ d *» «u***<- 

Hl - I a n rega ^ c . 1 to the symptoms and the evidence of Dr 

4« h°r«ur tI ,:“ ,tr to 4 zj ?» * 

«.«, o( euh.ustion during V1^'^™ JLd* 

diarrhoea and vomiting such as occurred hero. 1 Mked 

ice -ewaminaUon continued — I want tA « h- «, ~ j - 

»f rr i„ Nurse Lloyd's evidence?'* Nurse “u„ fi’rTleTd “ 

»!'?e v‘Sr„" e ,LS 8 “■ •«•"»* tb* ™T^ 

” g "' 1 *° - 

Just tell us why, at that staffs of her iUnou*? T +u;«i 

died ™ “ d *• 

direction of a further dosel-Ses ^ pwmlfl 111 the 

Mr. Justice ^ Darling —After Nurse Lloyd left ?—Yes 

* h “ ™ ,ld >» "‘tin'twenty. 

ThS ™" d , ia “™ r , sd "*«“ ^dyb 

That entirely confirms it. I attach imnortaneo in +il ;L - 

grame^Tn le^jehmum^g th ? r illtestin !> ’ *at is, 1.6 St 

J “ m \ ae 9.1 milligrams iu the eioetim nm* 

unHkely^that^he * n ° Se are ^ graduating amounts, and it is 
unuKeiy that the arsenic would have got in those *bror>ortinnn 
accidentally from soakage as has been suggested. 

■,... ^ nend asked you a number of questions about the con 

hfvTbeLf lgU8 ! > “I 80 ° n - Is there > upon^ theEvidence we 
tion of heart r fr0m i he P ost ' mortem examination, any indica- 
16? h t d 86 dU0 t0 rh9umatisra? —Not the slightest. 



Evidence for Prosecution. 

Sir William H. Willcox 

By Mr. Justice Barling —You thoroughly understood the 
hypothesis put to you by Sir Henry Curtis Bennett as to the 
last two days of the life of Mrs. Armstrong, and what might hay© 
happened during those two days?—Yes. 

,, taking that hypothesis as he put it, and remembering ail 
the evidence that you have heard as to everything, is that hypo¬ 
thesis, m your opinion, a possible one to account for Mrs. Arm¬ 
strong s death ?—Quite impossible. 

.,. Y ° n understood it to be a suggestion that it was suicide com- 
nutted according to the system of that hypothesis?_Yes. 


The Court adjourned. 


im 



Seventh Day—Monday, 10th April, 1922. 

Opening Speech for the Defence. 

Sir H. Curtis Bennett— May it please your lordship, gentle¬ 
men of the jury, at last I have an opportunity of addressing the 
tribunal which is trying Major Armstrong for his life. A week 
ago to-day this case was opened, and it would be an impertinence 
tor me to say fairly opened, by the Attorney-General. You will 
remember how the Attorney-General impressed upon you the verv 
great responsibility that you were assuming as jurors in that box 
and for a week you have listened to the case for the prosecution 
as against Major Armstrong being slowly unfolded. Gentlemen 
if I may say so, anybody who has been in this Court and has seen 
the attention with which you have followed the whole of that evi- 
dence would realise that you indeed did acquit yourselves last week 
as the Attorney-General said that you would, that you did realise 
what your responsibilities in this matter were. Now the case for 
'he. prosecution is finished; the case against Major Armstrong bv 
which the prosecution seek to show that Ibis man’horo is responsible 
for the death of his wife, is at an end. You have he ml the 
evidence-in-chief, and you have heard the cross-examination of the 
witnesses, you have heard those witnesses tested; and I hope to 
he able to show you that the case which was opened upon instruc¬ 
tions by the Attorney-General a week, ago to-day exists no more 
and that the case which was then put before you 'was a ease which’ 

zviilT te i ed on one poi ; nt aftor ‘is 

show vo^T ^ f?’' laa g T’ an< y ‘ m aro !W 1 Khali hope to 
“"/ u in , a few . moments, with, the skeleton of the case which 
was then made against him. Now you have to hear, and you will 
desire and be glad to hear, the case of Major Armslxong '.folded 
. 1 ha f e ? ft f n wondered, and I have never wondered more than 
during the last three days, whether anybody realises the terrible 

o a f the re r nSi " H t ^«Poi the shoulders of a 6 
n moer ol ihebai when he is defending a man for his life T 

have never realised that responsibility "more than I "do at* this 
moment, when I am able to discuss the case with you. You will 

mit before von ^ su ^ est ions that I am puttingVfore you are 
put before you for your consideration. You will quite under¬ 
build irosMmnront^f n0thin + g ^ at 1 say am 1 attempting (it 

s s srr,riSr" ti f m ' ^ 1 ^ 

oLonsbbiion T Lr f ° r y °" t0 C0I l Rlder i « they are worthy 
If : Sl r yo«; will, give them careful Consideration 7 
ii you tiunk that the criticisms, are well founded then Tef 
criticisms prevail, and if you thfnk that the TrgnLTthS I put 




Sir Henry Curtis Bennett, K.C. 



Opening Speech for Defence. 

Sir H. Curtis Bennett 

before you are good arguments, then, of course, you 'will give 
them due weight. If you think they are bad, cast them aside. 

What is^ the case now against Major Armstrong? The case, 
as I see it in a nutshell, is this: that in August, 1920, Major 
Armstrong started to administer arsenic to his wife; that in 
January, 1921, he continued, upon her return from Barn wood 
Asylum, to administer poison to her; and that finally she died as 
the result of poison administered by Major Armstrong. Is not 
this case a most extraordinary one? The prosecution set out to 
prove that, and, in setting out to prove that, they are not able 
to make any suggestion at all (I have been waiting to hear it) as 
to how Major Armstrong is supposed to have administered that 
poison, or as to the times when he was administering it; and, in 
my submission to you, they have shown no motive of any sort or 
kind why he should, though they have tried to. They have shown 
no more reason why Major Armstrong should have murdered his 
wife than any other person in that house. I am not suggesting 
who it is, and it is not upon me to suggest, and it is just as well 
when you begin to consider this case that we should get back again 
to realise what the criminal law of this country is. No accused 
person has to prove his innocence, of course not; it would be an 
impossible position. You can think for yourselves, without my 
suggesting to you, numbers of cases where a person might be 
charged with a criminal offence, and where it would be absolutely 
impossible for that person to prove his innocence. Take, for 
instance, the very simple case of where sometimes into a pocket or 
trunk is put by some malicious person some article which is stolen; 
say, into your trunk. It is found there. The accusation is made. 
It is almost impossible to prove your innocence; you can only 
prove your innocence by saying, “ The prosecution cannot prove my 
guilt. ,, Therefore, do not be under any misapprehension here. I 
know you will get the law from my lord later on, because my lord 
is here to direct you upon questions of law, and you are here to 
deal with the evidence. Do not forget that it is for the prosecu¬ 
tion to prove what they set out to prove; not to put a man into 
the dock and then say, tc Well, look at all this; that is very 
suspicious, this is very suspicious, and the other is very suspicious, 
therefore he is guilty.” They have to prove what they set out 
to prove. Just one word of warning. Do not be under the im¬ 
pression that I, as appearing for Major Armstrong, or Major 
Armstrong when he is in the witness-box, have to show you con¬ 
clusively, to prove conclusively, that somebody or other adminis¬ 
tered, or Mrs. Armstrong herself took, this arsenic. It is for the 
prosecution to prove their case, and I do not want the issue to be 
left here, although I should not hesitate to face it if it was the 
issue. But it is not; and I do not want the issue to be that I 
have to prove that it was somebody else. I am going to suggest 
to you, and I hope to show you that if you take the ordinary line 

171 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Sir H. Curtis Bennett 

°f possibility, that if you take the ordinary chances, the case that 
Mrs. Armstrong took this poison herself is an infinitely stronger 
one than the case which is made against Major Armstrong. It is 
not necessary for me to satisfy you that if she took it she took it 
intending to commit suicide; but I am going to submit on the 
facts which have been already proved in this case, when going into 
the case for the defence, that the probability that she did so take 
it is very much greater than the case which is made against Major 
Armstrong. J 

Just two other matters before I deal with the facts. This 
case, as you, I am sure, will have appreciated, has been worked 
backwards from the post-mortem; everybody has become extra¬ 
ordinarily wise. The whole case which is made against Major 
Armstrong is based upon the finding of arsenic in the body of Mrs. 
Armstrong, and then working backwards and saying, cc Look what 
that means; what a suspicious thing that means; right away back 
to August, 1920.” That is how the case is started, and in my 
submission to you it is founded upon a falsity. The whole of the 
case for the prosecution, remember, is this, that until September, 
1920, Mrs. Armstrong had never suffered from what has been called 
peripheral neuritis or multiple neuritis, which really means, as 
you know quite well, neuritis in different parts of your body, all 
over your body. That has been their case. If that case is 
founded upon a falsity you will look very carefully at the whole 
of the rest of it. Just let us see what the facts are that have 
been proved. Major Armstrong (I am not going through his 
career with you at all) is a gentleman who had, as the Attorney- 
General said, made for himself a position of which he could be. 
proud, a gentleman against whom nothing was ever said until Mr. 
Martin started to say it; a gentleman who was married to his wife 
in 1907; .and you will agree the whole of the evidence shows his 
living on terms of affection with his wife right up to August, 1920, 
when she went to the asylum. He was the last person “one would 
suspect of poisoning his wife. There is no history here, such as 
you get so often, of a miserable married life, years of misery;., 
motive the strongest to get rid of a person whom the man. may 
think is the cause of that misery. But the whole of the history 
from 1907 up to August, 1920, is precisely the other way, and you 
start in this case with the fact that they were a devoted couple; 
everybody says so. Put a man in the dock and charge him with 
murder, then everything he does becomes of a suspicious nature. 
They say, Ah, he used to go up to his wife's bedroom in the 
evening before she went to sleep; what a suspicious r thing 
because h© is., in the dock charged with murder. That wouldi give 
him an opportunity of administering the. arsenic. Fortunately, 
twelve men of common sense are not going to deal with matters 
in that way. If he had not gone up to his wife's room, then it 
would have been said by the prosecution, “ Yes, he may have been 
■ 172 . 



Opening Speech for Defence. 

Sir H. Curtis Bennett 

a devoted mai J a P August, 1920—neglecting his wife, going 

admin life* 1 nobod y ; could se e him in the hours of night to 
dnnmster poison —and they would hare said, “ Why this 

ma^^nnlrl v, n* beoause be is behaving as every normal, decent 
» \r Id b p h fJ e ’ because he 18 behaving exactly as the whole of 
a 0f , thl ! ca ? e would show be would he likely to behave 

sDarl time ^ftH 11 g u° m ?- UP “ bis spare time, and in most of his 
Court 1“^ !L* g by bls w - lf e, then in the atmosphere of this 
J™?’ W1 , tb the ™ an U P 011 trlal for murder, people hold up their 

h^irV* 7 ’- v,f < l° d gracl0us ’ be was going upstairs to sit with 
his wife; he might have given it to her then.” Why should this 
sort of atmosphere prevail when a man is put into the dock and 
charged 2 Every act which is a natural act, and an act whS 
you would expect from the history of the case, in some extra¬ 
ordinary way is made to assume a sinister aspect 

In 1914 Major Armstrong was called up, as many another 
person was in the country; and from May, 1914, until 23rd May, 

f M d T he WaS serving ' W bat is the history of the 
relations of Major Armstrong and his wife during that timet 
This man is alleged to be the poisoner of his wife. g During the 
whole of that time the evidence is that, except for one leave he 
spent all his leaves with his wife and children. In 1915 Maior 
Armstrong goes to Teignmouth, and from 1915 until 1918 she is 
Sa j y the Prosecution, and it is as I have already 
pointed out the rock upon which this case is founded—say the 
prosecution, August or September, 1920, the first sign of this 
multiple neuritis which, according to the prosecution, is brought 
on by the administration of arsenic by Major Armstrong. There 

SC r ra > evldence that he administered any, but that is 
their case. Is it a true case or not? Why, gentlemen from 1915 
r.ght up to 1920, it you boli,„ the erid.uci IhiohX, Wriv™ 
by the prosecution, Mrs. Armstrong was suffering more or less 
from time to time with multiple neuritis; and this case is founded 
by tbe Prosecution upon the fact that in May, 1919, Dr. Hincks 

wf K 6 ? n dS u he ? aS neurltls m one arm, I think the right arm 
and he tells her to wear a sling. They seem to have forgotten 
the evidence of Miss Friend and Miss Pearce, because the evfdence 
of Miss Friend is this, that at Teignmouth Mrs. Armstrong 
suffered from rheumatism, not in one hand, which was wW Dr 
Hincks found m May 1919, but suffered from rheumatism fn the 
hands and knees In 1918 Miss Friend says her sister Mrs 
Armstrong^was suffering from loss of power in her hands jdhe could 
not play the piano could not do up her dress. Has this evidence 
been forgotten by the prosecution when they say that this multte,te 
neuritis only started in 1920 ? In 1918 she 

multiple neuritis. In 1918 she was suffering not with neurTtte 
m one arm, local neuritis, as it has been called, but with rheuma 
tism m the hands and knees. You will not have lokJ sight o” a 

173 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Sir H. Curtis Bennett 

very important thing which came out in Sir William Willcox 7 s 
evidence on Saturday. When I was cross-examining as to whether 
or not one of the important signs of multiple neuritis was missing 
in this case in September, 1920, the numbness, you will remember 
what Sir William said to me, c< Oh, yes, there was some evidence 
of numbness—pins and needles. 75 That is a matter upon which 
Sir William was relying for evidence of numbness in September, 
1920, as being one of the symptoms of multiple neuritis. What 
did you find? Sir William was wrong in his date. The evidence 
of Miss Friend is that the pins and needles was in 1918. Then 
what does Sir William say ? Oh, well, it is not a symptom of 
neuritis in 1918 75 —that would not fit in with the case at all; pins 
and needles in 1918 would he some evidence of rheumatism. So 
if you get it within the period of time which is the case of the 
prosecution, it is a symptom of multiple neuritis; if you get it in 
1918, it is not by itself evidence. I do not want to spend too 
much time on this, but in my submission to you—and that is why 
1 submitted it to my lord when I was cross-examining Dr. Hincks, 
that 11920 was so important in this case—not pins and needles by 
itself in 1918, but loss of power, rheumatism in the feet and hands, 
and pins and needles in 1918, getting worse and getting better 
from time to time—you will be able to see by the doctors whom I 
shall call that that is what one would expect in multiple neuritis 
—sometimes very bad, sometimes better. That is the condition 
of this unfortunate lady, according to the evidence, right away 
from those earlier years, 1916, 1917, and 1918. The case does 
not rest there upon what her condition was, because Miss Pearce 
gave evidence upon it, and she says this, “ I went away on 1st or 
2nd August, 1920, for my holiday, and 1 was away when Mrs. 
Armstrong went to Barnwood Asylum, and I came back after she 
had gone to Barnwood. When Mrs. Armstrong came back on the 
22nd January, 1921, she was still complaining of trouble in both 
her hands and feet. 77 Therefore the evidence for the prosecution 
is clear, and undisputed about this—that right away through..these 
years 1915, 1916, 11917, 1918, and 1919, this lady, instead of 
being, as my friend 7 s instructions were when he opened this case 
to you, perfectly well on the 1st of August, she had for five years 
more or less suffered, and part of the" time was badly suffering, 
so that she could not play tho piano—not could not play with one 
hand, could not play with her hands—was suffering from rheuma¬ 
tism in the knees, in the feet^ suffering from loss of power, couldn’t 
do up her clothes, and suffering with pins and needles, one of the 
very symptoms which Sir William Will cox in answering me brings 
forward as being a symptom in existence in 1920, and he finds he 
is mistaken and it took place years before. 1 am going to leave 
.it - there, I have put it clearly before .you,, and I say that I am 
right in thinking, as the result of some few years now at. the bar, 
..that arguments to a jury do not become any stronger because you 
174 . 



Opening Speech for Defence. 

Sir H. Curtis Bennett 

put them over and over again. I have put it; you are quite 
capable of dealing with the evidence, you are quite capable of 
appreciating the supreme importance of the evidence I have been 
drawing attention to; because if I am right—and I have taken 
great trouble and care to see that I am only quoting what the 
evidence was—if I am right, the case for the prosecution, that 
there was no multiple neuritis before September, 1920, and that 
it was caused by the administration of arsenic in August 1920 
has gone. ’ * 

The result of It having gone is, that the whole of this story 
through 1920 right away down to 22nd January, 1921, is con¬ 
sistent, not with suspicion as against Major Armstrong, but with 
the illness from natural causes of Mrs. Armstrong. Gentlemen, 
there is one thing you and I have learned during this case—we 
have learned how to try and avoid getting multiple neuritis, but 
we have also learned that we cannot avoid it, because, although 
multiple neuritis may be caused by alcohol or arsenical poisoning 
it is equally likely to be caused by auto-intoxication, which, to use 
ordinary language, means poisoning from within oneself poisoning 
because some of the organs of our body are not acting properly. 
If I am right, and I am not afraid of criticism about it, if I am 
right in what I have said to you, the evidence is on this question 
of what Mrs. Armstrong was suffering from (and I am going to 
show several other reasons why I submit I am right). It was in 
1920 multiple neuritis, which had been caused by self-poisoning 
auto-intoxication—I do not want to use the word self-poisoning in 
case you should think I mean suicide, but poisoning from within 
—that is what she was suffering from. 

May, 1919, is the next date I want to deal with, and I will 
leave to the end the question of the suggested motives which have 
been put before you. When a prosecution is conducted by the 
Crown (quite properly, in the interests of us all) every possible 
machinery and every department is at the disposal of the prosecu- 
tion; no expense is spared in searching high and low to see what the 
evidence is, and in employing the greatest medical experts in this 
country. That having been done for months past, I say to you 
gentlemen (and it is for you and not for me) that the motives 
which have been put forward, which, of course, are the best that 
they can find, are ludicrous. When a man, it might happen to 
any of us—when a man has a charge brought against him, and 
perhaps that charge might be murder, that man on his own re¬ 
sources, and with the help of friends, staunch and true friends, 
has to deal e with the case as best he can. It is not given to him 
to be able to employ Sir William Willcox and Dr. Spilsbury. He 
has to cut his coat according to the amount of cloth that he has 
got; he has to employ the best people that his pocket can afford 
That is what is done in this case in the gentlemen that I am going 
to bring before you later. In May, June, and July, 1920, accord¬ 
ing to Dr. Hincks, this lady was suffering from local neuritis. She 

175 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Sir H. Curtis Bennett 

had for years suffered from indigestion, she was a delicate woman, 
just the sort of woman who becomes nervous, hysterical, hypo¬ 
chondriacal, imagining things, and just the sort of person one 
finds suffering as the result of years of ill-health from this auto¬ 
intoxication bringing on rheumatism and other things. 

Just that sort of person she was. Then we are left from 
1919 until 11920 with no medical evidence ; but we are not left 
without evidence as to jwhaf her condition was, because she was at 
Bath in October, 1919; and what do you find Miss Friend saying 
about her condition ? That she is still suffering from this neuritis 
at Bath, still suffering from the loss of the use of her hands, though 
she is saying that the use is coming back, and she is getting better. 
So during all those years this lady is worse, and better, and worse 
again and a little better; one arm bad and then the other, then 
both, then pins and needles, then loss of the use of feet, then loss 
of power in the hands; and so the history goes right away up to 
August, 1920. Then in August, 1920, a date is taken by the 
prosecution for a reason which it is very difficult to fathom, but 
perhaps one can guess it. On 1st August Dr. TIincks happens to 
see Mrs. Armstrong, if my recollection is right, not for the purpose 
of examining her, but he does in fact see her on that date. 
According to Dr. Hincks, she is well, as well as this poor lady 
apparently ever was. Then, so that you should b© impressed 
from the beginning with what the case for the prosecution was, the 
Attorney-General in opening said, <c 1st August she is quite well. 
■On the 4th August the prisoner buys three tins of weed killer; 
15th August she is suffering from arsenical poisoning/' What is 
the evidence about it? That on the 4th August he had nothing 
whatever to do with the buying of weed killer. You remember 
my cross-examination of Jay, the chief gardener: that Jay himself 
went and bought not three, but four tins of weed killer, that 
Jay himself used rather more than three and a half tins of weed 
killer, and that he left | lb., which he put into the tool shed. 
There is this great point for .the prosecution. . I.am going to 
show you a most curious set of dates. Say the prosecution, 1st 
August quite well, 4th August he buys weed killer. The fact 
is, he does not, it is bought by his gardener. Once you get 
your mind full of suspicion, it is extraordinary how even the 
great ^ counsel who are representing the Crown, the three of them 
..in this case, how even they can be led away into making such a 
point as that. You see the object' of testing cases. What a 
wonderful story, how impressive that, is not it? It must have 
impressed you when my. friend put those . dates before you— 
taking that one month*and putting' the dates in.that way. When 
you come to test it, there is mot only nothing in. it, but the evi¬ 
dence proves that, as far as that weed killer is concerned, Major 
Armstrong had nothing to do with it. 

On the 15th August the man who is alleged to be poisoning 
Eis wife sends for his doctor. That is a good start in a poison 
176 



Opening Speech for Defence. 

Sir H. Curtis Bennett 

case, that the man who is alleged to be administering the poison, 
of which there is no evidence, on the 15th August Major Arm¬ 
strong sends for Dr. Hincks to come to his wife, and says to Dr. 
Hincks, “ My wife is suffering, she cannot sleep, her mind is 
getting confused, disturbed, she has curious ideas, give her a 
sleeping draught/* and from the 15th August he does. No evi¬ 
dence, as Sir William Willcox admitted to me on Saturday, no 
evidence up to 22nd August of any vomiting, no evidence at all. 
Then what does this alleged poisoner do 2 Having sent for the 

doctor, and put his wife into his hands, he then sends an 

amazing poisoner is this—for the best friend of the family, Mr. 
Chevalier. He then sends on behalf of the person whom he is 
alleged to be poisoning, for her sister, Miss Friend; and Mr. 
Chevalier and Miss Friend arrive. This is the time, when I was 
cross-examining, when my lord suggested that I was taking too 
much time on the particular point; but this is the time when I 
submit to you the whole of this case is based. There is no 
question about it, it was opened in that way. The suggestion 
is that poisoning was going on at that time. He sends for the 
doctor, he sends for the best friend, he sends for the sister; and 
they all see the unfortunate woman who is suffering at that time. 
And^ (note this, because it will be important when you hear the 
medical evidence I shall call before you) suffering at that time 
not from general confusion of thought* not from madness of 
different sorts, all sorts of different kinds of delusions, but from 
the one perfectly clear-cut melancholia, acute melancholia. When 
you come to consider what I have already put before you, in my 
submission the case that Mrs. Armstrong took this arsenic herself, 
knowing what she was taking, is much stronger than the case 
against Major Armstrong. When Mr. Chevalier has come upon 
the scene he then and there forms the opinion that she was not 
sane, and he was a sensible man, you saw him in the witness-box; 
you are the judges of the demeanour of witnesses, except when 
application is made to cross-examine them, otherwise you are the 
judges of the witnesses for the prosecution and their demeanour. 
Was not Mr.^ Chevalier a level-headed, sensible man of the world, 
the oldest friend of Major Armstrong, who had known him since 
1891 ? That is the man whom the prosecution would have you 
believe the major sends for to see his wife whom he is poisoning; 
this sensible gentleman coming there in August says this, “ I formed 
the opinion then in August, 1920, that she was not sane, that she 
might commit suicide/* Look at the position up to then, put 
the two cases side by side. The prosecution say, “ Major Arm¬ 
strong poisoning his wife.** The defence say, and they have not 
got to prove it, but they have to say, “ Look at the facts, Mrs. 
Armstrong probably committed suicide; look at the position in 
August, 1920, on the one hand you have a man who up to that 
date everybody agrees was a devoted husband/* You have in 
* " . 177 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Sir H. Curtis Bennett 

my submission to you no motive worthy of the name. On the 
other side, you have a highly hysterical woman, who has suffered 
for years from neuritis, indigestion, loss of power in hands and 
feet, in such a condition that at that early date, six months 
before death, Mr. Chevalier forms the opinion that she is not 
sane, she may commit suicide; and, says Mr. Chevalier to Mai or 
Armstrong, “ You had better remove your razors.” It 
suggested that Major Armstrong at that time wants to murder 
hxs wife, wants his wife to die. If he did, what better than to 
leave his razors at her hand, or anything else by which she could 
commit suicide? Major Armstrong at once removed them and 
Mr. Chevalier is so impressed with the fact that Mrs. Armstrong* 
is likely to commit suicide, that he warns not only Major Arm¬ 
strong but warns the servant, Lily Candy. I got that* not only 
from Mr. Chevalier, but from Lily Candy, that she was warned 
to keep her eye on Mrs. Armstrong. 

That is the position in August. Mr. Chevalier, Miss Friend 
JJr. Mi neks, and Major Armstrong have a consultation that night/ 
and on the 22nd August it is decided to send her to Barnwood! 
up to this date not one scrap of evidence of arsenical poisonin'* not 
one scrap of evidence of the administration of any poison by any¬ 
body.. . Then it is suggested that on 22nd August, when this woman 
is just going off to the lunatic asylum, when/Major Armstrong has 
sent for Mr. Chevalier and Miss Friend, when he knows that his 
wife is under the charge of Dr. Hincks and she is going (do notice 
this) to be transferred into the custody of doctors of whom he 
knows nothing, that Major Armstrong administered arsenic. You 
are asked to assume that by Mrs. Armstrong's condition—you have 
to swallow something if you swallow this assumption—you are 
asked to assume, first of all, that Mrs. Armstrong was suffering 
from arsenical poisoning at that time. Once you have satisfied 
yourself beyond reasonable doubt of that, if you can, you have 
to lie satisfied of this, that he was administering it: and upon 
evidence of that sort hangs this man’s life. It “is suggested on 


22nd August that he administered to her arsenic. 


suggested? Because a woman suffering from acute melancholia 
is being removed from a home which she loved. to an asylum a 
woman who has suffered from indigestion for years, when being 
removed.vomits and is sick on the way. I do- not know whether 
you have had, any one of you, the great misfortune to know or 
perhaps to have some, one dear to you, who has had to be removed 
to an asylum, but you will bear from the doctors 4om I shall 
call before you that for a person who is suffering from acute 
melancholia it is by no means uncommon that those persons, when 
being taken away, and when realising that they are going to be 
removed from the home that they love, do suffer from sickness, 
so much so that I am instructed it is very often the custom to put 
in the conveyance in which that person is being taken some recep- 
178 



Opening Speech for Defence. 

Sir H. Curtis Bennett 

Wb l ch tbe .Porson can be sick. How did it strike Miss 

Look did MlS ® Frlend k “ T W > r s L ister as well, 1 suppose, as most 
ft wit Sh t 8 t ld V l fought it was indigestion; I thought 

her ” 4 which sh® had had at breakfast which had upset 

vomit- PP on t h at , evidence, and upon that evidence of 

UP « n - tllat , da " V ’ ,s the suggestion made that Mrs. 

IfrvoTLtTstdfh 6 ? 11 ! fr0m ar f nical P° isonin g at that date, 
the r» s f atlsfied ^at sh e was, when you look at the history for 

suffeff^ f W m ° nthS? , Even if y° u were satisfied that she 7 was 
suffering from arsenical poisoning, have you g-ot one iota nf 

arsenic was administered by Major Armstrong? 
Xt J° y° u > and I leave that date with you. ® 

What is the other evidence, and I want to deal with it fully 
and properly because no case for the defence is any good if you 

that twf°° d pom *! and bur y y° ur head in the sand and pretend 

made h abn, t r rt n -° hw P°\ nts *° be met - What w the nest point 
made about this arsenical poisoning? The next noint i« fho 

of tile heart on at 82nd ingn^ „d^. P 3bJnS,1S 

?".rt n "VK at T1 ™ murmur et the 

f^t!' • T i h ? ve tbe g reatest admiration for the medical 

ft el^rt 0n; - I ,f°, not kno 5 what we should do without them; but, 
th»+!q +’ m f hat P rofesslon > as 111 most others, you sometimes find 
doct r S ?° + n °t agree. Dr. Hincks formed the honest opinion 
that the heart trouble which was m existence at that date was due 
to rheumatism. Dr. Spilsbury and Sir William Willcox both 
admitted to me in cross-examination that rheumatism will cause 
heart troubte. But when Sir William is cross-examined he says! 

of K ^ 1 kn °w afterwards --and here we come again 
to working back from February, no working it back at that time 
from January a year hence when the body is exhumed—working 
ffnnW k then . Slr William says, “ I do not think the heart 

til " Wh Wa 'V, n 6 ^ tence °? 22nd August was due to rheuma- 
+ll Wh L n P t? wha i 18 }} ere t0 show that it was not ? Dr. 
^^+i, th + ^ ht Xt 7 aS ' Dr \ Spilsbury and Sir William Willcox 

cS it S^r U wnr m eZtendi “ g T °J er a number of years might 
bv t L w ^ Wilham says, 1 do not think i* ^n be caused 
by the sort of history of rheumatism which I have got ” For 
years she had been suffering from rheumatism, she had heart 

D^HiuoWi? C< l U + ld bave . been the result of rheumatism, which 
Dr. Hincks thought was the result of rheumatism. Of course 

Sr tZ P T 8 % tn ^ migbt be the result of arsenical poisom 
ing, theiefore it falls in with this nice little theory which has 

b f? n PUt b f h r- J ° U the P roseou tion. Albumen i/the urine— 

w f ith Br^hPAd 1 ' 8 consiste Wwith kidney disease, that is consistent 
with Bright disease. The argument about that is this “ Oh 

SoubI?” T tlii 6611 the ufT 1 * ° f ? right ’ s disease or kidney 
the W +h + f h k J.° u Wl11 hear ’ when the doctors come into 
the box, that from time to time, without any definite kidney 
trouble, most of us suffer from albumen; but because it was in 

179 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Sir H. Curtis Bennett ® 

existence on the 22nd August, at the time this poor depressed 
lady suffering. irom acute melancholia was taken to the asylum 
because it is in existence on that night, and continues to be in 
existence till 2Jth August, it fits in with this theory of arsenical 
poisoning, and, therefore, it is mentioned to you as another reaS 

why you are to come to the conclusion that she was suffering 
from arsenical poisoning. sintering 

She arrives in the home. Now mark the real point which 
“Jf en P u t by the Attorney-General in re-examination of wit- 
,, ' About a fortnight after she enters that home ” sav 

Prosecution, and place so much reliance upon it,’“ s he 
suffered and they hold up their hands as if tboy have dis 

neuntis. . Look at our theory of arson 10 now in August 1990- 

look how it 18 getting on. Here we find her in September’ suffer- 
mg from multiple neuritis. She had suffered from multin e 
neuritis, if I am right in the facts 1 have drawn attention to 
for years past from time to time; not the result of arsenical 
poisoning then; if she had suffered from it for past years she 
suffered from it as the result of auto-intoxication; but'now this 
theory is started, now we have arsenic on the sc,one, therefore this 
particular multiple neuritis is the result of arsenical poisoning 
You follow what this case is, upon which, yon are to 'he asked 
before many days to give your verdict? Kir William Willcox 
when I was cross-examining, I think for fho moment did not 
appreciate what my point was, and ho, said, “ I, shall have to eive 
you a very adverse answer, because I shall have to loll you the worst 
case of multiple neuritis I ever had was after one administration of 
arsenic. It is exactly the answer I wan led, because ii; in (he theory 
of the prosecution here that the administration mi one doso on the 

and fl 8 * that causecl Multiple neuritis. Sir 
William Willcox would have given that answer whether it was 

t0 me ,° r m favour; but it happened that the criticism 
that it was adverse to me happened to bo wrong at the moment 
because I wanted to show that the prosecution wore building up 
this case upon a false basis. The neuritis in Koptembor, the? 
say is the result of one dose of arsenic on 22nd Au-mst or mav 
be the result of several doses before that dale. That’ is their 
case, quite a good case if she had not suffered from neuritis fo, 
yeara past; and this was a mere repetition of what she had 
in 1915, 1916, 1917, 1918, „<1 ,919. she 
home, and she is in the hands of two new doctors, a#d these two 
new doctors examining her—it is so easy to bo wiso^in the lieht 
of after events—these two doctors examining her, Dr. Townsend 

^* 1 , -1°^’ com ® to the conclusion that there are movements of 
hers which she could not carry through if the neuritia 
imewasnot partly organic and partly functional. A step further 
1st October to 3rd November, or 3rd October to 3rd November, she 



Opening Speech for Defence. 

, Sir H. Curtis Bennett 

day , after da y 1 l 7th of a grain of arsenic, l/20th three 
™ , ay; * be 15 Sf 611 a PP roxim ately l/7th of a grain a day for 
T If 7™ have ln 7° ur minds Dr. Spilsbury’s evidence 
upon that I want to test whether this story which is being- nut 

zrl l : d r** r ,o ; ■»*?»”»'• ^ 

dates for thirty-one days she is given l/7th of a grain 

of arsenic a day. So I cross-examined Dr( Spilsbury about 

■>» ™ from SS r p,S! 

^ a ^ d recovered fr °m arsenical poisoning, I sug- 

gest that it would probably revive the symptoms? ” He 
wouldnt have that; but said, " It would in my opinion retard 
her progress.” - I must take the evidence for a moment Doctors 
I am going to call will tell yon that in their opS that amount 

toms 1 TakmD ^ ! bl , rt y' one [( da y a would have revived the symp- 
nJ L ? SpiFsbury ~ would haTe retarded her progress.” 
My next question was, ” Supposing she were not suffering from 

from n w« ?° 1SOnm + g at , a11 ’ but that what she had been steering 
tn “ fl fl0m natural causes, would not you expect that medicine 
to act as a tonic and for her to continue to improve in health? ” 

p Jfi’ Ttu r ' Spll f bury ; . M y next question was, “ Is not that 
exactly what happened m this case? ” ” Yes.” So test it there 

—was she suffering from arsenical poisoning at that time? "If 
she was suffering from arsenical poisoning I should expect,” says 
Dr. Spilsbury, l/7th of a grain per day to retard her progress: 
if she was not suffering from arsenical poisoning I should expect 
that medicine to result in a continued improvement in her health.” 
that is what happened—continued improvement in her health Do 
you think she was suffering from arsenical poisoning in Barnwood? 

bo time goes on until we come to January, and then this hus¬ 
band, Major Armstrong, as regards whom up to that time, at anv 
rate up to August, 1920, there is no evidence except that he was 
a, devoted husband, up to that time when she goes to Barnwood— 
m January 1921, he is desirous of having her back. Now 
gentlemen, follow. During the whole of the time that she was at 
Barnwood he is going there as often as he is allowed to go You 
remember the evidence of Dr. Townsend—” He came every time I 
allowed him to come, and every time he discussed with me and 
appeared anxious about his wife’s health.” Try and put your¬ 
self into the same position; try and imagine that you have your 
wife, to whom you are devoted, in an asylum. When you are in 
the dock charged with murder (because that is the position) and 
you have tried to get her out because you think she is better and 
you .think nome influence would make her well, that is a most 
terrific point against you. Apparently, when you are in the dock 
charged with murder, then every motive of the basest kind is laid 

ou/nTt^ 0 ! , Xt ■“ said ’ ‘‘ 0h > of c °urse, you wanted to get her 
out of the asylum to kill her; of course, you wanted to get her 
away, and not only to get her out on leave so that the home should 

181 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Sir H. Carlas Bennett ^ 

not have any power over her.” That, is put against you if vou 
are m the dock charged with murder; but is not it what you and 
I would do if we were m the same position and had that great 
misfortune to have a woman to whom one was devoted, writing 
letter after letter imploring to be allowed out, do not you thinf 
that the course that Major Armstrong tools was the natural course? 
If it was consistent, as I submit it was, with innocence, you are 
not going to take the other view of it, especially when the man in 
the dock is charged with murder; not because of it; but especially 
you are not going to take that course unless you are satisfied of it 
I he point is made, one of the points ivhich were put before 
you last week,, that the reason why he would net have a mere 
release of his wife from the homo was because, to use the words of 
the Attorney-General, there would be another institution inquiring 
into her death if she happened to die; that is put against hirrf 

wJ S - i0 / Ji m ’ ha .y? n £ made U P your minds—I have tried to put 
yoxt into the position yourselves—having made up your mind to 
get your wife home, because home surroundings arc probably going 
to put her right again, to say whether you would not have thought • 
it is no good having this poor woman out with this hanging over 
her head so that she knows that at any moment she may be taken 

SfVV*' 18 S T? to . do , an y Z° 0<1 I®* her back free again 
and if she goes off her head you can get her certified. Is not that 

? 0 « a + U '+ al , h m lg todo . ? ’Whether you would have done it or not 
is not it a thing which a man quite reasonably might want; to do? 

I suggest it is what we should all want to do; but if you do not 
go as far as that, is not it a thing a man (pule conceivably might 
want to do? But no, that was part of this deep-laid scheme 
because he would be afraid that that institution would keep s<2 

{. 10 . Id ' JV P r : ,, Iowns “ d WM asked about tin's several times by my 
friend the Attorney-General, but stuck to what ho said “ I should 
not make any inquiry at all once I was satisfied she under a 

W° r +-n ind thaf , d< f t0 T r , lad Kiven a death certificate; if she had 
been still on my books I should not have made any further inquiry 
1 should want to be satisfied that she was under a doctor, and that 
doctor certified her death.” So yet another point which is made 

thin air* Dlre ° ty y0U test lt,J l1; ^appears into the thinnest of 

So Mrs. Armstrong comes hack again, quite well as regards 
hands and feet. Dr. Hincks said, “ When on the 30th January 
I went to see the child, I saw her and talked to her, hut did not 
examine her. When I saw her on the 30th January ’she was quite 
all raffht. Was she quite all right? What does Dr. Townsend 

Sb6 18 i b , emg reloa8ed? “ Wo C0Midei> th at the 
paralysis of the arms and legs was entirely functional; it is very 

much better, but not yet qu ite well.” The prosecution hay© said 

*The force and ingenuity of this argument are worth noting.—En. 

. 182 . 



Opening Speech for Defence. 

Sir H. Curtis Bennett 

from the beginning “ arsenical poisoning in August; multiple neur¬ 
itis as the result—comes bach all right. ” Then they begin working 
^ ben ’ cours6 J there is more arsenic; so, of course, 
you get the return of the multiple neuritis. Gentlemen, that is 
absolutely untrue, because the multiple neuritis had never gone; 

g0 \ be ter ’ better, but it was there in existence when 

she came back, and I do not only have to relv unon the letter 
which is put m by the prosecution; you have the evidence of Miss 
Pearce, who was treated as a hostile witness. The judge is judge 
of the demeanour of the witnesses, my lord rules entirely and I 
obeyed at once to the ruling of my lord that she ought to be cross- 
xammed, but you can form your own opinion as to whether she 

the truth a here rfe ih P h ° neSt U 1 ° ld lady d °ing her Tery best to tell 
toe truth here. She says the same thing as Dr. Townsend when 

, rfi ' Armstrong came back she was still complaining (I am' usins 

the words of Miss Pearce) of the pain in the hands and feet Win 

SdTn August S i a Q9o UPOn /°f eth ^ g Which is a false basis > a s they 

22nd JanufrvS92i °a 18 alto p tber wro *g to say that on 
, a January, 1921, this lady came back cured. Their own evi¬ 
dence shows that she did not; she was still suffering from neuritis. 

Dr HinckTi^ hap ? e ^- . 0a 30tb January she is seen by 
mL lS.* 18 e f“ m f g tbe child ’ 0n 6th February the 
P , Prosecution allege had started again to poison his 

wife on that day goes to Dr. Hmcks and says, “ I wish you would 
come and keep an eye on my wife, she is not getting on.” How 

nortancp*?^ 1 T wlth tbat in your minds? Is not it of great im¬ 
portance? Is not it exactly what you would do ? The man who 

for C W ge ? Wltb her mu ( l ; d ® r > ^ben she is getting bad again sends 

Februarv Dr K f- P 7 ° Ur T on her ‘” So °n the 6th 

February Dr Hmcks keeps his eye on her. On the 11th February 

he examines her, and upon that 11th February when he examined 
her he speaks of the old symptoms all come along again, all of 
them consistent with auto-intoxication having caused multiple 

“IT" hen y ° U get the add iti°nal symptom, high-steppage 
gait. When you cross-examine about that you find that that is 
only another symptom of the same disease; it does not point to 
arsenic at all. Again I ask, on the 11th February where is the 
evnience of arsenical poisoning? At that time I suggest to you 
that this lady was m a suicidal condition of mind. I do not say 
that as a sort of theory like these theories which are put before 
you by the prosecution; I base it on the evidence. The evidence 
is that of Nurse Kinsey. Mrs. Armstrong had said, " If anybody 
threw themselves out of that attic window do you think they would 
kill themselves i ” That is not imagination; that is a statement 
by the nurse who was attending her, and so gravely did that nurse 
think of it that she said, {C This is a case for a mental whole-time 
nurse; I am not going to take the responsibility of it.” She said 
m that witness-box, “1 was afraid she might commit suicide.” 

183 



Sir H. Curtis Bonnet! 


Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

i BfinnAtt ^ 


i Pearce tells you that at that time, February, Mrs. Armstrn™ 
sard the same thing to her about suicide. You rcuembeTiW 8 
was also the statement that whilst in the homo sho had in her mind 
the throwing of herself out of a window from there. Againml 
the case m o those parallel columns that I have asked you to no 
this case into, the possibilities on the one side and the other. ’Ton 
have the husband, who is showing every consideration in the wav 
m which he is treating his wife, sending for the doctor telling 
the doctor to keep an eye on her; not an atom of evidence’tha h! 
was administering poison—that you have to imagine. On ths 

XSrJT 1 ’ ^ U i ia i V ° - h0 w . oman who ,uul mi1 ' of l.ho home 
lull of hope that she is going to lie bolter, who finds that that 

hope is doomed to failure, and that, instead of getting bolter 
has gone right back, and a woman who 1ms got in her^niml ii t 
quite clear, there is positive ovidenee about it, got j n her’mind 
suicide. It is nothing new, this suicidal tendency in February 
19211, because Mr. Chevalier Imd formed that strong opinion in 
August, l.)i,0. So you arc brought rigid, up to I,lie eve Of tho last 
and fatal illness of Mrs. Armstrong with, on the one hand, a woman 

Mmonnt VM 1 ’ load ’ BllI f oril, K «wuiU> melancholia, who has 

come out of the home hoping for the best ami finding (,1mi that best 
does not come along and that sho is getting worse; you find7 
woman who is threatening suicide, who is on tho verge of Zw 

HI ij n fn d O P r te - a I >pttrc " fc,y ’ ftml yet you are asked to say] if 
view of all that evidence, that (ho man who at that time every¬ 
body says_ was doing everything (,1ml, he could for her, who was 
showing his devotion to her, ami who was acting, ns 1 hope I lmve 
convinced you, as a normal man would under similar circum¬ 
stances you aro asked to say upon 1,1ml, evidence that the prosocu- 
tmn have proved (hat Major Armstrong poisoned his wife I saT 
to you, what I need not prove, that upon (hat date certainly the 
evidence points to sunmlo rather than murder. The whole <if the 
opinions which have been formed by Sir William W illume and T)r 
Spikbury are formed as the result of wlmt Dr. Spilsbury found 
wflhr r S n Jt a wha * is r °l )0, ; i l , <!<1 i(> T)r - SpilHimry alnl Sir William 
i^ion f >e aymplomH ' l hat >'« what (hey have been formed 

(iontlonien, I am calling very experienced doctors before you 
and o( course, then- opinions are formed upon what (hey are told 

S iiiTn HJ1 " P mS - JnR '' ' W m " d ' aa Sir Willcox’if and Dr! 

Spilsbury s opinions are formed upon (hat. So it all depends 

does rmt )t „ „, mn tho reliability «f the symptoms which ar S 
o t) 1 10H0 ffontlomon ( Nobody in (he world, I least 6i all ^with 
my Imowbdge of them would suggest tlmt’diey m'e doing St 
IroXl Ti 1,U n ' !;, . vni P> their most honest opinion, and I hope the 
thinl bT W ‘ K 7°i ' hu (1 . <KstorN 1 Hm calling credit for tho some 
beel^S W> irmoh ‘Spends upon the symptoms which they have 
been given, and, without my going back over it all, do you think 



Opening Speech for Defence. 

Sir H. Curtis Bennett 

they have been given quite the full symptoms of this lady's life 
rom 1915 2 Do you think if they knew as much as you do about 
fif r + lca ^ history they would not have come to the conclusion 

a the multiple neuritis was something which she was suffering 
irom for a number of years ? 

But now we come to the last fatal period, and the evidence 
upon the questions of symptoms practically depends upon Nurse 
Alien s evidence—Dr. Hincks’s, of course, from time to time. 
.Nurse Allen says that Mrs. Armstrong went to bed on 13th Feb¬ 
ruary, and never got up again. She is absolutely wrong, because 
l am going to call before you not only, of course, Major Armstrong, 
ut a lady who has no interest in this case whatever, Mrs. Price, 
who is the wife of the bank manager at Hay, and she will tell you 
—and will teh you why she fixes it—that on the afternoon of 14 th 
February, Valentine's Day, she sat with Mrs. Armstrong when Mrs. 
Armstrong was out in the porch. You remember the evidence of 
Miss Pearce about it. Mrs. Price will be called, and she will tell 
you that she was there for about three-quarters of an hour, and 
will tell you how she fixes the day. That corroborates what Miss 
Pearce has said, the lady who was treated as a hostile witness, 
hostile to the prosecution. She says on the 14th of February 
Mrs. Armstrong was out of doors seated in the garden. But 
Nurse Allen, upon whom these doctors have to rely chiefly for 
their symptoms, her recollection is that Mrs. Armstrong went to 
xx d th ® 13th > and never got up again. Do not think I am 
attacking Nurse Allen, do not let anybody think I am suggesting 
she is committing perjury, I am doing nothing of the sort. I am 
saying that her evidence is unreliable, not because she is dishonest 
but because, as she said herself, I have had a great number of 
cases since then, I have got no notes. She is wrong when she says 
that Mrs. Armstrong was in bed from the 13th of February 
onwards. Then she goes on to say this, “ On the 17th, the Thurs- 
day^Mrs. Armstrong became worse, and the doctor was telephoned 
for.” She is wrong again. Wherever you can test her she is 
wrong. You remember that with regard to this date I asked Dr. 
Hincks whether he _could produce his attendance book. He proved 
conclusively ^ that it was the 16th that he was telephoned for at 
the instigation of Major Armstrong—the second instance where 
Nurse Allen’s memory is at fault. Then we come to the all- 
important time about which we have heard so much. Nurse Allen 
says, and upon this a great deal of the evidence of Sir William 
Wiilcox mbased, that during the last two days she sufiered from 
violent diarrhoea. That is Nurse Allen's evidence. You can 
only 4 ©st a person’s evidence by what happens to he given you to 
test ut with. Here you get one of the best examples of a testing 
of the witness's evidence, because you get Nurse Allen saying, for 
the last two days diarrhoea—and, fortunately. Nurse Lloyd took 
over her duty for ten hours. We cannot test Nurse Allen's evi- 

■ ' 185 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Sir H. Curtis Bennett O 

deuce except during those ton bom^ lu^on.n ji 

can test it by. Who says, “ Diarrhea for two* day* ”° Tw* 
already «-o(. hor wrong about t.ho IMth February aloJoK t ^ 
wronp; about iho Kith and mil - now Id ,n L / got W 

««»* 11.0 M ta, .Inyl'i N lU I k™'®' 

One mohon during the nbdil ci,; i , 1 ^ ° t, * le sort, 

.lmvrlii''jk ono m.iI i.. Jt . h ,j i 7 t u IS, u,,,' hsliVdVii'is!'' 

and (hiring th© whole of ihoso Ion hours one iu<>(Von oub/^wf^’ 

t ie 11 h l ol ruary, wrong when alio H ay H ill„«HH started on the lS* 
that the doctor was telephoned for on that day. and «l o h troni’ 
absohitoly wrong ahout thin vital matter as to wl,other or not fS 

«ovoru l diarrha-a *’ k °Ori ( IhuV**1 (Vlh t ' l | ,TllU ‘' l,ul - y waH m,ITon ’ n g from 

» wrr r sk? 

allowing you, the nroh-ibilii t », . aH . 110 P° J am 

if v,m i i, a 1 i " ! I( ; I<!N - I hope [ am allowing you that 

..r irsi* if b in f™ 

jy“s t frr - * 

, ,d- i n i ' h V vhol « hlHl0, 'y of lh " first and tlmn fome 

TwZ JZm Tal!?’ l? 

•twndiUrs o;; Ti ( ,ho 1 m,] 1 ' , ' i 1 . . Ft:l,n,! , lr y- fw an 1 know she « 

Hth, and, according to’the^’cvTdcrmo VurL* A1] l ‘‘' T <l0U 011 the 
ut) from Hi a vui, an • , 0 N0 Allen, she was never 

4 /’ 3 i& ;‘T V““‘- 

finisb un w iih T i m r ,' (ia ^, and diarrhoea to 

undoubtedly f„„ , h . ,8U, t 



Opening Speech for Defence. 

Sir H. Curtis Bennett 

^ a ve never asked a question in cross-examination about it, 
i ., rom _ he lbth up to the 22nd that poor lady was as near 
death as she could be. It is a small point again, but do not 
iorget it, it has just occurred to me: on the 18th February Dr. 
Hmcks said he told Major Armstrong that his wife was dying, 

fw 7 ! 0 - 11 ar ! asked to kelieve ’ although he told Major Armstrong 
that his wife was dying, that he is poisoning her every day—I do 
not know when—nobody suggests when, you have to guess that: 

HaJT® i ?i Ue oo T’ b r t * is ^SS^d that he is poisoning her 
ght up to the -2nd. I put the case for the defence in as clear 
a form as it could be put to Sir William Willcox on Saturday, 

Fftbr, W f lat I ? Ut t0 i hlm W J S thlS ’ su PP osill g a person on the 16th 

“ ^ 1 take ®. a lar Sf dose . of arsenic, is it possible for that 
, / We , ° r 8 “ days; 18 P° ssMe *at person during the 
17th, 18th and perhaps the 19th should suffer from violent vomit- 
possible that after that violent vomiting it should 
gradually become less?. Then I said, would that person be able 
J V 6 * a “ f ? od . at “7 tlme "P, t0 the end ? Sir William said, and 

!if shorthand note of the cross-examination of Sir William 

tha l h ® T° U i d exp ? ct that the COIldi tion of the stomach 
would be such that she would be able to retain but little: he d?d 
not say none. I said, would you expect to find that that person 
gradually sank and died without the administration of any further 
poison ? And having got so far, I then put, would you expect 
to find m. such a person, post-mortem, disease of the kidneys? 
Yes he said, it is what you found here. Would you expect to 
find the liver with most of the arsenic left in the body in the 
hver ?—Yes it is what you found in this case. Would you expect 
to find, and this I put to Dr. Spilsbury, traces of arsenic in such 
a case in the intestine and in the caecum? “ Yes,” said Dr. 
Spilsbury, I should.” The only point on which they say what 
is described by my lord as a supposititious case-- 

. Justice Darling I said that this was a hypothesis and 
so it is. ’ 

Sir H. Curtis Bennett— I thought your lordship said the 
word I used. 

Mr. Justice Darling—I know what I said. 

Curtis Bennett —You will remember, gentlemen, what 
was said; I do not mind what the word was which was used If 
I am wrong in using the word I did I am very sorry. 

Mr. Justice Darling —I thought the other word seemed a sort 
of reflection on the person who is putting it—I used a perfectly 
neutral wffrd. f j 

Curtis Bennett—G entlemen, do not misunderstand 
me; I hope my lord does not misunderstand me. If in the course 
of a somewhat lengthy dealing with this evidence I have used some 
expression which was not used by my lord I regret it. The case 
which was being put, call it what you like, was a case which 

187 



Sir H. Curti. B cnneu 
nlwtolutely fillod ... 

of finding arsenic ;' VI , , 10 . lno, ' H of this ease except (,(l 0 ouesllm, 

arsenic s ^'<"onl,u 7 ennui, a .ul ( 10 

ascending cK,,*'*, ^ »> *».« intestines, (l.« oiecu.rWth 
dealing \vi11 1 n lu , u J ,ou (and remember hero you are 

1 U, '°" 7’I’ or, « «r wluu islom!!! T Y'"* Wi1,1 ' u|,h,io ™ *>ased 
have ulready shown V( J . ' '’"T' 1 u I ,,m MympK.nm which, I 

Num' Allt'ii; l, U j i 1 ^ . . ai . lT1 I0 “ V U I )()I ^ Kyniplomw mvon hv 

U" ,, “"'i 11 a!«». ii. 

examined Kir Will:,, (< ’ <,iIo| hiimo ymir verdict. Ko I cross- 
if wan not. quite iMiJhh,')n r'ViV'* 1 l,r ' . W l >iislnir y as <.o whether 
«»f il, goes through (h,» 1?, i ° th ” which was taken, some 

and that, some, of it c’ 1>art )on ' K alwor,,0<l on the wav 

milod hh you will hear It lcicrfl A 'T T* < ’j >,1Io<l ““W 1 * 1 ''* 1 , oncap- 
call, and gradually\ ' . u 1,0,1 >'y die doctors I am gointr to 
Imro, a <‘nntiuuo U ,7ij l f 0aN f ° llNolr . KO (l| af got what you found 

Und .hero i!r,d ZT> <■>'« W, and you 

disease of <Jut liver . ,, , kidneys; you laid if i„ this body 

greatest; part of the’.,!’ 1 ' - " U , *' UN absorption of the 

that is what y, )U fi ri( ) c < ’" 1C ,, v " o1 '. }, as gone through it, the liver: 
(in<l everything thal v ,7 ’ ‘',^' !UnN lmm ‘* 1,1 U'e liver, and you 
thw question, which T WOU !, d ./.'? 1MMi ,0 ‘"”1 111 »*!« ease J 
onoapsuled oti j| s wavV, 1 l ,t,hh,1),1 d.y ( lhal some of the arsenic g 0 | a 

going to rr lmlly n > Uuim i,wu - & 

omul the intoMtinon , „ ' 7 ' V ", 1 V \ wouW 

i>ore. Is not that,In", J ' Vi <ll(I <»'«! the intestines empty 
that r have ashed y 0ll ail Un‘1 ' ii "i 7". y °" , " mr in min<1 ail 
condition of (he w<‘„„V„ » V * ' u "'f 1 llavo l(l,<l y«u as to the 
the Ihoory of the JJlL J” Vi* <. IV ■” ' ory ,ml , 011 likely Ulan 
tune they eunnot mime in ','. lH , man ’ 1,,r ,ll> reason, at a 
poisoning his wife?' ’ ay w °anno|, suggest, was 

heard of (his matter'all'until n°t a "'* nol ' ,lin £ nioro is 

with ono or two ( m ( , , , l1 ' 1 October, I am going f rt deal 

Mr. Martin. You sa w M n . ll<1 , 1 1 ' 0 <l !' nl 'l" 11 ' 1 ' Nhortly with 

in the happy position Miu ’, tl , n "> 11,0 witness-box. T am not 
had of him," what, you n * !i’f ’ w,l, d' «ort of view you 

box, whether V<>u Iho,! rj.'Ii ' , a l 011UH do'wn'our in Iho witnoss- 
whether you Ibomdii ii '' i a ' 10 vmH n vni, li<‘-tivo man or not, 
Roing to'sftv one'si„ ll .i'V hi 0 )V l - N a ’ nar , i .who certainly was not 
in Ilav; he'would 0 11,1,0 l,lnn ff ioc his late brother solicitor 
was very careful m d, ’" n , cro< ' 1 lor i' 1 ' 0 nniallest thing, he 

and said, is that f^ vlin T ^ - V, J <m T ,,u)l w,lat •>« bad said 
I said, put it in your " Way V 1,0 sai,, ' 1,1 ! * «ot. So 

several identical Ii.r 'l."!"/''/',' "’, aTI ' 1 7°" ^ J1 r ^’>,hur ho used 
is said of Mr. Mar ij , h ) a ■ 1 T'' 1 That « ,ho «®n. It 
get rid of him. m j kt Major Armstrong had some motive to 

any stories of murders ? y °V !VW i <m<1 T ,uiy ,loto< ' l;ivo sbiry book or 
one which had this v W wha1 ',T m, 1 ™ mU] 1,1 ^ the 

188 notive? You would throw it away; you 



Opening Speech for Defence. 

Sir H. Curtis Bennett 

wcmld refuse to go on reading it. Did you ever hear of such a 
motive ? If one is going to take motives, the motive of Mr. 
Martin to get rid of Major Armstrong would have been a great 
stronger than the motive of Major Armstrong to get rid of 
Mr. Martin . Mr. Martin was the new-comer in Hay, the man 
who had only just started off, not very well known in the county ; 
the other man was the man who was received in the county a 
member of two county clubs, clerk to the justices, a very nice posi¬ 
tion. When you are talking about motives, wbat a much stronger 
motive there would be for getting rid of Major Armstrong. But 
seriously, I must deal with this motive, because it is the motive 
™ S P ut before you. If Major Armstrong tried to poison 
Mr. Martin because of the motive suggested by the prosecution 
here, then there is only one proper verdict I suggest to you, and 
that verdict would be that he was insane. Can you imagine that 
any sane man would try and poison Mr. Martin because of this 
trouble over the Velmewydd estate? Look what it comes to when 
it is tested. I am going to show you upon the evidence that 
Major Armstrong cannot have tried to poison Mr. Martin but let 
us deal with the motive. It is said that because these two solici¬ 
tors had. got some transaction on together which is not going on 
very satisfactorily, and because Martin is saying, my clients want 
to rescind this contract, therefore you, as stakeholder for my 
clients, will kindly return the stake money, it is suggested that 
Major Armstrong (he must have been hopelessly insane, as I said, 
h© said such a thing) said, I will get rid of this man, he wants 
the stake money back. It does not occur to anybody that another 
solicitor would take up the position directly afterwards. Still 
here is the motive. After all this searching by the Crown this is 
the motive seriously and at some length put before you by the 
Attorney-General last Monday.* 20th October—my friend seri¬ 
ously read out to you a letter which is written by Mr. Martin to 
Major Armstrong saying, my clients rescind this contract, and 
therefore you are to return the stake money. On the 26th 
October Major Armstrong, the very day of this tea—no tea ever 
got such notoriety as this tea did on the 26th October—on that 
very day Majo* Armstrong writes back saving, “ My clients do not 
consent^ to your clients rescinding this contract, and it has got to 
go on.” I assume that none of you are lawyers, gentlemen, but 
you do not require to be a very great lawyer to appreciate what 
I was able to. get from Mr. Martin in cross-examination. You 
•cannot enter into a contract for the purchase of whatever it may 
be, a farmhouse, a horse, or a pig, when a man is going to buy 
your farm or your horse, and then he can merely come along and 
say, <f I am going to rescind that contract.” You may have lost 
£400 over the deal, and all he has to say, according to Mr. Martin, 
is, I rescind the contract, and if anybody is holding the stake 
money he has to hand up that money. The law may be an ass, 
but it is not such a big ass as that. When a contract has been 

. 189 :■ 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Sir H. Curtis Bennett 

entered into, of course, Mr. Martin had to admit, the contract 
stands until it is rescinded by consent. If you and the pur¬ 
chaser like to say, let us call the deal off, there, is an end of it. 
but otherwise it can only be rescinded by the side who wants to 
get rid of it, in the case I am putting, by your purchaser, bringing 
an action to rescind; otherwise you can hold him to his contract. 
Of course, that is the law. But Mr. Martin writes and says, I 
want to rescind the contract; hand back the stake money. Major 
Armstrong writes hack on the 26th saying, my clients do not con¬ 
sent to rescind the contract. What do you find? The next move 
between these two solicitors lay with Mr. Martin then to say, all 
right, if you will not consent to the rescission of the contract, my 
clients will make you by starting an action. He does not do 
anything, and he' waits until the 10th December, and on the 10th 
December Major Armstrong issues a writ to enforce that contract, 
and that is said to he the motive why Major Armstrong should 
want to poison Mr. Martin. So kindly disposed was the man to 
a man of his own profession and of his own branch of the pro¬ 
fession on his trial for his life, so kindly disposed was Mr. Martin 
that he makes a point to you, or tries to, that that writ which was 
issued on the 10th December had not been proceeded with, when 
he knows this man has been awaiting his trial for murder. 

What is the evidence of the 26th October? Everybody has said, 
Sir William Willcox, Dr. Spilsbury, Dr. Hincks, that the symptoms 
of the illness from which Mr. Martin suffered were con¬ 
sistent with gastric enteritis. There is no symptom in this case 
which should be pointed to by Sir William Willcox or Dr. Spils¬ 
bury when I put the question to them, to distinguish the symptoms 
from gastric enteritis set up by something. The whole, of this 
depends upon l/33rd of a grain of arsenic in the urine. What 
conclusion have you come to about that? Major Armstrong is 
not being tried for trying to poison Mr. Martin; you are not 
trying that; you will not be asked for your verdict (I dare say you 
are surprised) upon the question whether or not Major Armstrong 
tried to poison Mr. Martin; that if you please is just a little bit 
of evidence for you to consider to throw light on whether he mur¬ 
dered his wife nine months before. You will appreciate that; 
that is why that evidence is before you, to rebut any suggestion 
made of accidental death or, I suppose, in this case, suicide of the 
wife in February, 1921. It is just to help you to make up your 
minds as to whether the prosecution have proved that—they have 
to prove that—it does not matter twopence about Martin, but just 
to help you to come to the conclusion whether or not they have 
proved it you are allowed to have this evidence about Martin. It 
has been admitted by my lord, and one must deal with it. What 
is the actual evidence on the day about it? 26th October, ap¬ 
pointment made for tea. What is the evidence? The evidence is 
this, that Major Armstrong and Mr. Martin were extremely busy; 

190 



Opening Speech for Defence. 

Sir H. Cwrtis Bennett 

they both used to go from their offices back to their houses to tea. 
Major Armstrong would have to pass Mr. Martin’s house to get to 
his house; therefore Major Armstrong says, as we are so busy, you 
come up to tea. Mr. Martin says, yes, I will give you a lift in 
the car; Armstrong says in the morning, no, because I have two 
men to meet up at my place; so Major Armstrong goes home to 
his tea. It must he suggested that after that food was taken into 
the drawing-room on that evening Major Armstrong dropped 
arsenic on to the scones. 

Mr. Justice Darling —Not necessarily on to the scones. 

Sir H. Curtis Bennett —On to something—I am obliged. 
The real case which was put originally was the buttered scone, 
because of the handing of it, so that he was bound to have it; 
that is the real case, but I quite agree it might be suggested he 
put it on any of the food. What is the evidence? Major Arm¬ 
strong arrives back, and is seen by MacGeorge to arrive; lie goes 
straight to him and talks to him, and MacGeorge’s evidence is 
that he went just inside, hung up his hat and coat, and came out 
immediately. Do you think there is any sort of evidence that he 
put arsenic, even if he wanted to, on Mr. Martin’s food then % 
There was no opportunity. He is then out in the garden with 
MacGeorge right up to the time when Mr. Martin arrives. That 
is not in dispute. Then Mr. Martin and Major Armstrong go 
round the garden together, and they go into the house together. 
Up to that time in my submission there has been no opportunity, 
even if he desired to do so, and I have already dealt with what I 
submit is the ridiculous proposition that he did—no opportunity 
to have put poison upon that food, food which he had not at that 
time been near if you believe MacGeorge that all he did was to 
go in and come out immediately. They go in together and sit 
in the small hay window. Is it suggested that Major Armstrong 
put something upon the food there? There is no evidence that 
he did; it is extraordinarily difficult to know how he could do it 
without being seen. Mr. Martin leaves. I do not care whether 
he said he was feeling off colour or not. He goes off home, and 
three and a half hours later, rather more, nearly four hours 
afterwards, he is sick for the first time. You will hear from the 
medical gentlemen I am going to call that if in fact he had had 
arsenic, what is possibly a fatal dose, at half-past five or anything 
like it, he would not have eaten dinner at half-past seven, and 
would have been sick long before four hours. The time when he 
was sick is jnuch more consistent with having something which did 
not agree with him at dinner. Have you noticed when one person 
is ill in a household counsel always gets up and says, nobody else 
affected by the food. Nobody suggested that everybody was 
affected by-the food. You know in your own homes it is very 
often one person happens to be sick or bilious after some meal; 
there is no point in saying, were you all sick? That does not 
explain it. Because Mrs. Martin was not sick, it does not account 

191 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Sir H. Curtis Bennett 

for what happened. Mr. Martin is ill for three or four days. 
Then this sample of the urine is taken. You will hear from 
medical gentlemen I am going to call about this. You will hear 
as regards that l/33rd of a grain, that from the bismuth, from the 
sulphate of magnesia, from the bottle, peroxide of hydrogen itself, 
it is quite possible to get sufficient arsenic to have accounted for 
the 1 /33rd of a grain which was found in that bottle. If you are 
going to take a test at all, you must take it under the most 
stringent rules. You will hear that the proper way to have taken 
the test of urine of this sort would have been to have cleansed the 
bottle over and over again, and to have taken the last sample of 
the water which you used for cleansing and sent that up with the 
urine, and if you found there was no sign in that, you would find 
that at any rate your bottle was pure. That was not done. A 
bottle which had contained peroxide of hydrogen, which would 
itself contain some arsenic, was the bottle which was used. 
Sulphate of magnesia Mr. Martin had taken the very day before 
this sample; and you will hear the proportion of arsenic to 
sulphate of magnesia frequently. I am not going to anticipate 
it. You will also hear about bismuth. That sample of urine 
was in my submission to you, when you have heard the evidence, 
in the highest degree unsatisfactory in the way in which it^ was 
taken. I have already pointed out, even if there was arsenic in 
Mr. Martin at all, you have to be satisfied that Major Armstrong 
put it there; and then you are not trying the case. It sounds, 
In my submission to you—I want to use no improper expression, 
but it sounds almost Gilbertian. You have to decide whether 
he had an opportunity of putting arsenic in, whether he did put 
it in, whether Mr. Martin swallowed it, whether the arsenic which 
was found is accounted for by medicine or an unclean bottle; you 
have to consider all these questions—for what? Not to form a 
verdict upon it, not to express a view upon it, but for the purpose 
of throwing some light on whether or not he murdered his wife in 
February. From that moment in Martin’s story every point, and 
I am not complaining of it—every man who stands in the dock 
has every point that there is put against him, and quite properly 
so. They say a most awful thing happens; after this Armstrong 
changes his habits and goes and has his tea at his office instead of 
at his house, and does that for the purpose of trying to inveigle 
the unwary Mr. Martin over. What do you find? That Martin 
did exactly the same thing, and altered his tea to his office. It 
is not suspicious for Mr. Martin, that is a very natural thing in 
a witness for the prosecution. It is not unnatural for Mr. Martin 
to change; but it is a terribly suspicious thing when it happens 
to the man in the dock. Why? Is not it precisely the same? 
Was not the reason which was given by Martin the good and 
sufficient reason that they were both of them very busy, and that 
is why they changed? 

192 



Opening Speech for Defence. 

Sir H. Curtis Bennett 

There are two other matters I will deal with quite shortly; 
one is the motive suggested by the Attorney-General as being the 
motive why Major Armstrong should want to murder his wife—- 
the will. During the war, in January, 1917, Mrs. Armstrong 
had made a will; you need not worry for the moment about the 
details of it. That will was drawn up, £50 a year left to Major 
Armstrong till 1933, then £100 to Major Armstrong; and, subject 
to that payment of that £50 and £100, certain sums left to the 
children at certain times. In July, 1920, there came into existence 
another will. My friend the Attorney-General, in putting this 
so-called motive before you, said this, “ In such a hurry was Major 
Armstrong to get that will signed that he did not even wait to get 
the witnesses there together." Such a hurry to get that will 
signed—8th July, 1920. What did my learned friend mean by 
that? ^ With very great respect, is not that pure imagination? 
Where is the evidence that he was in such a hurry? It doesn't 
take any longer to call two servants into the same room; perhaps 
it takes rather less time to call two servants into the same room 
to get them to sign than to have one in one room and one in the 
next. In such a hurry to get the will signed that he doesn't 
trouble to get them together. That is the way it was put last 
week, that he was trying to get the whole of this property, some 
£2300, into his own possession. What is the evidence now? In 
1919 at Bath Mrs. Armstrong had said to her sister, “ I don't 
think I have left enough to my husband; I am thinking of altering 
my will." The undoubted suggestion about this was, though it 
has not been very definitely put, that this was a mere bogus will. 
Bath, 1919—“ I don't think I have left quite enough money to 
my husband; I am thinking of altering my will." The evidence 
as to the signing of the will-—what is it? The witness was 
treated as hostile, hostile to the prosecution. What she said was 
this, “ Major Armstrong and Mrs. Armstrong were present 
together when I signed this will," and you will remember the 
action of Miss Pearce giving evidence. She had the will in front 
of her in the box, and she said, f< Mrs. Armstrong put her hand 
on it, told me where to sign it, and then said, ‘ There is Lily 
Gandy; she will sign. That will was signed by Lily Candy. 
Perhaps you did not understand why I put that insurance card 
to Lily Candy. I was not suggesting that that was a document, 
in the ordinary sense of the word a document; I only put it to 
show how easy it is to forget how signings are done. Remember, 
this is a long time ago. It is July, 1920, about a matter which 
would not attract particular attention. Try and think for a 
moment yourselves about some incident which happened in 1920, 
and see whether you would like to he called to say exactly in 
which room you were talking to a person on a particular day. 
Pretty difficult, isn't it? What happens to that will? It is 
proved, and, having been proved, I ought to say in passing per¬ 
fectly openly and properly proved, went through the office in the 
0 193 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Sir H. Curtis Bennett 

ordinary routine; you remember Miss Baker spoke about that, 
in fact, it was identified with the other documents by Mr. Martin, 
who signed it, and his name appears on the will; it is proved, and 
probate is granted to Major Armstrong. The motives, say the 
prosecution—he wanted to get the poor woman’s money. He got 
it, and he doesn’t spend one farthing of it. The attem.pt was 
made on Saturday to put this motive on its feet again by the 
calling of Mr. Taylor. All Mr. Taylor proved was this, that 
whilst Major Armstrong was abroad there was a debit balance in 
the account which was, as I dare say many of our accounts are, 
sometimes in debit and sometimes in credit. This was a debit 
balance at that moment; so his clerk deposits these bearer bonds 
in the name of Mrs. Armstrong—why they had not even been 
transferred to his own name—deposits these securities as against 
the then overdraft, and when Major Armstrong comes back he 
pays off the overdraft and the bank is in credit. From that time 
it is in credit and debit away till February of this year. The 
securities are left there, not one penny piece of them is used. In 
February of this year—perhaps you will not think it was a very 
extraordinary thing that it was desired by Major Armstrong to 
realise some securities for the purposes of his defence. At that 
time he is going to sell some of these securities, an embargo is 
put upon them, and the result is that the estate is still absolutely 
intact. That is the motive that the prosecution say, and my 
friend the Attorney-General last Monday said here, “ Who is it 
that had the motive to get rid of this woman? ” and pointed his 
accusing finger at the prisoner in the dock. What do you think 
of the motive—the will was signed by Mrs. Armstrong, signed by 
Miss Pearce at Mrs. Armstrong’s request, and, if you believe Miss 
Pearce, signed by Lily Candy; according to Miss Pearce, Mrs. 
Armstrong pointing to her saying, “ There is Lily Candy, she 
will sign.” Having been signed, the object for which the prose¬ 
cution suggest this ghastly murder took place, it is put in the 
possession of the alleged murderer, and there it remains, and not 
a farthing of that money was spent by him at all. That is one 
motive. 

The other motive which it is suggested is the motive, is in 
my suggestion, and all I say to you is for the purpose of your 
good consideration—it is not for me, I am glad to say, to deter¬ 
mine this case—the other motive which is put forward is fantastic, 
that that respectable lady whom you saw in the witness-box last 
Thursday might become his wife. It is suggested, I suppose, that 
Major Armstrong murdered his wife so that he might at some 
future time marry that lady. ^ What do you think of that being 
put forward as a motive in this case of murder? Those are the 
only two motives that, searching high and low throughout the 
country, the prosecution are able to put their hands upon. They 
cannot suggest an unhappy married life; they can suggest nothing 

194: 



Opening Speech for Defence. 

Sir H. Cartis Bennett 

against this gentleman at all except these two motives ; the will— 
and when he obtains the money he never spends it—and that lady 
who said, “ Major Armstrong was a friend of my family, my 
mother, aunt, and niece; he visited at my house; we wrote letters 
to each other; he told me he was married, that there were three 
children; he told me apparently that he was happy in his married 
life; and not until May last year, four months after his wife’s 
death, did he ever say one single word to me, never a word of 
indecency to me; but at that time he did say, c If you should ever 
want another home you know where you will find one,’ ” or words 
to that effect; a sort of half-proposal of marriage, which was not 
accepted, and which, according to that lady, and she is a witness 
for the prosecution, never has been accepted. She was considering 
it, because she had a great number of family ties. Gentlemen, in 
a case where the issue is the greatest issue that we human beings 
know, the issue of life and death, in such an issue as that, what do 
you think of that motive? I will leave those matters. 

The other matter I want to deal with, and I will put it equally 
shortly before you as the question of motive, is the purchases of 
arsenic by Major Armstrong. I am not going to worry you with 
the earlier purchases; I quite agree with what my lord said on 
Saturday, the earlier purchases do not matter at all, 1912, 1914, 
and the next of importance is 7th June, 1919. On that date you 
will hear from Major Armstrong he purchased \ lb. of arsenic 
from Mr. Davies, that it was coloured with charcoal, that he used 
6 ounces of the 8 ounces of that arsenic for weed-killer, that the 
remainder was the arsenic which was found in the cupboard in the 
library, the 2 ounces which you gentlemen have seen; that some of 
the weed-killer still remains in the bottom of those two bottles, 
that the weed-killer was used by him, that he had the prescription 
for,that weed-killer which was found in the garden file—I must 
not forget to say a word about that—that he made that weed¬ 
killer after experiment, and that he found exactly the proportions 
in which to use it, that in the summer of 1920 he was far too 
worried with the condition of his wife to worry about weed-killer 
that he left it to Jay. You remember the evidence—Jay bought 
it; that in January, 19211, from the 11th he purchased from Hird 
at Davies’s shop a quarter of a pound of arsenic, which was 
coloured. No point, and again let me say I am not complaining 
of it, but it shows to what a pass the prosecution are put in this 
case—no point is left out. The Attorney-General says in opening 
this case, <f . Fancy buying weed-killer in January,” and, when you 
get the evidence of Jay, he says, “ I would very much rather put 
down weed-killer in the open January than when the weather 
became thoroughly hot ”; and Jay goes on to say, * VI discussed 
the question with Major Armstrong, and, having discussed the 
question, Major Armstrong bought that white arsenic on the 11th 
January, intending very shortly to use it upon the paths. Having 

' 195 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Sir H. Curtis Bennett 

purchased it, lie puts it as he bought it in the two white papers 
in that secret cupboard, and leaves it there, having forgotten at 
the time he purchased that that he had in fact got put away in 
one of the caustic soda tins the 2 ounces left in 1919. If he was 
a poisoner, he would have known, would he not, that he had got 
arsenic in his possession; he would not have forgotten it. But 
as he is an honest man, and a respectable man, as I suggest, it is 
quite likely in one’s multifarious duties one would forget that one 
had got a little over from, two years before. He puts into that cup¬ 
board that packet unopened. His wife dies, he goes abroad, he 
is abroad in March and April; he returns in May, and goes to 
that cupboard, and he will tell you that going to the cupboard he 
found the packet of white arsenic with no string upon it, looking 
as though it had been opened. You will hear that Mrs. Armstrong 
knew, and always knew, where the garden material and stuff were 
kept in that library cupboard. He saw in May that that packet 
had no string on it, and looked as though it had been opened. 
There was nothing to attract his attention particularly about it 
then, because he, as an honest man, had no idea that somebody 
in some months to come was going to say that he had poisoned his 
wife. He had no idea that there was anything suspicious about 
it; but he did note that. Then he added that he took that white 
arsenic and divided it into two packets, 2 ounces as near as 
possible in each portion—I am not suggesting that it was weighed 
absolutely to a grain. He put one 2 ounces into one of the papers 
and one 2 ounces into the other paper. One part of 2 ounces he 
used by splitting it up into a number of little tiny packets, like 
the one you have seen produced here; he split them lip into those 
little packets to use them. How, gentlemen, I am going to tell 
you how he did use them. That is why I complain that the 
search made by the police was not a thorough search. When 
Major Armstrong was arrested early in this year, his defence was, 
“ I had the arsenic for the purpose of making weed-killer.” Why 
■is it that that receipt was not produced? Why is it the police 
did not see the last page of the 1920 diary, the entry showing the 
proportions in which the weed-killer had to be mixed with water, 
showing that that was in his mind at this very material time, the 
death in February, 1921 1 In the last page of the 1920 diary is 
this entry, which Detective Sharp said he had not noticed till I 
drew his attention to it; but he should have noticed it. These 
packets having been made up, he used them in the way which it 
has been suggested by the Boundary Chemical Company you could 
deal with plantains. He had at one time had an instrument which 
apparently yon dig down by the side of the plant, and, as I under¬ 
stand it, it is a sort of hollow tube, and having put this tube down 
to the, root of the plantain, you pour your poison down to that, 
so that it does not destroy any of the plants around, but merely 
goes to the root of that. You will have it described to you, in 
fact, there is an advertisement of that in this file. He had that 
196 



Opening Speech for Defence. 

Sir H. Curtis Bennett 

instrument before the war, but that had rotted from damp; and 
last summer you remember what Jay said, ct We are very troubled 
with plantains on that lawn. 57 Major Armstrong made up these 
little packets of arsenic, made a hole down the side of the plantain, 
and dropped the poison down to the root of the plantain. He 
carried those packets about in the inside pocket of his garden 
coat, and he was under the impression that he had used all of 
those packets; and it so happened that on 31st December last he 
was going to work in the garden, and he had on that same garden 
coat which he had used during the summer and had used during 
the autumn. He had in his pocket business letters and private 
letters. He had no idea there was one of those little packets 
left, and that little packet was caught by the envelope on the 
inside of an envelope, and it had been caught up from his pocket, 
and was found in the way in which it was. That is what hap¬ 
pened to one-half of that arsenic. What happened to the other 
half ? This is what happened. I care not how many witnesses 
they call to say, “ We pulled out the drawer 77 —you will see tha 
drawer when it becomes evidence— <c I could see right to the back 
of it, 57 says Mrs. Price. I care not. The evidence which will 
be called before you is this, that Major Armstrong, having 
separated those two packets in May for safety—no wife then to 
look after the children—for safety took that other little packet 
and put it with a piece of what we call blue draft paper all round 
it, because the white paper was not particularly strong, the arsenic 
was oozing out; he put it into this little bottom drawer, which is 
not the key drawer at all, the key drawer to which people would 
go and get the keys, to which Mrs. Armstrong used to go and get 
the keys, is not the drawer in which this arsenic was found. 
According to the evidence I shall call before you, the key drawer 
was on the left of this drawer. He put it away there, and thought 
no more about it. This is so important that I know you will 
follow this. On the 31st December he is arrested. On the next 
day, the 1st January, he remembered this little packet, and remem¬ 
bered that he had not told Detective Inspector Crutchett anything 
about this packet, and that he had muddled the 1919 remains in 
the cupboard with the 1921 remains; and you will hear that on 
that very next day, if it is going to be suggested that this arsenic 
was placed there by somebody fox the defence, or on behalf of the 
defence, bear in mind what I am now telling you, that on the 1st 
January Mr. Matthews, a solicitor of repute, a highly respectable 
member of an honourable profession—to Mr. Matthews Major 
Armstrong upon the 1st January made a statement—I am not 
entitled to tell you what it was, but the result of the statement 
was that Mr. Matthews went up to Mayfield into this room to this 
very drawer for the purpose of finding that small packet, and he 
will tell you that upon the list January Miss Pearce was there, and 
she pulled this drawer slightly open, sufficiently so that you could 
see into it, and that Mr. Matthews looked into that drawer, and 

^ 197 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Sir H. Curtis Bennett 

there was no packet in it to be seen. The result was that from 
that time Mr. Matthews and Major Armstrong both thought that 
the police had found it and were in possession of it; and, believing 
that, it is of great importance that day after day, week in and 
week out, in the newspaper reports of the proceedings at Hay, 
Mr. Matthews was asking my friend Mr. Micklethwait for the 
police to produce a list of what they had taken from Mayfield, 
because they were wanting to find out whether the police had in 
fact got this packet or not. Mr. Matthews thought that they must 
have got it, because when he had looked into the drawer upon that 
Sunday it was not there; and finally, the list coining' along, it is 
found that it is not shown; and so on the 9th February Mr. 
Matthews was again at Mayfield, and upon that occasion he found 
what had been seen by his clerk before, the garden file which I 
suggest to you ought to have been produced here. On the 9th 
February he goes up, and Mr. Matthews saying to himself, this is 
an extraordinary thing; here was I told on the 1st January of the 
existence of this; I went to search for it; it wasn't there; the police 
do not produce it; I press and press and press for a list of what 
they found; it is not upon the list; and he again goes to that 
drawer, and, instead of doing what he had done before, and what 
I suggest the police have done, looking inside it, Mr. Matthews put 
his hand right away to the back—and you will find it is not an 
easy thing to do—right away to the hack of it searching for a 
secret drawer, or something of that sort; and right at the back his 
fingers came upon paper caught up, the corners caught up. ^ I 
haven't got the drawer here, so I cannot show you how. Supposing 
that is the back of the drawer, the paper caught across there,. so 
that this was sliding backwards and forwards by the drawer being 
pulled backwards and forwards. He felt that there ; and he will 
show you how it was caught up. His clerk was there. They 
were dumbfounded; they knew not what to do about this. I ought 
to have told you this, that on the 1st January Mr. Matthews will 
tell you not only was he told by Major Armstrong that that packet 
was in the drawer, but so important did Mr. Matthews consider it 
that he at once consulted on the 1st January my friend Mr. 
Bosanquet about it. On the 9th February it is found. What 
did they do? It is a very difficult position. I do not know 
whether it is going to be suggested that Mr. Matthews ought to 
have gone straight off to the police, defending a man for murder, 
and say, “ You have made a pretty bad search here." He took 
advice, and the result of the advice that he took was, that having 
left it in the position in which it was, on the 14th February he 
took Dr. Ainsley, whom you know better than I do, a gentleman 
of repute, took him over with him, and he and Dr. Ainsley 
removed that little packet with the blue paper round from the 
position at the back of the drawer; they put it into a tin; they 
sealed the tin; brought the tin away; it was opened in the presence 
of another doctor, a sample taken out for the purpose of analysis 
198 



Opening Speech for Defence. 

Sir H. Curtis Bennett 

—I shall prove its analysis—and it was re-sealed in the tin; I do 
not know whether you saw me break the seals just* before I put it 
in; the tin remained sealed up until it was handed to me in this 
Court last Thursday. That is what happened. The police can 
say as much as they like, “ We searched; we searched thoroughly. J ' 
From the 1st January that was known to Mr. Matthews and Mr. 
Bosanquet that it was said to be there, and time after time, you 
may remember it yourselves if you have read any of the accounts 
of this case before you knew you would have the misfortune to be 
on the jury- 

Mr. Justice Darling—You had better not say that, for this 
reason ; if they have read accounts of what happened in regard to 
one thing, they may have read accounts of -what happened in 
regard to another. 

Sir H. Curtis Bennett —I am much obliged. Gentlemen, I 
am quite wrong in referring to anything you may have read; I 
am sorry I should have made two mistakes in three hours. I 
accept at once what my lord said; I have no right to tell you to 
use anything you may have read before; I ought not to have said 
■ it. 

Remember that when you come to deal with whether or not 
Mr. Matthews is an honest man, and his clerk is an honest man, 
and Dr. Ainsley is an honest man, do not forget that the evidence 
will he that that was known to Mr. Matthews, who consulted Mr. 
Bosanquet on the 1st January; that the evidence will be, and I do 
not think my friend Mr. Mieklethwait who was conducting the 
prosecution will dispute the fact, that over and over again 
pressure was being made, not improper pressure, and the things 
were not being improperly withheld, but Mr. Matthews was asking 
for a list of what the police found, because he wanted to know 
whether they had found this packet. It is for that reason he 
makes this final search. 

Now, gentlemen, I have finished. I have told you what the 
story of Major Armstrong is going to be. I have dealt with the 
finding by Mr. Matthews and his clerk and Dr. Ainsley of this 
packet. 1 I have told you in addition I am going to call Mrs. 
Price, the wife of the bank manager, also to call one witness, a 
servant who was in their employ in 1919, who will speak about 
making the weed-killer, and also as to the rheumatism which Mrs. 
Armstrong was suffering from in 1919, and so on. Then I shall 
call the three doctors whom I have named, who will tell you what 
I have already said, that in their opinion this death resulted as 
the consequence of one large fatal dose of arsenic having been 
taken on the 16th February. I have already pointed out how 
that does coincide, except for those small matters, with what Sir 
William Willcox accepted and Dr. Spilsbury accepted practically. 
When you are considering the evidence for the defence you will 
give as much, nay, perhaps, more attention to it than you have 
already shown to be giving to the case for the prosecution. One 

199 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Sir H. Curtis Bennett 

last thing. I call this evidence before you, and I shall have an 
opportunity of saying something to you at the last stage of this 
trial. Do not forget that when Major Armstrong enters this 
witness-box he enters it giving evidence upon a matter which means 
life and death. Do not forget that he is going to be cross- 
examined, fairly and properly cross-examined, but going to be 
cross-examined by the leader of that most honourable profession of* 
which I am a humble member. He is going to be cross-examined 
fairly and properly, we all know, by the Attorney-General, but 
by an experienced counsel; and I know you will give the prisoner 
what you would desire for yourselves, or for anybody dear to you, 
you will give every consideration to the way in which he gives his 
evidence. Remember, he is not an expert witness; remember the 
conditions under which he gives his evidence. When you have 
heard that evidence, and when you have heard the evidence which 
will be given by the other witnesses whom I am going to call before 
you, take the whole of it into your consideration; do not take little 
bits, but take the whole story as I have tried to take it. I have 
tried to take the whole story through for the prosecution; and when 
you have taken it, you will be faced with this, that there is no 
evidence of administration of arsenic by anybody in this case. 
You understand, I mean by that no particular person—of course, 
either she took it herself or had it administered—but there is no 
evidence of the administration at all; and in my submission, the 
issue being with you and remaining until the end with you, there 
is certainly no evidence that Major Armstrong gave his wife 
poison; but looked at fairly, as you will look at it, carefully, as 
you will look at it, the evidence points far more, I do not say 
conclusively, and, as you will appreciate, I have already pointed 
out, thank God, it is not for the prisoner to prove conclusively 
that somebody else did it; but it points strongly, so strongly that 
if you were dealing with the most simple matters of your every- 
you would hesitate and say, ££ Well, I am not satisfied 
of this. But when you are determining, as you have to determine 
this matter, you will say the prosecution have not proved the guilt 
of Major Armstrong; nay, further, that, ££ in our view, upon the 
whole of the facts that have been proved before us, both for the 
prosecution and the defence, we are satisfied that Major Armstrong 
is not guilty of murder/' 

Mr. Justice Darling —Gentlemen, I will ask you not to dis¬ 
cuss this case amongst yourselves from this point on. We have 
heard a perfectly new case opened. Do not discuss among your¬ 
selves what has been said or what may be said as bearing one way 
or the other, but reserve your consideration until you have heard 
is not guilty of murder/* 


200 


Adjourned for a short time. 

The evidence for the defence was then called. 



Evidence for Defence. 

Herbert Rowse Armstrong 

Evidence for the Defence. 

The prisoner, Herbert Rowse Armstrong, examined by Mr. 
Bosanquet —I am a solicitor practising at Hay. I am fifty-two 
years of age. I am an M.A. of Cambridge University, and I 
hold the appointment of justices’ clerk for the division of Hay, 
Rredwardin, Clyro, and clerk to the Painscastle Commissioner of 
Taxes. I obtained a commission in 1901, during the Boer War, 
in the 1st Lancashire Royal Engineers. Ultimately I was in the 
Devon and Somerset Volunteer Reserve, and was in the Reserve 
at the outbreak of the war. In November, 1914, I joined up 
on my own initiative with the Middlesex Division, Royal 
Engineers, and was taken on as captain. I was promoted major, 
substantive rank, in 1916, and I served until I was demobilised 
on the 22nd May, 1919. I was admitted a solicitor in the year 
1895, and I served my articles to Messrs. Alsop, Stevens & Crooks, 
Liverpool. After that I joined Messrs. Hutchings & Co., solicitors, 
of Teignmouth and Newton Abbot. I was in partnership with 
Hutchings & Co. in these places from 1901 to 1903, after which 
date I practised on my own account in Newton Abbot till I came 
to Hay in 1906. I was first of all managing clerk to Mr. Cheese. 

I brought a certain amount of capital into the business when I 
entered into partnership, and the business was carried on under 
the name of Cheese & Armstrong, and is still carried on under 
that name. I was married on the 4th June, 1907, at Teign¬ 
mouth, to my wife, who was then Catherine Mary Friend. I 
became engaged to my wife in September, 1904, and our engage¬ 
ment lasted for some three years. My wife’s father lived at 
Teignmouth. At the time of her death, in 1921, my wife was 
forty-eight years of age. We came to live at Mayfield in 
December, 1912. There are three children of the marriage, 
two girls and a boy. There was an antenuptial settlement at 
the time of our marriage, which consisted of the furniture and a 
life policy of £.1000 on my own life. Mr. Chevalier was trustee 
of the settlement. There was a covenant in the settlement^ to the 
effect that I would purchase to the amount of £200, and include 
that in the settlement. I did that. The relations between my 
wife and myself up to the time of her death were perfect. My 
wife was never a robust woman. When we were engaged, in 1903, 
she had a very severe attack of rheumatism. I remember that 
from the fact that she had great difficulty in putting on the ring 
I gave her on that occasion, and that attack lasted for (speak¬ 
ing from memory) three months. After that she had constantly 
recurrent attacks of rheumatism. She also had a very highly de¬ 
veloped nervous system. 

And did that have a special effect with regard to her health 
—nervous excitement, I mean?—I do not know. I cannot speak 

201 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Herbert Rowse Armstrong 

medically, but the tendency was to exaggerate details and worry 
very much over small matters—matters of household importance. 
Speaking generally, she was a martyr to indigestion. At intervals 
I have known her to suffer from attacks of sickness—head¬ 
aches. She was in the habit of taking dinner pills regularly 
and. she constantly took various homoeopathic medicines, nux 
vomica, bryonia, and ignatia. She had been in the habit of 
taking homoeopathic medicines before we were engaged. As a 
matter of fact, she kept a stock of such homoeopathic medicines 
as have been referred to. Prior to the war my wife took only 
general supervision of the garden, and for a certain time after 
the war it required a great deal more supervision than I could 
give. She instructed Mr. Jay, the gardener, who has already given 
evidence, and regularly paid all his bills, and was aware of what 
he used to purchase. She also decided as to what vegetables 
would be laid down for the summer. She did a certain amount 
of rose spraying herself and very light weeding. She was abso¬ 
lutely aware of all that was going on in the garden. For a short 
period after I joined up in 1914 my wife remained at Mayfield. 
During the time I was serving in the forces I spent my leave with 
my wife and family, with the exception of one leave, when I had 
to attend to business. That particular leave was taken on her 
special request. I visited my wife whilst she was in Teign- 
mouth. She was still very nervous and excitable. She com¬ 
plained of the recurrence of rheumatism. As regards the letter 
that has been referred to, written to Mr. Chevalier, there was 
fo! £ ounda * io] ? in fact for my wife’s worrying. At that time in 
1918 my bank account was overdrawn. I should think probably 
. most people s bank accounts at that period were not in the best 
condition, and this particular account at Hay was overdrawn 
but not to any great extent. The trouble referred to in that 
“ e „ r . was afterwards put right. That was the mortgage of 
£1900. The manager of Barclay’s Bank asked for additional 
security as I was going overseas, and certain shares in the Bryn- 
more estate were deposited with him. That is the meaning'of 

l J 1 onn efere 5?nn t ° th ° Se s } lares - -A- 11 ordinary security in consols, 
£800 or £400, was asked, and nothing further. 

,, Whe “ 1 ^mobilised in May, 1919, I returned to May- 
„® ld \ M y wife at that time was suffering from what was diag- 
by ? r ; Hl ? cbs as neuritis. She was unable to play the 
piano I found her m that condition when I returned. I 
remember on one occasion in October of that year when Mr. 

tol^ Cam6 t0 + US She 7 aS able t0 P la y the P iano for the first 
toe since my return. It was after I came back that my wife 

ZZl T°J 1Slt her sister a * Bath. I cannot fix the exact month 
yjf? l b60&me aware of . the wil1 that my wife made in January, 
A; 1 /’ , but . 14 was some time m the summer of 1920. I learned 

202 rmg genera conversat i°n on our own matters, she said 



Evidence for Defence. 

Herbert Rowse Armstrong 

that she had made a previous will while I was on service, and 
now she thought the time had come to alter it as I had returned 
safely. Since the making of the first will she had become entitled 
to further property owing to the death of her mother. I remember 
Miss Pearce going away for her holiday in 1920; she went some¬ 
where about August. It was prior to that that my wife referred 
to the will. It was before July that she spoke about it, but I 
cannot fix the actual date. In July mv wife went away from 
home to stay with a friend at Hoddesdon, a Mrs. Wise. As tax 
as I recollect, it was after her visit to Mrs. Wise that she men¬ 
tioned the will. My wife made a second will on the 8th July. 
After some general conversation with reference to the previous 
will, my wife told me of the rather complicated condition she had 
made. She wished to have a much shorter and simpler one, and 
at her request, with her knowledge, I drew up a very short docu¬ 
ment, the document which has been produced. My wife signed 
that document. Miss Pearce and the servant, Lily Candy, who 
was afterwards Lily Evans, were present when she signed it. As 
far as I remember, it took place in the evening. My wife? Miss 
Pearce, and myself were in the drawing-room. I believe Mlss 
Pearce called Lily Candy, hut I am not quite certain I have a 
distinct recollection of my wife saying Lily would do for the other 
witness. After the will was executed it was^placed with my wile s 
securities in the small safe which is kept in the Bouse. There 
was not the least secrecy in my wife having made another will. 

During the time my wife was away at Hoddesdon in 1920 my 
wife's niece was staying with us. She was asked to stay with 
the idea that she might ultimately be a companion to my wife. 
Unfortunately she developed mental trouble while staying with us, 
and was taken to an asylum. I kept my wife fully advised of 
this during the course of the trouble by letter. It was a matter 
that troubled my wife very much; she was a favourite niece. 
During that time I received a letter from the lady who gave evi¬ 
dence to the effect that she would be staying with some friends 
in the neighbourhood of London, and inquiring whether I would 
be likely to be in London about that time. I had an appoint¬ 
ment with counsel at a conference, and I met her. We^ dined at 
the Oddenino Restaurant, and then I took her to the tram. 

The first occasion on which I became aware that there was 
anything amiss with my wife was on Monday, 9th August, 1920. 
I recollect that date because it was the day of one of my benches, 
and usually no benches are held on a Rank Holiday, ^he benches 
are held on the first and third Mondays in the month. The 2nd 
August being a Bank Holiday, the bench was held on the 9th. On 
that day I left my wife apparently in perfectly normal health when 
X went to the office in the morning. I was rather late for lunch, 
as the bench was rather a lengthy one. When X came back to 
lunch she surprised me by saying before the children that she 
expected I had been arrested—that she had been doing something 

r ono 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Herbert Rowse Armstrong ^ 

which would cause my arrest, and that she had told the children 
thS ezpect t0 , see me an 7 mor e. That was the first 

of mv wife th T r + Seen j r Jf ard of an F actual delusion on the part 
of my wife. I turned the conversation during lunch time and 
immediately after lunch I took her into the drawing-room and 
asked her what all the trouble was about. I also spoke to the 
rector, Mr. Buchanan, and to other friends in the neJhhourhoS 

SniSfT’ T th> 1 SaW Dr - Hincks - The d ^i°ns had l °^ t 

T r ™?' 1 a m ? 0t Very clear what happened just before but 

lhTS er 0n S r d ^ 15th ’ seein S D r. Hincks and explaining 
what had occurred and asking him for a sleeping draught. She 

diffien? Up r , nigh l &TL i T nted t0 g0 awa y> and 1 had great 
difficuity m getting her back to bed. One of the delusions mv 

W™ r i d fr T a h th f time was that she had been defrauding 
tradespeople, and she also was under the delusion that she had 

been underpaying the servants, especially Jay, and had not been 
looking after the children properly while I was away on service 
Those were the three principal forms of her delusions. At that 
time my wife was approaching the age of forty-eight. I dis¬ 
cussed the question with Dr. Hincks. It was ‘after I had dis 
cussed it with Dr. Hincks that I telegraphed to Mr. Chevalier. 
It was a Wednesday. He came to Hay on Thursday, I9th August 
He saw my wife on that day and on the following day. On the 

that if after breakfast he made the suggestion to me 

that at was not safe to leave razors anywhere where my wife could 
ge them, and as a result of that I removed my razors. I also 
removed my service revolver. On Tuesday, 17th, Dr. Hincks 
suggested that it might be safer for my wife to go away to some 
home or institution. At first I was very much averse to her 
going away. I then sent word to Miss Friend, her sister, on the 
2!st. I met her at Hereford. Prior to that Dr. Hincks had 
suggested her removal to Barnwood. On Sunday 22nd August 
my wife remained in bed, and her breakfast was 7 tkken up to ht; 

tJ dowrif° She Sta r g Wit \r 1 had n °thingWhatever 

deven I Ahink ? P m £ e “ ornin & between ten and 

y lf ’ + \. k ' 1 went to see Dr. Hincks immediately after 

breakfast^ I cannot exactly fix the hour, but I think I was with 
Dr. Hincks about eleven o’clock, and while I was at the surgery 

^arth TL 7 t Ieph0ne f °I Dr -. Ja y ne *> com* over from Td- 
1 dld not f* ra J wife again that day until she came into 
S! ro f °V» Dr. Jayne’s arrival, which would be about noon 
^ v Wlfe c , had an e S§ f or breakfast that morning; it was the stock 
M S s 0 Fri U n n H 7 M th&t ** were present my wife! 

together ^; m' and the m«e; we all Inched 

SSer'to an r d Wlfe and her . sister and I went 

went Thprp ’ t" +k ?. 1( ? n °^ 866 wife vomit before she 
I had ad^fufow^ 0 * the . lightest truth in the suggestion that 
administered arsenic to my wife prior to her removal to 



Evidence for Defence. 

Herbert Rowse Armstrong 

Barnwood, or on any occasion. I went to visit my wife at 
Barnwood on about half a dozen occasions. On one occasion 
Dr. Townsend suggested that Dr. Soutar should examine my 
wife, and I agreed. The last occasion on which I went to 
Barnwood to see my wife was early in January, but I cannot 
fix the date. It was after Christmas. At that time my 
wife was perfectly aware of the nature of the institution she was 
in. She was longing to get away. The correspondence which 
has been put in took place between me and Dr. Townsend, and 
Dr. Hincks and Dr. Townsend. The first suggestion made by 
Dr. Townsend was that my wife should return on leave. I did 
not agree to that. The reason I did not agree was because I was 
under the impression that it would necessitate an examination by 
the asylum doctors at constant intervals, and it seemed to me it 
would be rather rubbing it in to my wife the surroundings which 
she had just left. When my wife came back from the asylum she 
complained bitterly to me that she had lost use of both hands and 
feet while she was in the asylum. On the 22nd January, when 
she was actually back in the house, she was able to walk, but I 
was told there was a lack of co-ordination. She could walk some¬ 
times better when she did not think about it, and she could handle 
a heavy teapot. 

As between her condition when she went in and when she came 
out, what was her condition when she came out?—When she went 
into the asylum she had the use of her hands and feet. When 
she came out she had not. As far as I could tell, when she left 
the asylum the original delusions had ceased to a great extent. 
I am speaking of her conversation with myself. There were 
certain delusions which I was able to clear away by explanation. 
One was that before she left she thought that Jay was knocking 
at the windows and that people were trying to get in. I reminded 
tier that in an adjoining meadow to my house a reaping machine 
had been working at that period, and she said at once, <c How very 
stupid of me; I never thought of that. That explains what that 
noise was.” She did not suffer from anything of that kind after 
she came hack in my presence. I did not notice anything par¬ 
ticular regarding her walking. She did not complain to me of 
her high-step gait. I had been in touch with Dr. Hincks prior 
to my wife’s return, and I asked him to keep an eye on her after 
she returned. I remember Nurse Kinsey coming to help my wife. 
She came at Dr. Hincks’s suggestion. My wife was unable to 
dress herself properly, and it was my desire that a nurse should 
be present in view of the fact that she had only just come out of 
a mental home. Nurse Kinsey arrived the day after my wife 
came hack and remained until the 27th January. She did 
not tell me anything regarding my wife’s condition. When 
I heard that Nurse Kinsey was unable to stay I discussed the 
question of another nurse coming with Dr. Hincks. Nurse Allen 
came on the 27th. Up until the time Nurse Allen came I occupied 

205 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Herbert Rowse Armstrong 

the same room as my wife, but we had always separate beds. 
After that I moved across the passage to a room opposite. My 
wife always kept a stock of homoeopathic medicines in a medicine 
cupboard on her mantelpiece in the bedroom. The key of that 
cupboard was turned, but it always remained in the lock. Until 
Sunday, 13th, my wife's condition was very much the same. 
During that period she took part in slight social duties. If people 
called she would entertain them. I cannot say whether she was 
in the garden on any occasion prior to the ll3th. as I w r as away 
at the office, but she was quite capable of going into the garden. 
I remember on Monday, 14th, on my return from the office, she 
told me she had been sitting out in the garden, that she had had 
a visitor, a Mrs. Price. She had been sick on Sunday, the 13th. 
I remember telephoning to Dr. Hincks on Wednesday, 16th, as the 
result of a communication by Nurse Allen to me. My wife took 
to her bed on the Wednesday evening. Either Miss Pearce or 
Nurse Allen prepared my wife's food, as far as my knowledge goes. 
Up until the midday dinner on the Wednesday my wife always 
took her meals with myself and the rest of the family. My wife 
had been in the habit of giving lessons to my little boy, and I 
recollect that she gave him his lessons on the Wednesday morning 
before the sale I have referred to, the 16th. I remember that 
because at the meal a reference was made to an exercise book that 
the boy had lost, and his mother was a little bit annoyed at the 
fact. From the 16th onwards my wife got steadily worse. Dr. 
Hincks called every day. I went to my office during the day time 
while my wife was ill. The only alteration I made was that I 
left a little later in the morning and used to come back a little 
earlier at night. I used to go and sit with my wife. I always 
went in to see her before I left in the morning. I came back 
for luncheon in the middle of the day, except on Thursdays, which 
was market day. I returned at five o'clock at night instead of 
six.' •' 

By Mr. Justice Darling —I always looked into my wife's 
room after I had lunch. 

Examination continued —On Sunday, 20th, in consequence of 
a conversation I had with Dr. Hincks, I arranged with Nurse 
Lloyd to come and help during the night. 

By Mr. Justice Darling—I did not at that time know that 
my wife would not recover. 

When were you first told that?—On the Monday morning, 
21st, was the first time that Dr. Hincks mentioned it. 

Examination continued —You may recollect that Dr. Hincks 
in his evidence said that he told you on the 18th?—Yes, that was 
not correct. Nurse Lloyd came on the 18th between nine and 
ten at night, I believe. Nurse Allen had gone to bed when she 
arrived. Between the time when Nurse Allen left and Nurse 
Lloyd came Miss Pearce was In charge of the sickroom. I have 

no recollection of being in the room during that time. X had 

206 



Evidence for Defence. 

Herbert Rowse Armstrong 

nothing whatever to do with the food that was prepared for my 
wife that day. I remember going into the room while Nurse 
Lloyd was there just before 1 went to bed to inquire whether 
everything was in order. I should think that would be about 
ten o’clock. I remember she had taken off her outside cloak and 
was standing close to the bed at the time. On the morning of 
the 21st, when Dr. Hincks told me my wife could not recover, he 
also told me that I should at once get some brandy and champagne. 

I got the brandy from the King’s Head, and I telephoned to a 
friend—a neighbour, a Mr. Booth, and he very kindly sent some 
champagne direct to Mayfield. That being a Monday, there was 
a sifting of the Court that day at Hay, and I was acting as clerk. 
I got home shortly after twelve. I took the brandy home with 
me. The champagne had arrived when I got home. 1 opened a 
small bottle of champagne in the sickroom. Nurse Allen and Miss 
Pearce were present on that occasion. I saw Nurse Allen give 
my wife some champagne. I think it was between five and six 
when I got home that night. Nurse Allen was in the habit of 
coming downstairs for her meals. I was sometimes in the room 
when Nurse Allen was away taking her meals. On these occasions 
it is possible that I might have been alone in the room with my 
wife. I remained in my wife’s room during the earlier part of 
that evening. I remember asking if the servant should come up 
to relieve Nurse Allen, and my wife said, fC No, I do not want 
nurse to go away.” But she was speaking in a very strong tone 
of voice for her. I commented on it afterwards. She was very 
drowsy at that time. I went to bed at the usual time that night. 
At eight o’clock in the morning I received a message from Nurse 
Allen, and as the result I went into my wife’s room. I found 
my wife unconscious. She was conscious only at remote intervals. 
Dr. Hincks arrived about nine or 9.30. He said he did not 
think she would live out the day. He told me there was nothing 
more that could be done. He then took me down to my office in 
his car. Shortly after ten o’clock the nurse telephoned me to 
tell me that my wife was dead. I at once went to Dr. Hincks’s 
surgery, and heard he was away at an urgent case. I then went 
straight home. I was in my study the whole time before lunch. 
The first time I saw Nurse Allen was at lunch time. I telegraphed 
to Miss Friend on my way up to the house. Miss Friend arrived 
at 1.30. 1 then discussed the arrangements for the funeral with 

Dr. Hincks. The funeral took place on the 25th February. Mr. 
Chevalier was present, as well as Miss Friend. I had a con¬ 
versation with Mr. Chevalier with regard to my wife’s will. I 
remember that I told him she had made a fresh will. My wife 
used to pay certain dividends to Miss Farley and Mrs. Short, her 
two aunts. They were on the Rio Janeiro Railway Company. I 
have continued to pay these dividends since my wife’s death. I 
proved my wife’s will through the office. It was done in the ordi¬ 
nary way. Nothing was realised, but a small mortgage was paid 

207 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Herbert Rowse Armstrong 

off, and the proceeds of that, used for probate duty and the neces¬ 
sary expenses of proving the will. My wife kept her banking 
account at Lloyds Bank, Teignmouth. I had mentioned my 
wife’s new will to Miss Friend before I spoke to Mr. Chevalier 
That, I think, was in August, 1920, but I do not remember the 
date. I continued the banking account at Teignmouth. The 
dividends from the stock continued to be paid into this separate 
account at Teignmouth until the date of my arrest. In March I 
went away for a change of air. I did that on Dr. Hincks’s 
advice. 

I want to ask about the lady who has given evidence. Will 
you tell the jury your relations with her—what took place?— 
Perfectly friendly relations. I used to visit at her house where 
her mother lived, and they were extremely hospitable and kind to 
me during the time I was on service and quartered in their neigh¬ 
bourhood. I showed her a photograph of my wife and my home 
and children. 


Attention has been called to an entry in your diary marked 
“ M - G ” Just after you came back from abroad. Will you 
explain to the jury what you meant by this mark “ M. G.”?—At 
that period I knew that my housekeeper, Miss Pearce, would be 
away in June. I was very anxious to get somebody to keep house 
during that time, and on my return from abroad I had a request 
to stay with the lady in question to advise her on certain pro¬ 
fessional matters. She was living with her mother at that time. 
I made that note to remind me to ask her if she knew of anybody 
who could possibly come as my guest and look after me and my 
house while my housekeeper was away. My youngest child was 
being educated at home at that time. We discussed the question. 
She was the only friend I could discuss a matter of that sort with 
as I have no relatives. (Shown exhibit No. 47)—The last para¬ 
graph m that letter, dated 8th May, 1921, which reads, " I want 
some one to come and keep house for me during June as my guest 
while Miss Pearce goes to Teignmouth with Margaret. Do you 
know any one, as I am at my wit’s end,” refers to the same 
matter. 

ioio 1 known u Mr : Martin since my return from service in 
1919. He was then in Hay. I knew Mr. Griffiths very well. 

He was an old gentleman who had an extensive practice in Hay 
a ? d T keld * nu J mber ° f appointments, and he was a great friend 
of Lily Friend. When Mr. Martin first came my wife invited 
ftim to tea. 1 remember him coming to tea. I recollect that 
was dressed in white flannels and wore a rather loose sporte coak 
1 did not invite him again after that until the end of 1921 as 
my wife was rather particular. We continued on ordinary terms 
as business friends. When Mr. Martin was married I sent Eim 
a 'wedding present. I endeavoured to act in a friendly manner 
towards Mr. Martin. The invitations that have been referred to 
were^just invitations to show friendly kindness to Mr. Martim 



Evidence for Defence. 

Herbert Rowse Armstrong 

1 heard^ Mr. Martin say that he suggested that I should sign his 
papers in order that he might become a commissioner, and he also 
suggested it was only for my convenience. That is not true, 
because I could have got another commissioner. There was 
another commissioner living at Bredwardin, a couple of miles 
away.^ It would, of course, be more convenient to have a man 
opposite my own office. 1 have heard the account of the negotia¬ 
tions with regard to the Velinewydd purchase. 1 had no personal 
feeling against Mr. Martin with regard to that. It has been my 
misfortune as a solicitor to have to write angry letters to other 
solicitors with regard to business matters, but it has in no way 
altered our friendly relations in private life. I invited Mr. 
Martin to tea on the 24th, and he ultimately came on the 26th. 
At that time we were both exceedingly busy, and 1 was under¬ 
staffed. MacGeorge was doing the actual garden wort at the time. 
I had a conversation with MacGeorge in the morning. Mr. 
Martin offered me a lift in his car that day, but I arrived home 
earlier. What Mr. Martin has said is perfectly correct. When 
I arrived I simply went right through the house—in at the front 
door, put my trench coat on when I changed, and out’through the 
side door. I had no opportunity whatever of tampering with any 
food in the drawing-room before Mr. Martin's arrival. There 
was a plate on each tier of the three-tiered cakestand. On the 
bottom there was bread and butter, on the middle buttered currant 
bun, and on the top row some scones. The scones were plain, not 
buttered. I poured out tea, and handed Mr. Martin a cup. 
After I had given him a cup of tea I passed the cake stand to him, 
and he helped himself. I heard Mr. Martin's evidence with regard 
to my taking up a scone in my fingers and handing it to him 
saying, £C Excuse fingers," or something of that kind. That is 
incorrect. I remember leaning across to help myself to a scone, 
and saying, " Excuse me," but nothing further. It was neces¬ 
sary for me to stretch in front of him when doing that. This was 
the first time Mr. Martin had been to tea with me since my wife's 
death. I remember passing a plate of currant bread and butter 
to Mr. Martin and placing it by his side. That is what he said 
he finished off. Afterwards he smoked a cigarette. I remember 
offering him some pipe tobacco, and my recollection is that he said 
he was off smoking a pipe. I had no* cigarettes, and I apologised 
for not being able to offer him one. At that time I usually had 
my tea at home, except when I was working late, and I would 
order tea in from the cafe next door when I was at the office work¬ 
ing late. Later on I arranged to have tea always at the office. 
One reason was that I was extra busy, and another was that I had 
great difficulty with an oil stove which I never had before for 
boiling water. On Thursday, 27th October, I went to my office 
at the usual time. I went across to Mr. Martin's office in the 
morning and I saw Preen, the clerk, who was called as a witness. 
I attended a sale that afternoon for Mr. Martin. I saw Dr. 
r 209 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Herbert Rowse Armstrong 

Hincks on the 27th at his surgery. I called specially to see him, 
to inquire how Mr. Martjn was, I knew Dr. Hincks personally, 
and apologised for asking him with regard to a patient, but I 
told him that Mr. Martin and I had some very important business 
on Tuesday next, and I should be glad to know if be was well 
enough, as the Hope completion was on then. I was acting for 
Captain Hope on about forty lots. The date of the completion 
was the 2nd November. 

Do you remember Mr. Martin saying you met him shortly 
after, and the extraordinary remarks he referred to, that he might- 
think it curious or cruel, but he would have another attack 1—I 
never made the remarks. 

What did you say?—I at some date remember meeting him 
on a Saturday after his illness, and I said that if he did not take 
more exercise he would have another attack. I had spoken to him 
before on the same matter. He was a man who was not in the 
habit of taking exercise. He had a motor car. It is a fact that 
on several occasions after the 26th October I asked Mr. Martin to 
come to tea. He was not the only person I asked to come to tea. 
I had invited Mr. and Mrs. Martin to come to dinner with me in 
December. I have known Mr. Trevor Griffiths for a number of 
years. I was going to ask Mr. Talbot, of Brecon, to come and 
meet Mr. and Mrs. Martin. I rang him up, but he told me he 
could not come. I was trying to get four for bridge. I did not 
succeed in getting the four altogether. At the time of my arrest 
I had invited Mr. and Mrs. Martin to come to dinner and make 
a party of four for bridge. In 1918 there was another chemist 
besides Mr. Davies in Hay—a Mr. Stocker. I never made any 
purchases from him; I dealt entirely with Mr. Davies. On the 
7th June, 1919, I purchased half a pound of arsenic from Mr, 
Davies. I used to keep the arsenic and caustic soda in the 
cupboard in the study on the left-hand side of the fireplace. My 
wife had access to that cupboard. I kept general small gardening 
materials in that cupboard also—-a rose spray, and things for 
writing on rose labels, and a particular kind of ink. My wife 
was cognisant of all the things that were kept in the cupboard. 
With the exception of what appears now—about 2 ounces—all the 
arsenic I purchased in 1919 was used in the summer of 19119. 
I remember that on that occasion I boiled it in an old petrol tin, 
a red tin which had been left by the tenant when I was on service, 
I do not know what became of that tin. I used to use petrol for 
a gas installation. Having boiled the solution in the can, it was 
then poured into a bottle—one of the bottles produced—a cognac 
bottle. I wrote the word “ Poison ” on that bottle. In the 
summer Jay did all that was done in the way of killing weeds. 
At the end of 1920 there is an entry in my diary with regard to 
weed-killer. The object of that entry was to remind me to make 
weed-killer earlier in 1921. The reference there is to 2 gallons. 
What I had made before had been 3 gallons, and I had to slightly 

210 



Evidence for Defence. 

Herbert Rowse Armstrong 

alter the proportions in using it. I had a 2-gallon can; the 3- 
gallon one had been damaged or could not be used. Shortly after 
this I went to Mr. Davies and made the purchase of 11th Januarv. 
Mr. Davies s shop is only a few minutes from my office. 

Mr. Justice Darling —Mas it white arsenic % 

Mr. Bosanquet —Yes, my lord, it was white. 

Examination continued —It was Mr. Hird, the assistant, who 
served me on that occasion. I did not see whether the arsenic 
was .coloured or not before he wrapped it up. It was wrapped 
up . in white paper, and there was a label on the outside. When 
I got home I opened the caustic soda tin which was in the cup¬ 
board, and then I realised that I had some of the 1919 purchase 
unused. 1 had used all of it except the 2 ounces that have been 
referred to. I had put that into the caustic soda tin and for¬ 
gotten all about it. I put the new purchase on the top of the 
tin on the shelf in the cupboard. Shortly after that my wife 
came home. At that time Saturday afternoon would be the only 
time I could do anything in the garden. After my wife’s death 
I went 'abroad, and I came back on the 28th April., Some little 
time after I came back I went to the cupboard—it would be some 
time m May, because it was after I had taken my boy to school 
and that was on the 13th May. The summer of 1921 was an 
exceedingly dry summer, and for that reason it would not be a 
favourable time for putting weed-killer on the gravel paths. 
T^L et i J ^ le cupboard in May, 1921, I saw the packet that 

I had bought in January. There was no string round it, and it 
appeared to me as if it had been opened. I opened the packet, 
and for the first time I realised that it was white arsenic. I did 
not weigh it. The packet was in such a position in the cupboard 
that anybody going to the cupboard would see it readilv. 

Did your wife know you were using arsenic for the garden _ 

She did. 

Mr. Justice Darling —What do you mean by “ were using ” % 

Mr. Bosanquet —In the habit, I mean, my lord, without giving 
a particular date. ” 

The Witness —She was present when I made it. When I mixed 
my weed-killer in 1919 my wife was present. When I found the 
arsenic in the cupboard in May, 1921, there were two lots—-the 
coloured one in the caustic soda tin and the packet on the top of 
the tin. I put the coloured lot at the bottom of the cupboard, and 
placed the packet containing the white arsenic in a small drawer 
at the bottom of the centre cupboard of the bureau, and I locked 
the cupboard. The next time I went to that drawer was, I think, 
some date in the month of June. At that time I was staying with 
my neighbour, Mr. Moor, on the opposite side of the road, and 
I used to come of an evening to the garden at Mayfield and do 
little odd jobs. The arsenic was wrapped in two white papers, 
just as I got them from Mr. Davies’s shop. I was not satisfied 
with the results of the 1919 arsenic, and I decided to make some 

211 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Herbert Rowse Armstrong 

experiments as to the proportion of caustic soda and genera! solu¬ 
bility, which I was able to do with comparative safety. There 
were no children in the house. 1 boiled the water on a gas ring* 
there was no kitchen fire, for the house was shut up. 1 divided 
this packet of arsenic into two parts, roughly; I did not weigh it. 
I just divided it off with my penknife. One lot I placed on the 
outside piece of paper, and the other lot remained in the inside. 
Having clone that, I wrapped up the lot in the inner paper and 
put it into a half-sheet of blue draft paper which 1 had taken 
from the bureau. 1 then put it back in the same little drawer 
I had taken it from. (Shown exhibit No. 60)—That is the blue 
draft paper I referred to. I never took that packet out of the 
drawer again. 

[Mr. Justice Darling inquired where the bureau was, and, 
on learning that it had been brought to the precincts of the Court’ 
he directed that the prisoner should put the packet where he said 
he left it, that the jury should afterwards examine the bureau, 
and that later Mr. Matthews should put the package where he said 
he found it. Nobody who was a witness must be in the room with 
the bureau. 

During the tea interval the bureau was brought into a room 
in the courthouse, and the judge’s instructions were carried out, 
Armstrong leaving the Court under surveillance to place the 
package in the bureau, and then returning to the witness-box, 
when Mr. Matthews was called out. These proceedings were 
watched by all the counsel engaged, as well as the judge and jury.] 

Examination continued —With regard to the bureau, you have 
now placed the packet in the position in which it was when you 
placed it there, as you tell us?—I have. 

Do you happen to recollect which way up you placed the 
packet ? No, I have no recollection. I do not remember whether 
I placed it flaps up or flaps down. I used to keep my keys in 
the bureau in a small drawer to the left of the cupboard. It was 
on the^ top row of the drawers to the left of the cupboard and 
immediately next to the cupboard. There were also some old 
luggage labels with my name painted on and some foreign postage 
stamps. As regards the other half of the packet of arsenic, I 
made up several small packets in pieces of paper. I cannot say 
exactly how many there would be—over a score; I cannot give the 
actual number. As regards the remainder of the second half 
that had not been made into small packets, I used it up in making 
tests m the nursery with the object of ascertaining if possible the 
best form of solubility. The packets I made up from the second 
half were about the size of exhibit No. 32. When making my 
experiment of the remainder that was left over, I took various 
portions of that and mixed it with caustic soda to see whether the 
proportion of my recipe was the right amount. The object of 
making these experiments was, when I made the mixture in 1919 
it was done in a petrol can, and I was unable to see whether it 

212 



Evidence for Defence. 

Herbert Rows© Armstrong 

°f not - , B >- doin ? ^ in the glass test tubes I was able 
to see whether equai proportions of caustic soda and arsenic made 
piopei solution. Ihe glass tubes are available if wanted I 
bad among my papers _a catalogue of the Boundary Chemical Com¬ 
pany, m which tnere is an advertisement of what they call Kilm 
I purchased one ot these Kilm patent weed eradicated before the 

whnL bU f t +] Vh l n ? Ccl p m -t Ua,Ck f , rom the war it was not usable. The 
whole of the body of it is made of cardboard, and it had been kept 

macu p b oard . the damp baa got at it, and it had all gone bad. 
That instrument gave me the idea that if I injected a form of 
poison at the root or these big dandelions it would have the same 
efiect as the original instrument. As a matter of fact, the original 
instrument did inject poison at the root, and it was a succesi I 
Pf, tBe °* arsenic which I have referred to into'the 

pocket of the Norfolk jacket, which has been produced. I made 
a hole at the base of the biggest dandelion roots I could find with 
an old file that was lying m the garden, and, having cut the whole 
of the root, I emptied the contents of a packet into it. It seemed 
to have a successful effect. 

By Mr. Justice Darling— Did it take one packet to kill one 
dandelion ?_Qne big root 3 or 4 inches round. I did not weigh 
the quantity of arsenic I put into the root of the dandelion. 

Examination continued —The surrounding grass was spared. 

I believe I used up all the packets I made. As regards the coat 
m which I kept the packets of arsenic, it was a coat I had had for 
some time which I used for working in the garden. I had it on 
the day I was arrested. 

By Mr. Justice Darling —Where were you arrested?—At mv 
office m Hay. * 

Examination continued—It was a Saturday when I was 
arrested. I have forgotten what the price of a quarter of a 

pound of arsenic was. 

In that jacket there were a number of letters. How did those 
come to be m the jacket at the same time?—The night before I 
turned out the contents of the coat that I was then wearing- the 
next morning, knowing that I would be working in the afternoon 
in the garden, I put letters which I had in my old coat, together 
with some letters that had arrived by that morning’s post in the 
pockets of that particular jacket. I am in the habit of emptying 
my pockets before I go to bed every night. I was also wearing al 
old pair of riding breeches and trench boots that morning It 
was shortly after ten o’clock in the morning when Inspector - 
Crutchett called at my office. The officers were with me in my 
office until after four. During the earlier portion of the inter¬ 
view I made the statement which has been read. I did not have 
any food from breakfast time until I got a cup of tea given to me 
at the police station at five o’clock. 

In that statement you used these words, In January 1921 
I made a further purchase of a quarter of a pound of arsenic at 

213 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Herbert Rowse Armstrong 

Mr. Davies’s shop. A small amount of this was used as a weed¬ 
killer after being boiled with caustic soda by myself. It was not 
a success, which explains why I have some left at my house. When 
I purchased this arsenic it was mixed with charcoal. I am keeping 
this to make a further trial later on. I remember talking with 
Mr. Taylor, the bank manager at Hay, respecting my recipe for 
weed-killer. This arsenic I speak of is the only poison in my 
possession anywhere, excepting, of course, any contained in medi¬ 
cine.” Explain how you came to say that to the police 1—The 
first portion that you have read was obviously incorrect. 

As regards it being tinted?—Yes, I had mixed it up with the 
1919 purchase; I said the 1921 purchase. 

With regard to the further statement, e< This is the only 
poison that I have,” what do you say?—I was thinking of what was 
at the bottom of the cupboard. I had absolutely forgotten about 
what I had put in the bureau. As far as my recollection went at 
the time, what I told the police was correct. The statement was 
made under very trying circumstances. 

By Mr. Justice Darling —You had quite forgotten the arsenic 
in the bureau ?—I had quite forgotten that. 

Examination continued —I saw my solicitor, Mr. Matthews, on 
the following day, Sunday. I sent for him to com© over. 

I cannot ask you what was said, but did you on that Sunday 
make a communication to Mr. Matthews?—I did. When the 
detectives were in my office they took possession of the contents of 
my coat, and, as they have said, they placed the letters and other 
things all together in a brown paper parcel. I was not aware at 
that time that amongst the things in my pockets there was a small 
packet containing 3f grains of arsenic. I obtained leave from 
Inspector Crutchett to sit at my desk and deal with my business 
letters. Among the letters which had been taken from my pocket 
I knew there were two which were purely business. There was 
also a telegram with an address which had been sent to me that 
morning on a business matter. I interpreted the consent given 
to refer to business letters, that I could also look at those letters 
which had been taken from my pocket, and I did so. 

The suggestion—I do not know that it has been put into so 
many words—is that you sorted those letters with a view to re¬ 
moving this packet of arsenic from them. Is there any truth in 
that?—No; for the first time in turning over those letters I saw 
that small packet—I should say for the first time since June. 

Do you recollect how that little packet was lying among the 
letters?—Just part in and part out of the flap of one of the 
envelopes. 

. y° ur statement you say, rc At this time I came across a 
recipe for weed-killer, consisting of caustic soda and arsenic, which 
was very much cheaper than the liquid weed-killer which my gar¬ 
dener had previously been in the habit of purchasing.” Where 

214 



Evidence for Defence. 

Herbert Rows© Armstrong 

was the recipe at that time ?—In the garden file which has been 
produced (referring to exhibit No. 64). I informed Inspector 
Crutchett of the existence of that recipe, and I told him where 
it was to be found. That was immediately after the statement 
had been made. 

That closes that incident. I am reminded that there is one 
thing that I have not dealt with. I ask you as to your relations 
with the lady who has been called. Did you at some time or other 
propose marriage to her]—I did. 

When was that?—I think it was on the 14th of May, Whit¬ 
sunday. It was either the 14th or the 15th, I cannot say which 
day. It was the day after my birthday; that is the 14th. 

Was there an actual engagement at any time subsisting between 
you 1—No. 

Cross-examined by the Attorney-General —As I have already 
stated, my wife had a severe attack of rheumatism in 1903, which 
lasted for three months. 

Did the attack of rheumatism last for three months or not?— 
Yes, the inability. 

Inability of what?—Using her hands. 

Or her legs ?—I do not remember that it was acute in the legs; 
it was more acute in the hands. The rheumatism was recurrent 
from and after that time at intervals during our engagement, and 
also during our married life. There was the same inability to use 
her hands. It was sometimes the one hand and sometimes the 
other. That went on right up till 19:19. She also was a martyr 
to indigestion during our married life, and at intervals she had 
attacks of sickness and headaches. In 1919, when I returned, she 
was suffering distinctly from neuritis. I cannot remember which 
hand it was on that occasion, but it was only one hand. Dr. 
Hi neks told her to put the hand that was suffering in a sling. I 
believe it was the right hand at that time, and I think there was 
some swelling of the wrist. That trouble fluctuated during the 
summer, and gradually died away until October, when it was quite 
better. She was then able to play the piano. She always had 
indigestion at that time during intervals. Up to the time that 
my wife went away in 1920 she was very highly strung; she was 
more highly strung and nervous than she had been in the previous 
year. Her nervous system seemed to be more irritated, if one 
might say so. As regards her general physical health, there was 
no sign of acute neuritis. When I talk of my wife going away 
I mean when she went to stay with her friend at Hoddesdon in 
June, 1920. After she had been to Hoddesdon she went to Block- 
ley. That would be about the end of June or July. Her condition 
was just the average at that time. There had been no recurrence 
of the neuritis from the previous October; it seemed to be dormant. 
She had indigestion at intervals, however. Her digestion was 
never good. 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Herbert Rowse Armstrong 

Do you want to draw a distinction between the time when she 
came home from Hoddesdon or Bloekley at the end of June and 
the date when she went to the asylum, or the few days before she 
went to the asylum in August ?—I should rather draw a difference, 
if I plight, between the time she returned from Hoddesdon and 
the time she ■went to Hoddesdon. She seemed to he more nervy. 
I can only use that word—not nerves in the sense of timid, but 
nervy in the sense of being full of nerves. 

Do you mean when she came back from Hoddesdon she was 
more nervy ?—Yes, the trip did not seem to have done her the good 
I had hoped it would. 

Let me take a few days before she went to the asylum, any 
one of the few days before she went to the asylum and the time she 
returned home. What was her condition of health then ?—From the 
time she returned from her holiday fill the 9th August she was 
extremely nervy and excited, then on the 9th the delusions ap¬ 
peared for the first time. I do not remember of her complaining 
of rheumatism nor of indigestion particularly. While my wife 
was in the asylum I visited her as often as I was allowed. There 
is an entry in my diary which says, f< 31st December, Gloucester, 
3.50, ’ That was the time of the train I took when I went to see 
my wife. I paid one other visit to her before she returned home, 
but it is not entered in the diary. That visit on the 31st Decem¬ 
ber was the last visit before the correspondence commenced about 
her return home. That correspondence started on the 11th 
January. In my opinion she was quite fit to come home. When 
she did come home she took up the practice of giving lessons to 
the boy, and she continued doing that for some days, up to the 
morning of the day she took to her bed finally. That, at least, is 
my recollection. As compared with August, her mental condition 
was then very much better. 

Going back for a moment, let me put this general question— 
In August of 1920 would you say that your wife’s health was good 
or bad, or indifferent, or what ?—I should say indifferent. You 
are speaking of on or about the 9th August, 1920? 

I will take the 9th August if you like. I am not wishing to 
tie you down to a particular date. Say the first fortnight in 
August; would you say indifferent?—Yes. I remember when Mr. 
Arthur Chevalier came clown in August. He then spoke about a 
possible suicidal tendency, and it was at that time 1 put my 
razors and service revolver away. It came as a shock to me to 
hear that from Mr. Chevalier, as I had never contemplated such a 
possibility; but from the argument that he put forward as to her 
then state of health it seemed to me that he was justified. I took a 
serious view of it then; I was afraid that there was a suicidal 
tendency. I was therefore glad when the responsibility of looking 
after her had passed away from me on her entrance into the asylum. 
I had not had that danger in mind prior to Mr. Chevalier sneak- 
216 1 



Evidence for Defence. 

Herbert Rowse Armstrong 

ing to me. He came to me on the Thursday, and my wile left 
on.the Sunday, the 22nd. Besides putting away the razors and 
my service revolver, I also warned the servants to keep, I believe 
it was, knives away from her, and I knew that in my absence in 
the office Mr. Chevalier would be keeping an eye on her.. I know 
that at that time I had two portions of the 1919 arsenic in the 
cupboard in the left-hand side of the fireplace in my study, but 
I did not know it then; I had forgotten it. I do not think that 
cupboard was locked; 1 am not sure. 

By Mr. Justice Darling —She had access to it, and knew 
what was in it?—Yes. 

Cross-examination continued —Did you discuss this possibility 
of suicide with the doctor attending her, Dr. Hincks 1—I asked 
him at the time if there was any danger, and he said there were 
always possibilities at that period of life, the change of life. 
That was what was in my mind. I was, therefore, anxious about 
her after Mr. Chevalier spoke to me. I was also anxious about 
her general state of health. (Shown exhibit No. 55)—That is in 
my handwriting and it is my signature. 

Let me read you what you said and signed on the 23rd 
August, 1920, about your wife’s health— ££ Q. Has she ever suffered 
from any serious disease, or is she subject to any particular consti¬ 
tutional or bodily ailments'?— A. No. Q, Is the patient 
violent towards herself or others, and in what way ? Or has she 
broken glass or furniture, torn clothes or bedding, or done mis¬ 
chief of any kind?— A. No symptoms of violence, au contraire , 
apathy to surroundings and acute introspection. Q. Has she 
threatened or attempted self-destruction ; if so, when, and by what 
means'?— A. No. Q. Is the patient’s bodily health good, bad, or 
indifferent?— A. Generally good, but of a livery tendency.” Was 
that statement made to the hospital true or not?—Yes. 

Is it true then as you told me to-day that her health was in¬ 
different ?—That question—it covers that. 

Mr. Justice Darling —What ? The answer that was given 
there would include your answer to-day ? 

Cross-examination continued —I put the words specifically to 
you at the time when she left in August was her health good, bad, 
or indifferent, and you said indifferent ?—-Yes. 

I put the question to you, as answered by yourself, and signed 
by yourself on the 23rd August, ££ was the patient’s bodily health 
good, bad, or indifferent,” and you answered ££ generally good, 
but of a livery tendency”?—That would imply indifference; 
“ generally good.” 

Perhaps . I will spare you to make a comment at the present 
moment. You observe the word is quite clear there, ec indifferent,” 
and you chose out of the three words offered to you fc good,” 
bad,” or ££ indifferent,” ££ generally good,” and you are asked 
there e£ has she threatened or attempted self-destruction; if so, 

217 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Herbert Rowse Armstrong 

when, and by what means/' and you answered “ No." Did you 
think it fair to the asylum not to make any disclosure of your 
anxiety as to this suicidal tendency?—I answered that question 
correctly; she had never made any attempt. 

Let me put the other questions and answers. “ Was there any 
peculiarity in connection with the patient previous to or at birth? 
— A. No. Q. Was there any peculiarity observable in the patient 
during childhood and youth, or was she generally strong and 
healthy in mind and body?-— A. Yes. Q. What is the patient’s 
natural temper and disposition and favourite pursuit and ten¬ 
dency? Has she led an active or sedentary life?— A. Cheerful but 
anxious. Household duties and literary taste. Q, Has she always 
been temperate and industrious?— A. Yes, a total abstainer. Q, 
Has she at any time undergone any serious disappointment or 
reverse, pecuniary or otherwise?— A. General strain in family 
care and household management during and since the war. Q, 
Has any blow or other injury ever been received on the back or 
head? A. No. Q. Has any relation or family connection been 
known to be insane, or of weak mind, or eccentric, and, if so, 
which of them?— A. No. Q. Has any near relation been habitually 
intemperate?— A. No. Q. Is there any tendency to consumption 
in the patient’s family?— A. No. Q. How many previous attacks 
of insanity has the patient had, what period elapsed between each, 
how long did they last, and where was she treated?— A. None. Q . 
Before the patient manifested the symptoms of insanity did she 
surfer any loss of sleep or appetite or exhibit any change in tem¬ 
per or disposition?— A. Helplessness for ten days prior to reception, 
and nervous excitement with slight irritability for some months 
prior Q. What circumstances are supposed to have caused the 
mental disorder 2—A. Change of period of life. Q. In what man- 
ner has insanity shown itself ?— A. Delusions that she is being 
iollowed about; that she has neglected her family and husband, 
and is liable to arrest. Q. Has she at any period of the disorder 
een of dirty habits?— A. No. Q. Has she refused food at any 
time ?—The day prior to and the day of reception, 21st and 
J^nd_ August, v- Has she ever had fits of any kind or been 
paralysed ? A. No. Q. Has she been under medical treatment, 
and under whose care?—A. Dr. T. E. Hindis, Hay. Q. Has she 
ever been subjected to personal restraint?— A. No. Q. Up to what 
time has she continued her ordinary employment?— A, The day 
before reception." J 

That is your signature. Now, let me ask a little more about 
August Did Dr. Hincks attend your wife on the 18th August?— 
keen there either on Monday or Tuesday, I am not sure 
which. Sunday was the 15th. To the best of my recollection he 
came both on the Monday and Tuesday, but I am not absolutely 
certain. I do not know whether at that time he took a sample and 
tested my wife’s urine. My household consisted at that time of 
218 



Evidence for Defence. 

Herbert Rowae Armstrong 

my wife, a niece, Miss Agnes Sayle, who came the first week in 
August when Miss Pearce went away on holiday, the servant, Lily 
Candy, and myself. These were all up to Mr. Chevalier’s arrival. 
The children, of course, were also there. After consultation, with 
Dr. Hincks, at his suggestion it was arranged that another doctor 
should be called in, and he jointly with Dr. Hincks certified my 
wife. That doctor came from Talgarth. I do not think he had 
ever been in my house before, although I knew him personally 
through another source. He was only called in proiessionaily. 
My wife had not vomited on the morning of the 22nd to my know¬ 
ledge, but I was told so. I am not sure as to the precise hour 
when Dr. Hincks called that day, but it was about midday. ^ My 
recollection is that after my wife had been certified Dr. Hincks 
and Dr. Jayne left my house. It was originally intended that he 
should come hack about two o’clock, but I believe there was some 
little difficulty in getting a car to convey my wife to the asylum. 
It did not appear to me that my wife’s condition altered 
for the worse between Dr. Hincks’s first visit and second visit to 
my house that day. I have heard Dr. Hincks in evidence say 
that he had some anxiety as to whether my wife could be taken 
to the asylum, but I do not know what was at the back of his 
mind. The car in which we went to the asylum was an open 
car, and my wife sat between myself and Miss Friend in the 
back seat. Dr. Hincks sat in front next the chauffeur. Miss 
Friend took a vessel in the car in case my wife should vomit. 
I did not know whether it was necessary to take such a vessel in 
the car. 

By Mr. Justice Darling —My wife did vomit on one occasion 
on the way. 

Cross-examination continued —She knew she was going to a 
mental home. I was told by Dr. Hincks to let her know that; I 
told her she was going to a home where she would have great 
attention, and also where she would have rest for a short time. 
I did not use the words “ You are going to a mental home.” I 
never mentioned the word asylum or anything to do with that; I 
only told her she was going to some place where she would have 
attention and a rest cure. 

Can you then suggest any sort of mental distress which 
would have brought on vomiting in the car?—I do not know at all. 
I have no means of giving an opinion on that. My wife was able 
to walk from the car when we arrived at the Asylum. I think 
she took her sister’s arm, but I cannot say more than that. She 
did not take mine. Speaking from memory, I think it was within 
the first 4 or 5 miles that my wife vomited on that journey. The 
total distance we had to travel was some 50 miles. I do not 
remember that my wife was in an exhausted condition when we 
arrived at the asylum. I was told afterwards that she was put to 

219 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Herbert Rowse Armstrong ^ 

bed at once I was told that she had been put to bed and was 
in comfort, but I did not know of my own knowledge. 

Did you ask whether she had a bedroom, or a bedroom and 
sitting-room, or what sort of room?-I was told I was not allowed 

, I)r - Townsend told us that she was in an exhausted condition 
she was taken to bed, her pulse was rapid, 120 to the minute her 

deuce 6 ™* 111 ' 6 ^ 10 °’ h61 ' t0ngue was coated ?—I heard that’evi- 
Do you agree or do you not agree that she was in an ex- 

Tfr?® did n0t app6ar S ° When she left the car 

and went to the lift; I cannot say more than that. 

, + P id J on ask anybody, either Dr. Townsend or Dr. Hincks 
whether. they thought she was seriously ill 3—I did not ask if she 
s seriously ill, because I did not think she was seriously ill 
from her appearance after this 50-mile drive did you think 

wifllT.n 7 TT ity , *2 pUt anj 0 uestioi ‘ at all about your 
heHel -Zf lt . 10 ^~ I a ® k ? d generally if she was comfortable, I 
believe that is the word I used. I cannot give the specific word 

i?ouldTnt a g T 1 T Dq i Uiry that She was a11 right < and I was told 
I could not see her. I do not remember whether I put the question 

as to whether or not she had been put to bed. " 

The Court adjourned. 


220 



Eighth Day—Tuesday, 11th April, 1922. 

The Prisoner, Herbert Bowse Armstrong, recalled, further 
cross-examined by the Attorney-General— I knew in the summer of 
1920 that my wife had made a -will some time previously. After 
general conversation she wished to make another will. I knew 
generally what was in the old will, but I never saw it until this 
trial, when I saw it across the Court. I know that in that will 
there was an annuity left to Miss Pearce. I know that in the 
new will no reference appears to Miss Pearce. My wife left it 
entirely to my discretion, and after her death I told Miss Pearce 
that as a matter of carrying out her desire 1 would give her that 
annuity. It was £12 a year. It was within a few days of my 
wife’s death that I told Miss Pearce that. I never saw what has 
been called the epitome of the will. My wife had a brother in 
New Zealand whose name was Arthur. I have at intervals corre¬ 
sponded with him. My wife used to write to him regularly, and 
on her death I took up the correspondence more or less at inter¬ 
vals. I wrote to him some time in November about shares or scrip 
and certificates along with some other family matters. I do not 
remember saying in a letter written by me to her brother on the 
28th November, “ After her death I found a draft of the will No. 1, 
which had included an annuity of £20 to Miss Pearce.” I also 
do not remember writing that I had told Miss Pearce, <£ I consider 
myself bound morally to continue to pay this.” I may have said 
in a letter to her brother that I was going to pay Miss Pearce, 
but I did not say that I had found a draft of the will No. 1 
after her death. My wife’ told me about the annuity to Miss 
Pearce. 

By Mr.. Justice Darling —The second will was drawn up in 
my handwriting. I drew that up without having seen the first, 
will. I believe the first will was in my sister-in-law’s custody. 
1 cannot say that I knew at the time the second will was made up 
that the first will was with Miss Friend, but I asked my wife after¬ 
wards where the will was, and she told me. 

Would not it have been a prudent thing not to leave a.will 
in the hands of Miss Friend which Miss Friend apparently be¬ 
lieved to be an operative will ?—Certainly, in the events that have 
occurred, it would have been prudent, I admit. 

. Supposing you were acting for a client in making a second 
will, would not you ask for the other; would you leave it in the 
hands of somebody else, who might produce it at any moment -with¬ 
out your seeing it?—I think one does things rather more irregu¬ 
larly for one’s own family. I do not think Miss Friend knew 
anything about the execution of the second will. 


221 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

O 

Herbert Rowse Armstrong 


give them to him, but they were given to him in my presence. 1 
think it was on Tuesday, 15th. 1 do not remember what became 

of the bottles, but 1 remember Dr. Hincks telling me the next day 
that he had looked the matter up. It is quite possible that Dr. 
Hincks handed the bottles to me and said the contents might be 
taken, but my recollection is that I saw Dr. Hincks at his surgery, 
and he said there was no objection, he had looked it up. I cannot 
say whether my wife was given anything out of these bottles after 
that or not; the nurse was in charge. I did not have anything to 
do with giving her anything out of these bottles; I had nothing to 
do with giving her medicine in any shape or form. During the 
whole^ course of her illness I never gave her any food or anything 
to drink in any shape or form. I do not remember Dr. Hincks 
telling me on Wednesday, 16th, that my wife was too ill to get 
up, but about the middle of the week she was unable to get up— 
whether it was Wednesday or Thursday I cannot say. From that 
time she. did not get up again. She got steadily weaker. I 
was getting increasingly anxious. I discussed her condition with 
Dr. Hincks, and I noticed that he also appeared to be anxious. 
It was on the Monday morning, the 21st, about ten o’clock, as 
I was going to the office, that Dr. Hincks told me she would not 
recover. I went to my office that morning. I wrote to Miss 
Bessie Friend when I got down to the office. I do not remember 
what I wrote to her. 

Is this your postcard? (Shown postcard.) I observe this post¬ 
card records 11 a.m. on the 21st. Let me read you what you wrote 
on this news being given you that your wife was not likely to 
get better. “ Monday morning. Many thanks for letters. Hope 
colds are better. K. (that is your wife) was slightly easier yester* 
day, but not had a good night. J 5 That was the report given by 
Nurse Lloyd, I believe. “ Slept a bit with an opiate. Complains 
still of much pain internally, and vomits at intervals. Dr. H. 
hopes that the latter is under control, as not so frequent. Had 

mirse ^ e ^ eve Nurse Allen. n That was written immediately 
after you had got the distressing information that your wife 
Z aS J 7 ^' Is that true?—I am not sure. I notice at the bottom 
ayfie is put m, and from the fact that I have these postcards 
at home tins must have been written before I went down to the 
office, before I saw Dr. Hincks. 


. I thought you told me quite clearly that you wrote to Miss 

friend after you had the information from Dr. Hincks!_There 

is a second letter written after seeing the very serious condition 
she was in. When 1 say I wrote a second time it may have been a 
telegram, but I certainly wrote or telegraphed when I was aware 
of . * e s y ious £ ature ' I agree that for the last four days of my 
wife s illness she was quite helpless, unable to feed herself I 
saw her each morning before I left to go to my office. I went a 



Evidence for Defence. 

Herbert Rowse Armstrong 

little later each morning during her illness. I waited to hear 
Dr. Hincks’s report. I came home to lunch each day except Thurs¬ 
day, Thursday being market day. It is quite possible that while 
I was at home for lunch I relieved the nurse. She was in and out 
of the room all the time. I would also be with my wife from five 
to 7.30 at night, between tea time and ordinary dinner time. 
Then after dinner I would go and sit there a little while. My 
wife died on the 22nd, and I went abroad on the 18th or 19th of 
March. I had a conversation with Mr. Chevalier after the funeral 
about my wife’s will. I told him she had made a new will, leav¬ 
ing everything to myself, but that I should apply the income to 
the education of the children, as had been done in the past. We 
were both anxious that the children should be well brought up and 
have a good education. When I came back from abroad I went 
at once to Bournemouth. There was a letter waiting for me at my 
club. It was more convenient from the railway point of view to. go 
from London to Bournemouth than to go home to Hay and spend 
two days travelling from Hay to Bournemouth. I left Paris on 
the 28th, and arrived at London and dined at my club. On the 
29th there is an entry in my diary ff Bn ”—that refers to Bourne¬ 
mouth. I stayed at Ford Cottage, and on the 30th I returned to 
Hay. There is no entry in my diary between the 1st and the 
12th, but during that time I wrote to Mr. Chevalier about getting 
a housekeeper. I think that was on the 8th. There is no entry 
referring to that in my diary. I would not make an entry of 
every letter I wrote. 

. . Then you would not make an entry of a thing like this, 
writing to Mr. Chevalier about your housekeeper, why do you 
make an entry with two initials following which happened to be 
the initials of the lady called here and whose name was not dis¬ 
closed ? Because that is the very point referred to in a previous ■ 
letter. There was no further necessity for me to remind myself. 

But you wrote on the 8th May to Mr. Chevalier about a 
housekeeper, and you say it was not of sufficient importance to 
make an entry in the diary about it, and you did not?—I had 
previously made an entry to remind me of the same matter, the 
28th, I think it was. ': 5 . 

But that is to ask somebody else?—Yes, and then I wrote to 
Mr. Chevalier. 

We will leave it at that. At any rate, on the 14th or 15th 
May you invited this lady to be your wife?—Yes. 

How, let me pass on to Mr. Martin. You have told us 
that before the 26th October Mr. Martin had had one invitation to 
tea, which was the only time you say he came in a sports coat?— 
Mr. Martin was* only asked once in my wife’s lifetime, and after 
her death this was the first opportunity I had. When I said that 
my wife was rather particular I meant that my wife did not like 
the way in which Mr. Martin dressed on the occasion of his visit, 

q 225 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Herbert Rowse Armstrong 

and she took a dislike to him. That was the reason why I did not 
invite him to tea. I do not remember who were present at his 
first call when he came in flannels and a sports coat, but I believe 
there was an Army officer and his wife there who were staying 
in Hay. On the occasion of his visit on the 26th October, on the 
cake stand, on the top, there were scones; on the second tier 
currant loaf; and on the third, bread and butter. My recollection 
is that the scones were not buttered. The reason why 1 asked him to 
tea^ on that occasion was because I thought it would be rather a 
civil thing to show to a brother solicitor, the only one in the town, 
and I wanted, to get to know more of him. We were both very 
busy at that time; there had been completions and heavy sales. 

What was the purpose of your inviting him to tea, which you 
had never done before, at a time of pressure 2—I cannot give you 
any fixed reason.. I had no general reason other than being a 
general social action.. I had no special reason other than ordinary 
civility for asking him to tea. I remember an interview on the 
20th October when the purchaser of two lots of the Velinewydd 
estate was present. I asked for more time. My firm were the 
stake holders of the moneys which he paid. I am sole partner 
of the firm. The deposits were something like £250 apiece, 
there were also expenses in the neighbourhood of £30 or £40 
apiece, but they would not be returnable. After the letter of 
the 20th October, saying there would be no further delay, I on 
the 2.1st October made a further request for delay. I showed Mr. 
Martin a telegram I had received from the mortgagees' solicitor 
stating the reconveyance had been sealed, and that was the whole 
trouble about completion. 1 think he admitted that in his evi- 
denoe. On the 26th October I left my office to go home about 
lour o clock, and I returned to the office about 6.30, after Mr. 
Martin had left, because I had not finished my work. A fresh 
matter came in as I was leaving the office. I do not remember how 
late I was kept at the office, but it would be over an hour. When 
\^°tl k° me ^e first time that day I walked straight in through 
the house. The coats hang just outside the kitchen door in the 
kail. I was wearing my trench coat. I remember that it was a 
rather heavy coat, and I hung that up with my hat I am wearing 
here and went out into the garden at once. I do not remember 
going to the caf4 close to my office that day at all. As we were 
sitting at tea that afternoon the cake stand was between us, but Mr. 
Martin would have to get up from his chair to reach it. I got 
up and handed it to him. He could choose what sort he liked. 

. ,, et - see . ^ your. statement is right after what you have 
told us This is your signed statement-" The food consisted of 
buttered scone. Is that true or not?—At the time I gave that 
statement I was under the impression it was buttered scone, but, 
on carefully thinking of the matter since, that is not correct. 

".S.--2S5sS 



Evidence for Defence. 

Herbert Rowse Armstrong 

That was written in the office. I had always been accustomed to 
bave buttered scones taken into the office. 

^By Mr. Justice Darling —When did you come to the con¬ 
clusion that it was not right ?—Quite early in having to make 
out my statement. 

Cross-examination continued —Then you say, <£ I handed 
Mr. Martin some scone on a plate. He took some, and I also took 
some, which I ate, and I afterwards placed the dish of currant 

bread at his side on the table and asked him to help himself 55 ?_ 

Yes. r 

Did you hand Mr. Martin some scone on a plate 1—I handed 
the whole show; it was on the plate, and I handed the whole 
stand. 

“ I handed Mr. Martin some scone on a plate. He took 
some, and I also took some, which I ate, and I afterwards placed 
the dish of currant bread by his side on the table 5 J ?—Yes, that 
is the table I refer to. 

Is this a fair way of representing what took place_“ I 

handed Mr. Martin some scone on a plate 55 ?—I think so. 

“ I shall be able to ascertain by going to my house where the 
scones and currant loaves were bought. 55 Was your impression 
at that time that the scones had been bought?—I thought they 
were; I was not at all sure. Sometimes scones were made by 
Miss Pearce, and sometimes they were bought. I am not quite 
sure whether it was the Thursday afternoon or the Friday morn¬ 
ing that I asked Dr. Hincks what was the matter with Mr. Martin. 
I remember the letter of 6th December, which ends up, c< As you 
have not complied with our original letter cancelling the contracts, 
we now write to give you formal notice that unless we receive the 
original contract for the purchase of the above land duly can¬ 
celled, with your cheque for the deposit and the fees paid by 
Monday next, we have instructions to take action against you as 
stake holders, and also against your client. 55 The proceedings 
were threatened against us, but I never supposed that they would 
be taken. 

On the 7th did you invite Mr. Martin again to tea?—I 
cannot remember the actual date; possibly. 

Did he say that he was unable to go?—He gave various 
excuses at different times. They seemed perfectly reasonable at 
the time, but I do not remember the actual words that were used. 

I asked him to discuss business, the business the following day at 
my office. There was another matter I particularly wanted to 
see him on, a question arising out of the lodge of which we were 
both members; a legal question had arisen as regards some licens¬ 
ing matters, and I wished to discuss it as between two members. 
He said he could not come. I do not remember ringing him up 

227 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Herbert Rowse Armstrong 

about five o'clock that day. I remember ringing him un nna 
particular day, but I do not remember which day it was. 

. P ld y° u say, “ Are not you coming to tea. It has 
waiting half an hour "?—On one occasion I had ordered in food 
and it was waiting. 0(3 

By Mr. Justice Darling— These contracts should have been 
completed about February, 1920. 

On the 6th December, 1921, he is writing to you savins: that 
you are the stake holder, and unless the purchase is completed 
^ the money returned he will bring an action against you?- 

Why was not the purchase completed and the land conveyed 
to these people who paid their money in 19201—Several questions 
had arisen on the title. In addition to that, the solicitor acting- 
tor the purchaser had died in the summer of 1920, and up to 
the time of his death he had not delivered the draft conveyance 
1 had been acting from the very start. The thing has not been 

yet ; 1 was m a P osition on the 6th December to com- 
plete the purchase, but I did not do it, because he had threatened 
to rescind; he had broken off all negotiations. That was the 
reason why I issued the writ against him for specific performance. 
1 think the letter m which he first broke off negotiations and said 
he wanted his money back is the letter of 20th October. 

t y ° U aily k°P e a ^ er ^at that he ever would complete? 
—1 had very grave views, because X at once took counsel's opinion 
as to my position as regards whether I could commence an action 
or whether I should be bound to comply with his request. 

Why did not you commence an action ?—Because my writ 
had not been settled by counsel. 

ward} a ^ or specific performance settled by 

counsel ?—Yes. ■ 

Cross-examination continued— On the day that I phoned 
across to Mr Martin he replied that I had not mentioned tea to 
him, and he had had his, but he would come over about 5.45. 

Did you say that it did not matter, to-morrow would do, and 
perhaps he would come over and have tea with you?_That is 

quite nght I told you the subject-matter was not essentially 
an omce matter. 

Instead of coining oyer that day, although yon had rung him 
day?^Yes P ° Stp0Iied ^ and suggested tea together the following 

Did you invite him to it again on the 12th?—I do not re- 
member the day. I invited him several times. 

Dad you invite him to tea on the 12th, and did he refuse on 
tne ground that he was having tea with Mr. Davies?—He did 
mention the fact that he was then having tea with Mr. Davies. 

, JJld ast him if he could not put that off?—I believe I 

say. Cannot you be released,” or words to that effect. 



Evidence for Defence. 

Herbert Rows© Armstrong 

What was the importance of getting him to tea on the 12th? 

— JLne same reason. 

Had it anything to do with the fact that the 12th was the 
date by which the cheque for the deposit and the fees had to be 
paid, as stated m the letter of the 6th?—Not in the least. 

How many invitations did you give him at about that time 
to tea?—I cannot say—about half a dozen. I do not think more. 
Me says twenty, I know. 

Was it continued over a period throughout November and 
December 1 ?—At intervals. 

By Mr. Justice Darling —Did he ask you to teal_No. 

Cross-examination continued —Now, I want to come to this 
time when you. had this packet of arsenic, the 4-ounce packet, and 

you were staying, I think you said, with Mr. Cunlifie Moor*_ 

Yes. 

This was in June, 1921?—Yes, it was while Miss Pearce was 
away. My recollection is that I was there six weeks. It would be 
the month of June and two weeks in July, but I am not abso¬ 
lutely clear as to that. At that time I took the packet of arsenic 
out of the cupboard in the study. It was wrapped in two papers. 
which were both white. I think there was string round the packet, 
but I cannot remember. 

By Mr. Justice Darling —Where was it at this time—the 
packet? In the drawer of the bureau, in the same place as it is 
now. 

When did you put it there?—In May, just after my return 
from abroad. 

Cross-examination continued —Let us be quite clear; please 
correct me if I am not right. That is what you said yesterday, 
as I took it down, “ Some time in May I put the packet of white 
arsenic m the small drawer in the bottom of the centre of the 
bureau 55 1—Yes. 

. And then you went to see it again in June?—I went to see it 
again in June, at a date I cannot actually fix. 

By Mi. Justice Darling —I had taken the packet from the 
shelf in the cupboard before I put it into the drawer of the 
bureau. 

Cross-examination continued —I divided the 4-ounce packet 
into two little packets of 2 ounces, roughly. Then from one of 
the 2-ounce packets I made some score of tiny packets, such as was 
found upon me. It was some date in June that I did that, but I 
cannot actually fix the date. It was one evening when I went 
across to Mayfield. I made them in the study at Mayfield. 

How did you decide how much each packet was to have inside 
it?—I simply took a small quantity on a penknife. I did not 
weigh them.. The whole thing was approximately. I made the 
score of packets in one evening. I used them the same evening as 
they were made. 


229 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Herbert! Rowae Armstrong 

By Mr. Justxok Daumw—You used them all?~Yes, all b t 
the one that was found. ’ ut 

Gross-examination continued— I used (hem by driving an U 
file or piece of metal into iho ground, and (hen I ({topped the stuff 
down into the aperture (hat was made. 1 did this in the case of 
each dandelion. I wished to kill. I took a separate dose for ead 
dandelion. a ' 

Will you tell my lord and the jury why you wont to the trouble 
of making separate packets for on,eh dandelion when you could 
have taken your little parcel of arsenic out ami put the same 
quantity of arsenic in by taking if on your penknife and putting 
it in the hole made by (he metal insfrumoid ?■■ Well, it W as more 
convenient to have a separalo little packet for each one than it 
was to take the thing ont and scalier it about. 

I am not saying scattering?- The (ondenoy would be to scatter 
it in the open air. 

I am suggesting when you made the hole you might have dipped 
your penknife into the packet and put the arsenic into the hole! 
—I might have done that; if did not occur to me. 

You would lose a certain amount of powder, because a 

certain amount of that very fine powder sticks to the paper? I 

suppose it would. 1 have not, thought of (hat particular point. 

Can you tell us also how you came to use nineteen of the 
score and not the twenty? —I do not know. I did not count the 
number that I was using. I simply took them out of my pocket 
as I wanted to, and was under flic impression that I had used the 
lot. Apparently I had not used Ihe last. I did not stake out 
twenty dandelions. 1 used (he balance of (he 2 ounce packet of 
arsenic by mixing it with caustic soda, (esting the solubility of 
it. That test was made in the nursery, whore (here was a gas 

ring. I used the whole ol (he 2 on nee packet in this experi¬ 

ment. I mixed the caustic, soda, with it. I poured boiling water 
on it. I tested different samples ol (ho 2 ounce packet. I made 
all these experiments on (ho one day. T must have been working 
for about a couple of hours one (naming at them. The date I 
made the experiments with (ho caustic soda and (.he arsenic was 
after 1 dealt with the dandelions; 1 think if. would be the same 
week. I threw away the results of those experiments in the lava¬ 
tory. I did not use it on the weeds. It was very hot. and dry 
weather, and it was unsuitable to use it on (he weeds at that 
time. When I was arrested and all the contents of my pockets 
were put into a piece of brown paper and folded over,'I do not 
remember whether there was some form of blotter just put on the 
.? ver ^ le brown paper. If Ihe inspector says a blotter was put 
on the top I have no doubt it. is correct. I thought the leave to 
ook at the business letters included (ho right to look into that 
F< a v Ce >> * as ^ e ^ ^ * could look at these letters, and I was told 
res, and I thought that included it. T looked into the bundle, 
230 




Evidence for Defence. 

Herbert Rowse Armstrong 

and the first thing I found was the telegram I was looking for, 
and in the course of turning over my business letters and what 
not I saw the white packet that has been produced. I remembered 
that this packet of white arsenic must be one of those I prepared 
that day in June for the dandelions, and that brought the whole of 
the circumstances, the making of the packets and using them, 
to my memory. 

By Mr. Justice Darling —It all came back to my memory 
when I saw this little packet on the table. 

When you saw the little packet on the table among the 
letters, then you remembered how you had found the 4-ounce 
packet in the cupboard and divided it into two 2-ounce packets, 
made twenty little packets, used them on the dandelions, and 
put 2 ounces of white arsenic back into the drawer in the bureau f 
—I cannot say I remembered every incident of that. 

Did you remember what I have Just asked you ?—Not the 
whole detail. 

Did you remember that you had put about 2 ounces of 
white arsenic in the drawer of the bureau?—I remembered that, yes. 

And the police were then in the room with you ?—They were. 

Had you then made your statement or not?—I had then made 
my statement, and I had been arrested. 

Cross-examination continued —Tou had made your statement! 
—About an hour before. 

This statement contains corrections which are initialed by 
you ?—There were some verbal corrections, after reading it through, 
that I made; I do not remember what they were. I initialed each 
correction. I will take it that there are nineteen initials on the 
statement. 

And that, of course, was done to make it as accurate as 
possible!—As accurate as I could at that time when it was given. 
I expressed to the police my anxiety to be of all the service I 
could to them.. I gave them every assistance. 

When you found that little white packet in your pocket, the 
whole of the position of these 2 ounces of arsenic flashed back into 
your memory?—Yes. 

And you knew it was in the bureau?—Yes. 

I am going to read you your statement, the statement made 
an hour before— Cf The first time I purchased arsenic was in 1914. 
At this time I came across a recipe for weed-killer, consisting of 
caustic soda and arsenic, which was very much cheaper than the 
liquid weed-killer which my gardener had previously been in the 
habit of purchasing. I therefore purchased arsenic and caustic 
soda from Mr. Davies, chemist, of Hay, and signed the book. I 
remember him telling me that the arsenic had to be mixed with 
charcoal, and he mixed it accordingly. I made the weed-killer at 
my house by boiling the caustic soda and arsenic in an old petrol 
tin. I think I put in all 1 purchased. It might have been in 

231 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong-. 

Herbert Rowse Armstrong ^ 

+ t- nl pr ??° rtl p° n ° f ^f 1 P arts of ea ch, but I do not remember T 
think Miss Pearce will remember the proportion. It was all uw 
m the garden as a weed-killer. I have always had Ionsider»Kl 
trouble with weeds on the part of my vegetable garden 
purchase of half a pound of arsenic in June, 1919 was for t> 16 
same pui pose, and was used in exactly the same way”? Th't 
was my recollection at the time I gave that statement 7 Th&t 
a f bought ^ had all been used up %—Yes 

to ' il ™ *“ — 

The liquid and powder weed-killer were rmrohn Wl 

:t rd that y ti J me y ’ 1 ^ " ho 

I never sTw it ^ b ° W , how much was purchased, and 

the statement finishing ^here, to^ou^belfe/at that^t” S °’ T ith 
used up the whole of the 1919 arsenic ?—Yes, I thought^ ^ ^ 

of a Do^nd^fT 7 ’ 192 h l m ^ d6 a furtIler P urc hSe of quarter 
ot a pound of arsenic at Mr. Davies’s shop. A small mlr 

7 myseit. when was that?—That is wrong; I have admitted it 
in mv l h WaS n m E success, which explains why I have some left 

S.”Li T i • p f rol ““u d >* ™ ,»£ 

cnarcoal _ f—I had mixed up the whole of that with the 1910 
It is^consistent with the statement of the 1919. 

T a ^h® 11 ^ purchased this arsenic it was mixed with charcoal 
I am keeping this to make a further trial later oo t , ' 

i™rri r „ d r^lS 

y oiling the arsenic with caustic soda in a netrol tin auk,, l 
I have no motor car T i 7 , p , 01 t* 11 -. Although 

So that suggests this* does it^not that* P6 5° -S as installation.” 
of arsenic purchased’in 1991 * j ^ 7 °j had made ^eed-killer' 
caustic soda in a petrol can £*“? ttt waging 7 WU "* * ^ 

statement meams ?—-I^ufte "agreed ° f detaiL This is what y° ur 

cansttLodrSinl1t 1 ’inTneCl haSed ar f nic ’ mixed ™th 

—Yes • as I sav t f ^ • P®*f o1 can ’ and used the preparation? 

V 8 ■{ sa7 > 1 had mixed it up with the 1919. 1 

at mv house Contains . 0,lp J ,0ard Y he . r ® I keep the arsenic 

Nobody in the house so far asTlF mat ? rlals > and is unlocked, 
of arsenic in the house Thi<. I know, is aware of the presence 

^-1 SyoV^r "chUdt 

fcy. s^zrssT.7 Siacsr* 



Evidence for Defence. 

Herbert Rows© Armstrong 

^ Mr. Justice Darling— When you said as to the 1921 lot, 
^ I mixed it up with the 1919 lot,” you mean you had confused 
it in your mind ?—Yes, I had confused it in my mind. 

Cross-examination continued — cc This arsenic I speak of is 
the only poison in my possession anywhere, excepting, of course, 
any contained in medicine. I have a medicine chest in my bed¬ 
room.” Within an hour of signing that statement, by finding 
the little packet of white arsenic, you knew that statement was 
wrong?—Yes. 

And, although you knew it was wrong, you took no steps with 
the police to correct it ?—In the meantime I had been arrested. 

By Mr. Justice Darling— You mean you made the statement 
before arrest?—1 made the statement voluntarily before arrest. 

Then you were arrested; then later on you saw the little packet 
and remembered that what you said in your statement was wrongl 
-Yes. It was a very great shock, the arrest, naturally; and I 
then decided to say nothing further until I had seen my solicitor. 

Cross-examination continued — And to allow the police, to 
whom you had promised to render every assistance, to go away 
with a misleading statement in their possession. This statement 
is quite misleading, is it not ? —When that statement was made 1 
did not know I was going to be arrested. 

We^ have passed that. You were allowing the police to go 
away with what you knew was a misleading statement in their pos¬ 
session?— I am afraid I did not think very much about it, about 
what the police were going to do. I was too much overcome by the 
position I had been placed in. 

You had offered to-Inspector Crutchett, after arrest, had you 
not, to show where certain articles were if you had the oppor¬ 
tunity of going to the house ?—I do not think so after the arrest. 

I am putting what is said in cross-examination in answer,to 
your solicitor, Mr. Matthews—“ Armstrong offered to show me 
where certain articles were if he had the opportunity of going to 
the house ”?—Yes, quite so; but my recollection is that that was 
before the arrest, after the statement was made. 

“ volunteered to give me any assistance, and immediately 
made the statement which has been produced and read. There 
was not the slightest obstacle placed. in the way of my search by 
either Mr. Armstrong or the clerks.” When was the search 
carried^ out, after the statement or before?—After the arrest. It 
was going on for two and a half hours or three hours. 

This is what your solicitor elicited — tfe I had every facility 
for searching the office and every assistance from the clerks 
up to Monday evening. After finishing at the office on the Satur¬ 
day I went at once to Mayfield. A thorough and systematic search 
was made of the whole house. Armstrong offered to show me where 
certain articles, were if he had the opportunity of going to the 
house.” Was not that after .you had been arrested?—No. 


233 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong;. 

Herbert Rowse Armstrong & 

find S’wh'T^.rtSc!t d „ l ^ I r i r i ?l d ‘ lJ “f? to 

there I could, certainly 7 ? ~ In the event of what is put 

. Y ° u ° ould have told them before they left vom- 

TSdL™ to * mst '' h “ e “w ““ M ^ 

I gm ?ou°aie d ‘r d e.”» _I “ ° 0t 1 ™ » I told you; 

^ s -r* yo ” 

you ?- I do not know whether you— the P ° hce ’ were 

confuted ^ S t ^ Ton hf}^ ™ “? ^ 7 ° u kad 
arsenic was in the bureau; you^oulAaTLd°t^aTIo £ pdS 

SftoVemS TiUt M 

—Yet^ g ° b7 hiS adviCe aS t0 whether y° u should tell the police! 

.ntimYadTee: t0 “ y ^ 

.ntr^-Thi"’.'-? 8 ! :ll ht T- U T ", JO " “**«”»» 

session anywhere esceDtins? nf ° f 18 th6 ° n 7 P ° 1SOn in my P os ‘ 
cine.” You iSZtt ot 4 <»*™, any contained in medi- 

p. rt io».„ %l^TZ'^L i0 not 1 h ‘ d 

and lLw yof could 7 ? *"“1 866X1 the littIe P a <^> 

in your bureau Oi?L P? 11 , 08 there waa white arsenic 

writing in^staSme^*7 *?* ^ “ 
statement; I did not real tht statement “* **" t0 the 

the potice° W wL°e U under °a S" -° **’ ^ if 7 ° U had Wn that 

decided to Ty no£g furttr STH ^ did ^ . Say ’ “ 1 
I was astornrai-mri «+ A j- uruntli * seen my solicitor . 

it was going to affect meT ^ P } eCe th f® ; 1 did not know how 
« going to aaect me as regards my defence. 

that point°un 0 der dl a wf^/?? 8 ® •**““ 7 ° U had Ieft the P oIice at 
you had got?—No, I did nJt “ lm P reS810n as to what arsenic 

234 



Evidence for Defence. 

Herbert Howse Armstrong 

Why did you want to consult your solicitor before you should 
say anything further 1—I was mad with haying found this little 
packet, and I was not at all sure how it would affect my defence. 

You have told us already that you realised then when you 
found the packet that what you have stated was wrong. Let me 
read it to you— 4 4 What I there said as to how 1 boiled and used 
the arsenic bought in July, 1921, is wrong; I had mixed it up 
with the 1919 lot; I confused it in my mind. I made the state¬ 
ment before my arrest voluntarily, then I was arrested, and later 
I saw the little packet and remembered that what I had stated was 
wrong; I decided to say nothing further until I had seen my 
solicitor. Before the police left my office I realised that I could 
have told them where to find the white arsenic at Mayfield. 55 All 
that is right ?—That is quite right. 

Cross-examination continued —You knew that that little packet 
would require explanation, did you not?—Obviously. 

You realised that that packet being found in your pocket 
raised an awkward situation for you, did you not?—Yes, 1 have 
been a magistrates 5 clerk for sixteen years. I remember that this 
case was heard at the Police Court on the 9th, 10th, 11th, 12th, 
19th, and 24th January, and 3rd, 9th, and 17th February. Mr. 
Davies, the chemist, was called before the magistrates in my 
presence, also Hird, his assistant. I did not hear any question 
put to either Mr. Davies or to Mr. Hird that the arsenic sold in 
January, 1921, had never been coloured. 

Then in no way was any suggestion made throughout the whole 
of the proceedings before the magistrates that there was in exist¬ 
ence this other packet of white arsenic?—No. 

And the fact was never disclosed until one day last week 
in this Court ?—I think that is correct. 

Then may I take it from you first that the statement that 
you made to the police before they left was to your knowledge 
untrue?—The original statement that was made before arrest was 
incorrect. 

And you determined, although you remembered all about it, 
to say nothing about the white arsenic to the police who were still 
present in your room?—I had told my solicitor, and the conduct 
of the case was left in his hands. 

I am speaking of. the afternoon in your office on the ,31st 
December. You decided at that time that you would leave the 
matter of the knowledge of this white arsenic and the inaccuracy 
of that statement as it was while the police were still in your office? 
—'While they were in my office, yes. 

Ke-examined by Sir H. Curtis Bennett— I had not the re¬ 
motest idea upon the 31st December that the police were coming 
to see me. When they did come I volunteered to make the state¬ 
ment which was taken down, and that statement at the time I 
was making it was, to the best of my recollection, a true state- 

235 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Herbert Rowse Armstrong ^ 

ment - , That statement haying been taken down and having 
signed by me, I was then arrested on a charge of attempted murder 
It was a very great shock to me, indeed. It was almost;™ 
diately after I had signed the statement that I was arrested' 
Inspector Crutchett sard, “ Superintendent Weaver has got 2^’ 
thmg to say to you,” then he turned round to me and^arrested 

There was no consideration of my statement before arrest Tt 
was about an hour after that that I was looking through my bus! 

hrowi 6tterS ' i 1 ^ 6 W T® amongst that bundle of letters In the 
b own paper business letters, and when I was given the leave te 

look at my business letters I understood that to "include the letters 
m the packet as well as the ones upon the desk. Amongst those 
letters m the bundle I saw this little packet. The police^did not 

I 6 onW v* tha l t f ne n hat they were comin S to Mayfield to search* 
L° a | y knew that a few minutes before I was taken to the cells’ 
about four o’clock roughly. All that time I had remembered 
that m the bureau there would be 2 ounces of white arsenic and I 
was under the impression that the police would find that 'mokJ 
Next morning I sent my managing clerk over to Hereford for the 
purpose of getting the assistance of Mr. Matthews. Mr. Matthews 
came out to Hay to see me. I told Mr. Matthews at that first i™ 
terview about this packet. On the next mornin" the 9^ 

^ims^M^M Zb th ® f firSt hearin g a * the Police Court,' at my 
^toe'ws from time to time pressed Mr. Mickle! 
thwait for a list of what the police had found at Mayfield It 

Wave of *the n aI S enic re vY SU PP liecL Th ® amoLt which 

mJanuar!* !? l7 hlC V ®“ d ln my statement was purchased 

the arsenil’wwJ’rT/ 6 y v. the ? mount which was a PPltoable to 
the Yw i h J had P urchased m 1919. I was not deceiving 

Oust tn* any aS t0 bemg in P ossess ion of arsenic. 

Just to remind the jury of one sentence only—“ The cunboard 

■**“ rr!° rt h »»“ KS 

b.fL. toura™?” 1 ? 1 " 1 ; ■ S °,‘ h “* yoU “ r8 “ firit momsnt 
ffoino ti ll airest > at a time when you did not know you were 

S toe that von' e i e r ’ - makmg *• volmitary statement telling the 

Sw. .is wig p’Xt“ jnr ““ teiiing 

examined Yvt as . ked , whether y° u were present when Dr. Hincks 
yow diarvlexh; ? g T lgt \ AugUSt ’ 1920. Just look at 
were not there T? t 1920 ‘ You said Saturday you 

St jaml w ^ r TOUg n, ^ note ’ “ Town ’ met Wade, 60 

on thaHav whe. n TOn w- ire , CIub ’ 8 .P’ m ‘” Does that show that 

that day when Dr. Hincks examined your wife you were in 

£ Te ?; ?r»"» 22 » d j 

taken away from ^ t0 underafcan ^ that she was being 

her home Ld t? hYIn,? Wa |u & woman wh ? was devoted to 

children. She was very disturbed at being 



Evidence for Defence. 

Herbert Rowse Armstrong 

taken from her home. As regards the second will, I told Miss 

Friend in August, 1920, that my wife had made a second will, 
so that from that time she would know that the will which she was 
in possession of, the 1917 will, had been superseded. I had not 
only made up my mind, but I had in fact told Miss Pearce as 
to my intentions about the £12 a year, that I would pay her £12 
a year. I told her that after my wife’s death. As I hare already 
stated, I intended to use my wife’s money upon the children’s 
schooling. As a matter of fact, the eldest girl is at school at 
Malvern and the boy is at Monckton Coombe Junior School, out¬ 
side Bath. They are both good schools. I took the boy down to 
Bath about the 13th or 14th May; I am not sure of the date. My 
girl has been kept at the same school she was at when my wife 
was aiive. The school at Monckton to which my boy was sent was 
the school which my wife in her lifetime had chosen for him. 
As a mattei oi fact, instead oi spending mv wife’s estate in paying 
for those two schools, I have paid some cheques out of my own 
money. As regards the entry at the end of the diary for 1920, 
that entry was not written with the idea that all sorts of people 
would be asked whether they could read it or not; it was an entry 
for my own information to refresh my memory. 

The Attorney-General has suggested to you that it was put 
upon that page before Mr. Barnet, of Camomile Street, had writ¬ 
ten his name lower down?—From my recollection it was put in 
because I had met Mr. Barnet in November. 

And Mr. Barnet had been handed this book and made that 
entry?—In a railway carriage. 

That left this little space which the jury have seen above 
Mr. Barnet’s name ?—Yes. As regards the entry on early potatoes, 
as a matter of fact, I buy my potatoes early in the year for the 
purpose of getting them sprouting. That would he one of the 

late notes in my book. 

You were asked why it was that you did not use for the 
purpose of the weed-killer any of the arsenic which you purchased 
on the 11th January, and you said that between the 11th January 
and the 22nd, when your wife came back, there would only have 
been one Saturday ?—Yes. 

I want you to look at your diary for 1921, and there you find 
in the diary a note that upon that one Saturday you were in bed 
ill?—I find it is so, I was in bed ill. The diary shows that I 
was also in bed ill on the 13th, 14th, and 15th, and partially on 
the 16 th. r j 

Mr. Justice Dablisg —You had still got it intact. 

lie-examination continued —Let us get that quite clear. When 
you bought it in January, 1921, did you put it into the cupboard 
or tbe bureau ?—I put it in the study cupboard. 

There it remained until when?—Until I returned from my 
holidays in the middle of May. I did not touch it from January 

237 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Herbert Rowse Armstrong 

until May. My recollection is that the arsenic cost somewhere about 
half a crown a pound. Quarter of a pound would cost 7M T 
have not looked it up, but I take it there are 7000 grains in 1 lb 
Taking that as the figure, it works out that these little packets 
of 3| grains would cost l/66ths of a penny, so that for Id you 
could destroy 66 dandelions. ’ J 


As regards the Velinewydd estate, the 20th October was the 
date upon which the letter was written by Mr. Martin to me savino* 
he wanted to rescind the contract, and the 26th October was the 
date upon which I wrote to him saying my client would not con¬ 
sent to such a transaction. After that I took the opinion of Mr 
Joiiy a Chancery barrister, upon the matter. I do not remember 
the date, upon which I got Mr. Jolly’s opinion, but after taking 
his opinion I instructed him to settle the writs. The writs pro* 
duced, issued on 10th December, were in fact settled by Mr. Jolly. 

So that from the 26th October you were not allowing the 
matter to rest, but you were taking counsel’s opinion, and you 
finally got him to settle the writs ?—That is right. Upon the morn¬ 
ing of the 22nd February Dr. Hincks told me at his surgery that 
my wife would not live. I had looked into his surgery on my way 

S l he . Th ® P° stcard which 1 sent to Miss Friend has on 

the bottom of it the word ff Mayfield.” It is a postcard belonging 
to a society, and it is one that I would not have in my office. I 
must therefore have written that postcard at Mayfield before I 
went to the office that morning. 

There is one thing I have to draw your attention to on the 
postcard: Complains of much pain internally and vomits at 

intervals. Dr. Hincks hopes that the latter is under control, as this 
is not so frequent.” Is that correct, because it is important that 
by the morning of the 21st February the vomiting was not so 
frequent?—That is my recollection. 

By Mr Justice Darling— Had Dr. Hincks been there that 
morning before you wrote that?—No. 

- ,T®% exa T m n U ^ continued —Had he seen her in the afternoon 
of the Sunday?—Yes, some time on the Sunday. 

, i nd , \ s + tMs corr , ect > “ Vomits at intervals; Dr. Hincks hopes 
that the latter is under control, as this is not so frequent ” 1 Was 
that the position on Sunday, two days before her death?—My re¬ 
collection is that Dr. Hincks told me somewhere about Sunday—I 
cannot exactly fix the date—that the vomit was under control. It is 
my recollection that the vomiting in fact was better on the Satur- 

£ nd , Monda y> ^an it had been on the Wednesday, 
Ihursday, or Friday, and that is corroborated by the fact that 
I wrote that postcard on the Monday morning. I am not quite 

t on r f^rf D 1 w 6nt i a 1 + t tt ! r u° r l telegram af ter I had the intima¬ 
te f Tthm «h+ Hl ^ S ft* te tho ?8 tt wife wa s not likely to 

Jw mLW A T 8 a Ie * ter ’ but 1 have a recollection 
at Miss Friend told me on her arrival after the death that some- 



Evidence for Defence. 

Herbert Rowse Armstrong 

thing had been brought to her at the station—whether it was a 
telegram or a letter I have only a hazy recollection, but 1 certainly 
communicated^ with her at that date. In consequence of my com¬ 
municating with Miss Friend, she in fact came to Hay the follow¬ 
ing day. On the occasion of Mr. Martin’s visit when my wife was 
alive, he came m flannels and a sports coat. My wife was a lady 
who was very particular about formal matters of that sort, and this 
was the first time Mr. Martin had been to our house at all. It was 
m consequence of the way he was dressed that he was not asked 
again during my wife’s lifetime. 

By Mr. Justice Darling —I have already explained what 1 
did with the 4 ounces^ of white arsenic I purchased, in January. 

I ^have never had white arsenic before; it was always coloured 

witn Cu&rcoEil, 

How was it when you made your statement to the police you 
were so particular as to tell them you had mentioned all the arsenic 
you had excepting any that might be in medicine of which you-, 
would not know? How was it when you told them so carefully of 
all you had got you put in that statement that there mi«*ht be 
other arsenic m medicine? How can you account for having for¬ 
gotten all that arsenic—the only white arsenic you ever had?_I 

cannot account for it. 

You had tried an interesting experiment by mixing it with 
caustic soda, not in a tin, but in a glass. Is that so ?—Yes ouite 
correct. 3 H 

And that accounted for 1 ounce of it, and as to the rest you 
had made it up into twenty little packets 2—Yes, my lord. 

And with regard to nineteen of them you gave separate doses 
to nineteen dandelions?—Yes. I noticed that these dandelions 

died afterwards. 

V . ™ very interesting, was it not?—It was at the time, 

out it had passed from my mind. 

Do you tell the jury that you absolutely forgot about that 

white arsenic?— I do. 

* (J ^ ndel i ons ? —Tbe whole incident had passed from my 

mmd for^ the time when I was making that statement. 

Bid it not strike you afterwards that it was very remarkable to 
forget. You are a solicitor ?—I follow that. 

Does it not occur to you it would have been a very, yerv bad 
case for you if you had to tell the police that you had got not 
only weed-killing arsenic, but white arsenic in your possession?— 
i>ut 1 did not remember it. 

That is not what I asked you. Does it not appear to you 
if you had made a statement to the police that you had got arsenic 

in your possession it would have been a very bad thing ?_It would 

have to he explained. 

You see that?—Yes, quite, now. 

When you saw the little packet, and you realised that you 

239 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Herbert Rowse Armstrong 

had got white arsenic in your pocket, did you realise that it was 
just a fatal dose of arsenic, not for dandelions only, but for 
human beings?—No, I did not realise that at all. I only studied 
chemistry at school.. I realise now that every one of those little 
packets I made up, if they were the same as the one found in mv 
pocket, every one contained just a fatal dose of arsenic for a 
human being. 

. T he suggestion is that the moment, you remembered that you 
tried to get it back?—I could not, because Inspector Crutchett was 
on the other side. I know now, since the evidence has been led 
that that packet contained a fatal dose of arsenic. ’ 

If you were simply dosing dandelions, why did you make up 
that 1 ounce of arsenic into twenty little packets such as that 
found m your pocket wrapped up in paper ?—Because of the con¬ 
venience of putting it in the ground. 

But you did it all in one day?—I dosed them. 

All at the same time?—Yes. 

Why go to the trouble of making up twenty little packets, one 
for each dandelion, instead of taking out the ounce you had got 
and making a hole and giving the dandelions something from the 

1 ounce?—I do not really know. 

Why make up twenty little packets, each a fatal dose for 
a human being, and put them in your pocket?—At the time it 
seemed to me the most convenient way of doing it. I cannot give 
any other explanation. I am not sure whether all the police officers 
left my office with me after my arrest. Before I left the office I 
u- re m em h©red that I had 2 ounces of arsenic in my bureau 
which they did not know anything about. I did not tell them 
anything more about it, although I knew my statement did not 

fk° Ut A , 1 , was told that tlle y were going to search 
Mayfield about four o clock. I thought they would find it then. 

a -f 0t t0 ycm when you bought they would 

J + lt „ t l 1 1 at 14 ,y° u J d be much better to make a clean breast of it 
and tell them, I forgot it when I made my statement, but I have 
remembered it since.. When you make your search you will find 

2 ounces of arsenic Did it not occur to you that that would be 

S 6 ! tSfrf 7, T\° U ! ht 1 had better kee P my mouth shut, 

as 1 said before, until I had seen my solicitor. 

I am assuming that you thought they would find it. You are 
a man accustomed to criminal procedure. Would it not have 
been better to make a clean breast of it and say, “ It is in the 
drawer of the bureau 77 ?—It did not occur to me. 

understand you kept all this to yourself, and sent for Mr. 
Matthews the next morning?—Yes. 

to tht n !Lt>r+W c ° nsultation with him you did not even mention 
to the police that the arsenic was m the bureau?—I will not p-o 

*' Y„“ mLtJ™ Mr ' “ S ”' J *7 ™ 

240 



Evidence for Defence. 

Herbert Rowse Armstrong 

.And from the moment tie knew that yon simply tried to get 
during the Police Court proceedings a list from the police of what 
they had actually foundI—That is so. 

And the police never found it?—Apparently not. 

Bo you not think if they found it they* would have pro¬ 
duced it?—Perhaps they would. 

What is your opinion—that they found it or not?—No. I 
do not think they did. 

And when they did not find it, you say you got a list, and the 
arsenic was not in it?—Yes. 

As far as the police officers and the prosecution were con- 

earned, they knew nothing about it until Sir H. Curtis Bennett 
opened these facts to the jury yesterday. Is that so? 

Sir H. Cubtis Bennett—No, I produced it last week, my 

lord. J 

The Attorney-General—Y es, it was produced when Mr 
Davies was in the box, on Thursday, I think it was. 

By Mr. Justice Darling —Was it, as far as you know, pur¬ 
posely concealed from the police until last Thursday?_Yes, as 

far as I am aware. . I heard the cross-examination of the police 
as to the cavity behind the drawer. The arsenic was not in the 
cavity behind the drawer, it was in the drawer itself. 

Then what is the purport of the cavity?— I do not know. 

Your counsel put a question about the cavity. 

Sir H. Curtis Bennett —With respect, no, my lord. 

By Mr. Justice Darling —There was a question asked you. 

There is no question about it ever having been in the cavity?_ 

No. As a matter of fact, there was no cavity for it to go into. 
Where I put it was the actual drawer of the bureau, the one be¬ 
tween the two pillars, and that was where it was found. My 
case is that the police searched and did not find it, and that it 
was there all the time. If they had looked in the drawer they 
would have found it. 

And what you say is, you thought when the police were going 
m search they would find it?— I thought so. I thought it would 
be obvious on opening that drawer. 

And you ran the risk of their finding it or not?—As your 
lordship puts it. 

Is that so?—I did not think there was a risk. I thought it a 
certainty they would find it. 

If you thought they were certain to find it why did you not 

try to get credit for yourself by telling them where it was?_I 

can only repeat that I thought I had better say little further then, 
as I was under arrest, and that I had better keep my mouth shut! 

I hope your lordship will allow me to say that it was a very great 
shock to me at the time, and I had not, perhaps, the opportunity 
of thinking as clearly as I would now. If the same thing were 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Herbert Rowse Armstrong ^ 

occurring now at the present moment I should act different^ „„ 
doubtedly, to what I did in the then condition of mv brain £ 

that time it was a great shock. * 

Yes, but, according to you, you had done your best to 
it secret till last Thursday?—I was surprised at it, my lord. 

T aJT MA f° A fn PEIC ®>. exam u ine 'd by Sir H. Crams Bennett- 
I am the wife of Owen Price, the manager of Barclay’s Bank at 
Hay. I first met Mrs. Armstrong in 1914 or 1915. She called 
on me, and I returned her calls on a few occasions before she 
went away, when Major Armstrong joined the Forces. 1 re 
member Mrs. Armstrong going away in August, 1920. I recollect 
seeing her on Monday, 14th February, 1921, after she returned 
from Barnwood. It was somewhat between three and five in the 
a or noon. She was sitting out under the verandah at Mayfield 
I cannot tell how long I was with her, but I think it might ba 
three-quarters of an hour. When I left she was still outside under 
the verandah. I recollect the date, because at the time of her 
death I remember estimating the time since I had last seen her as 
being eight days. I can also fix the date from the fact that I had 
a new costume by post that Monday morning, and in that costume 
I was to go to Mayfield to see Mrs. Armstrong. When I returned 
rom Mayfield I sent a cheque for the balance due for the costume. 
The cheque is m Court. The cheque is dated the 14th, and the 
receipt is dated the following day, the 15th February 

• + n C * r r SS ' 6 A ami ? ed by M /' Vachell— I was not on intimate terms 
with Mrs. Armstrong. I had seen her on a few occasions. I 
only saw her on that one occasion after her return from Barn- 
wood. I did not see the nurse. I saw Miss Pearce. I cannot 
say whether she was in charge of the invalid. I thought Mrs 
Armstrong was very frail. s 

Emily Davies, examined by Sir H. Curtis Bennett— I was 
formerly m the employment of Major and Mrs. Armstrong. I 
went there some time early in 1919. During the year I went 
there Mrs. Armstrong suffered from neuritis in her hands. I saw 

iul- ° n i ° * 6 • °j < T asi °? usm S an electric battery. She also com¬ 
plained of indigestion and headaches. I remember during the 
summer Major Armstrong boiling some water in a petrol tin in the 
^ltchen I knew, it was weed-killer he was making, but I did not 
know what was m it. During the summer of 1919 I often saw 
Major Armstrong doing something to the paths. The weed-killer 
was kept m the outhouse after it was made. I was not told any¬ 
thing about what sort of stuff it was, except that it was poisonous. 
_. B Lr ° ss - ex &minea by the Attorney-General—I left before Christ- 
C p ann fl t f ac % when it was that Mrs. Armstrong com- 

occ^el / rm £ ° m neUritis ’ but she “mplaiaed on different 
occasions during the summer. Sometimes she had it in the one 



Evidence for Defence. 


Emily.;. Davie® 

hand. and sometimes in the other. 1 was first spoken to about 
giving evidence while the case was on the first time. Mrs. Arm¬ 
strong said that it was neuritis that she was suffering from. I 
remember her putting her arm in a sling. It was the right arm. 
I remember one of her wrists being swollen. 

Thomas Alfred Matthews, examined by Sir H. Curtis 
Bennett—I am a solicitor, carrying on practice at 6 King Street, 
Hereford. I was admitted a solicitor in 1904, and I have been 
in practice here since 1909. I knew both Major Armstrong and 
Mr. Martin before this case started, but not intimately. On the 
1st January of this year I was sent for to go and see Major Arm¬ 
strong, who had been arrested at Hay. He made a verbal state¬ 
ment to me that day, and in consequence of that statement I went 
to Mayfield,. and went into a small study. Miss Pearce was in 
the room while I was there, and probably Mrs. Price, the servant, 
came in while we were in the room. In consequence of what I had 
been told I desired to look in one of the drawers at the bottom 
in the little open cupboard of the bureau. Miss Pearce, at my 
request, pulled the drawer open so that I could see in. She 
opened all the drawers. The particular drawer I went to look 
into, when it was opened, was apparently perfectly empty. It 
was the. centre one, the one in question. The drawer was not 
pulled right out on that occasion; it was only pulled out 3 or 4 
inches. There were no keys in the drawer. I have a recollection 
that on one occasion I saw some keys and labels in one of the 
drawers, but I do not remember which drawer it was. Upon that 
very same day that Major Armstrong had made a statement to 
me and I had been at Mayfield I consulted Mr. Bosanquet in the 
evening. I made a statement to him, and took his advice. 

By Mr. Justice Darling —Did you follow it?— I did. 

^ Examination continued —I appeared from time to time for 
Major Armstrong during the Police Court proceedings. I con¬ 
stantly pressed the prosecution for a list of what the police had 
taken from Mayfield, both publicly to my friend Mr. Micklethwait- 
and privately. On Thursday, 9th February, one of the days 
upon which there was to he a hearing at the Hay Police Court, 
before going there, I again went to Mayfield. I had not been there 
between the 1st January and the 9th February. On that occasion 
I ...was. accompanied by my managing clerk, Mr. Olivers, He 
came into my employment on bis discharge from the Army, in 
May, 1919, I think. I had the highest testimonials prior to that 
regarding him. When we arrived at Mayfield we went into the 
study. We found there the file which has been produced marked 
Garden/ In that file we found a recipe for weed-killer—the 
one which was produced when Mr. Crutehett was in the box. We 
also found all the other things which are now in the file. I 
cannot say whether by that time I had succeeded in getting from 

243 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Thomas Alfred Matthews 

the prosecution a list of what the police had found at Mayfield 
but my impression is that I had some sort of list at the time, f 
think it fair, however, to say that I never had the complete 
list for which I had been asking identifying those articles T 
had a special reason for asking that those articles should be identi- 
“f ■ have never been supplied with that. At any rate, by 
the 9th February, no little packet of white arsenic had been pro¬ 
duced m Court. After looking at the file we then looked at the 
bureau. My impression is that the flap of the bureau was closed 
and 1 opened it, but I cannot be certain. I distinctly remember 
a sort of cardboard almanac in front of the cupboard. I moved 
the almanac and opened the little cupboard. The little cupboard 
is inside the bureau after the flap is down. I noticed as I pulled 
the drawer to open it that the posts at the sides of the drawer 
were loose, particularly the one on the right-hand side. I am not 
quite sure about the one on the left-hand side, but I rather think 
it is the least bit loose. Having got the cupboard open, I pulled 
the drawer open as far as it would go—I should think, roughly, 

, 4 “ C ^ eS ; Xt tbe f u stuck - 14 appeared to be empty, just as it had 
been before. I then put my hand inside the drawer, and I felt 
some paper at the top of the drawer. Having felt this paper—I 
had no idea then what it was—I proceeded to dislodge it and 
when 1 did dislodge it I found it was a packet. Then for the 
first time it flashed across my mind what it was. I took the packet 

£ mT C ° ntai , ned L\ blu ? d ^ft paper, just as it is produced 
here (Referring to exhibit No. 60)—A number of people have 

when E Slnce the :?> and is crumpled; it was quite fresh 
/ „ took , lt ° ut - Jfi had string on it. I opened the blue paper 
and I found the white packet inside. I turned over the white 
packet and^ sawthe label bearing the words “ Arsenic, poison, G. 

a P a , V1 T es ;, Wben we Polled the drawer out after examining the 
packet I then saw a white powder at the bottom of the drawer. 

JL did not know if it was arsenic or not. After we had removed 
M S iu 6 abe to P ul1 the drawer right out. We got to 

2 ed n „f at 10-10 that morning, and it must have Teen 
about 10 30 when we discovered this. We had to be at Hay Police 

it°Wl- a ' about , eleven ' Chivers saw this packet. We put 

it back as nearly as possible in the same place, and we nut the 
bureau back exactly as we found it. We closed the flap We then 

"think L d °° r ° f ^ ^ T Uch had not been bcfi pre^outy 
L had it L^brnf^f k6y ° f 14 1 at ftust one of 

fouTi^+^t d 7 br ° u S h * I* back t0 Hereford that evening. Having 
ound that packet, and having replaced it in the same position as 

rLd^ L IZT i M . r + - ®° san quet and Sir H. Curtis Bennett, 
banner, f ^ wltb Mr - Bosanquet on the Friday, as he 

February to b ® c ™? to Hereford. 4 That was Friday, 10th 
February. I had a consultation with Sir H. Curtis Bennett in his 



Evidence for Defence. 

Thomas Alfred Matthews 

chambers on the 13th February. I took their advice, and subse¬ 
quently acted on that advice. As a result of that, 1 returned to 
Hereford on the 13th, the Monday, and upon the next day, the 
14th, I went in company with Hr. Ainslie, a well-known doctor 
in Hereford, out to Mayfield. We were accompanied by . my 
managing clerk, Mr. Chivers. I there, in the presence of Dr. 
Ainslie, removed that packet from the place I had put it back 
to after _ we had found it on the 9th. First of all 1 opened the 
drawer in order to show them it was apparently empty before I 
actually removed the packet. 1 pulled it out 4 inches, and as far 
as _ y° a could see there was nothing to be seen. Hr. Ainslie also 
tried to put it up into the place where I had found it. We then 
removed it and placed it in a tin. The tin was sealed up and a 
paper put round it, and it was brought hack to Hereford, when 
it was opened by Hr. Ainslie and another medical man, and a 
certain amount extracted to he sent away to an analyst. It was 
first of all weighed, and it was found to be 2 ounces less 15 
grains. The small amount having been removed from it for the 
purpose of analysis, the remainder was put back again into the 
tin and sealed up, and it remained sealed up until the seals were 
broken by Sir. H. Curtis Bennett the other day. The case was 
adjourned until the 17th February, when expert evidence was 
called. Hr. Spilsbury and two others. On the 17th February I made 
a search in the cupboard on the left-hand side of the fireplace, 
but I found nothing of importance. On the 24th March I again 
went to Mayfield, and on that occasion I brought away some test¬ 
ing glasses. I also brought away a great number of homoeopathic 
empty bottles. 

Cross-examined by Mr. Vachell—W hen you went to May- 
field on the 1st January did you go there for the express purpose 
of finding a packet of white arsenic 1—That was one of the pur¬ 
poses, I -will not say^ express purposes—or, rather, seeing if it 
was there. The drawing-room was the first room that we entered, 
and then we went to the study. We did not make any search in 
the drawing-room. I remember asking Miss Pearce to open 
drawers in the bureau in the drawing-room as well as in the 
study. She opened them. We then went to the study, where the 
bureau was. I knew beforehand of the existence of this little 
centre cupboard, and I knew that at the bottom of that little cup¬ 
board there was a drawer. One of the objects of my visit was to 
explore that drawer. 

For the purpose of obtaining from there a packet of white 
arsenic?—No. 

For what purpose?—For the purpose of seeing if it was there. 

That is the same reason?—No, if it had been there I do not 
know that I should have obtained it. 

Let us say for the purpose of ascertaining if it was there?_ 

Yes, if it was, I do not know that I should have removed it; X 

245 . ■ 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Thomas Alfred Matthews 

may or may not. Neither of my clerks was with me on «,■* 
occasion ; I was fetched on the Sunday morning, and I was quite 
away from any of my staff. Miss Pearce was present. She opened 
the drawers at my request. She did not know what I wasC 

- ft >f nd 1 dld Want her t0 know - 1 a «ked her whetheEhe 
ad been present when the bureau was searched by the police and 
s e said she was, and my impression is that Mrs. Price was in 
the room at the same time, but I would not be positive. 

Did you ascertain from her and Mrs Price or . 

Sen’optldEYet 7 h ‘ d ^ " ardled * * he Police. had 

theyEiXsE’U I^ntiEed 8 :Lh 6 rawe d r. I p^icuiariy 
remember her saying “ Yes ” to that one, because I wL d rS 

Sree n 6 l 1 think she told “» *at there were 

CrUtChett ’ Mr - W6aVer ’ and ^arp, 

searched2“* in the j 1 ' P resence th e bureau had been 
searched?—I heard they were there and they opened the drawer. 

i P*!^° u . ask lf th0 y foun d anything?—Not in particular - T 
£ ,d *1“ “W '“ d *<4 of e »««. .He did" “faj 

Sf * dr ™' 1 •-*»<•■■''' the dr,™ .tick Xn 

ml™ aS' n fh, t °,r”-;f' 1 h ‘? * - I «dd? 

moment ago, that the pillar was loose, and that prevented tW 

drawer coming J ul b^ open, but I would not be absolutely certain 
1 ,, 11 dlct not open more than 4 inches t+ j;j 

me a to ree ^sT tE* th - ba ° k ° f the drawer ’ hut it enabled 

vA* +k 1 ..J t i 1 ? u ^hc, that it was perfectly empty. I did not 

know, the depth of it; I had not been in the house before 

very greaEiJooEnoE ft which / ou had as one of 

cry great importance?—I cannot say then. I had been tnVen 

importance toiW Z^m TlJ Tft S&J 1 attached tr ™ d °™ 
importance to it, I assumed they had got it, and there was an end 

You did not use the word 
great.” 


tremendous ” ?—You said 


' very 
and 



Evidence for Defence. 

TTbomas Alfred. Matthews 

was; we merely went into the outbuildings where one of the police 
officers was, because Mr. Crutc-hetfe wanted to speak to him. 

Will you really deny that you went into this very study with 
Mr. Crutchett?— I could not deny it, but my recollection is very 
clear that we did not. My own impression is that we walked 
through the house and spoke to Miss Pearce, who was in the 
kitchen. We then went into the outhouses and saw Sergeant 
Worthing and Sergeant William. I am quite clear we never went 
into that room—as clear as 1 can be. 

Was it your object at that time to give Mr. Crutchett every 
possible assistance in solving this case?—I did not go to Mayfield 
for that purpose. 

But was that your attitude, one of helpfulness to him?— I 
cannot say that; my attitude was conducting the defence of Major 
Armstrong. 

Did you say anything to Mr. Crutchett about the white 
arsenic?—Certainly not. 

Or about your attempt to find it in this bureau?—Certainly 

not. 

Did you mention the bureau to him at all?—Certainly not. 

On your instructions, may I take it that you believed that 
somewhere in that house there were 2 ounces of white arsenic in 
existence ?—I believed there was some; 1 did not know the quantity; 
about half I believed there was there. 

And that, I take it, you never mentioned to Mr. Crutchett?— 
Certainly not. I was defending Major Armstrong. The file that 
I have already referred to was in the same room as the bureau, 
and I am quit© certain we did not go into that room and look at 
the file. 

Did you take the file from the fireplace and look at the con¬ 
tents and say, f£ He told me he had a recipe for weed-killer ** 1 
—No. I am quite certain about that. As a matter of fact, I 
do not think I knew of the recipe for weed-killer at that period. 

Did Mr. Crutchett say, He told us also, but we cannot 
find it 55 ?— No, absolutely no. Nothing of that sort took place 
at any time. It is not a question of a mistake in the date ; I am 
absolutely certain I never spoke to Inspector Crutchett about this 
recipe during the whole period of the trial. I am absolutely 
certain I did not take down the file when I was in his presence 
there. I conducted the defence before the justices, and Mr. Davies 
and Mr. Hird were called by the prosecution at different times. 
Hird was recalled on the 9th February, and Mr. Davies was re¬ 
called on the 3rd February. 

So that Hird was recalled on the third day after .you had 
discovered this arsenic in the drawer ?—Yes, he was. 

Previous to your discovery, do I take it from what you said 
that you knew or believed that the purchase made at Davies’s shop 
by your client, made from Hird, was of white arsenic?— I did. 

247 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Thomas Alfred Matthews O * 

I did Y ° U heard th6 6VidenCe given before justices by Hird?- 

he (thafis Mr at Ar m X d onr)^a r de g a the \ St yeM / ° n llth Jan oary 
He purchased a quarter of Hound^r, °, f ? rSenio me! 
and it was wrapped up in two papers; 1 kbefwith^P ? har ° 0al > 
Did PU you n nS e a Pa ° ket - r Yo . u heard him sly thSt?!^ 0n 
that?—I did not* 117 qU6stl0n 111 cross-examination to Hird as to 

HirdUsLrfi ^Lri t d iL”» r ; ro * e “ miM *• 

*k» arserdc^you W™ e o t Sho» £%£ 

Cross-examination continued — On the dav nf v,- u ■ 
called, that is the 9th February von h * r it of bls bein g re- 

an hour before actually seen \ . und ® rstaiu l> just half 

-! d?d e S n p «“1, 0 L^ st th “* 7our - ■=“ 

had in your pos^siTn MrArmstrongfwrhte 6 ’ t°t C ° UrSe ’ y ° U 
long before. on & s wri *ten statement ?—Yes, 

i. •** *— 

“ ~<fi r “i^“ tXi. 

of i St£rct 0 . t ,T„ c w. cro “‘‘“" i “ li “ 

SontntS S“it mf 'SlT 

Up the poison book. It was a otehtr^IJy'^u and he fiIled 
go straight in the till ” T third- ^ an ® actl °o- The cash would 
say that Mr. Davies was actual I *T e heard the assi ^nt 

place ?_I think Mr Davies "avi 7 '^ 6 ^ at the time * took 

But Mr. Davies was Ic^ld den u bef ° re his ^ant. 
called afterwards. recalled, was he not?—Yes, he was re- 

. 5 .« 2? £ ^ *™ 

the sale took place, and that Mr' TW^ JT m . the sh °P when 
248 ’ Q tllat Mr ‘ Davles had reminded him to be 



Evidence for Defence. 

Thomas Alfred Matthews 

sure to colour it? —I do not recollect that 1 knew it. I remember 
that statement quite distinctly at some time or other. 

In the face of that, did you allow Davies to go out of the 
box without challenging that ? — Yes, apparently I did not do it. 

I would like to ask you about the discovery on the 9th 
February. Between your first visit to Mayfield on this 
search, that was the 2nd January, and the 9th February, had 
any people from your office been to Mayfield to your knowledge?— 
Yes, two or three. I had about sixteen clerks at that time. There 
were two who were particularly assisting me in this case; Mr. 
Olivers was one and Mr. Hawkrigg was the other. Mr. Smith 
also was there several times, because he went to arrange about 
the removal of the family. I also know that Mr. Olivers went 
once or twice with Inspector Crutchett. Mr. Hawkrigg went on 
one or two occasions. On one occasion particularly I sent him up 
for a specific reason, and the other occasion was when he went up 
to get some clothes, or went up with Mrs. Price or Miss Pearce 
to get some things, because I had the key. Miss Pearce left on the 
6th January, on the Friday following the day of arrest. I have 
already stated that on the 1st January Miss Pearce was present 
when the bureau was searched; indeed, it was she who pulled out 
the drawer. I did not ask her any questions about that before 
the magistrates. 

Have you noticed that no question was put by my friend to 
Miss Pearce as to that?—I do not know whether he knew that 
she was there. 

Have you observed that any question was put ?—I do not think 
so, and I have followed most of his cross-examination. On the 9th 
February I went to Mayfield for the purpose of inspecting the 
recipe which my clerk had previously taken a copy of at my request. 
Mr. Armstrong had a clerk called Phillips, who, *1 understand, had 
been up to fetch clothes for Major Armstrong. He, of course, 
knew nothing about the statement. I had not made up my mind 
by the date I made the discovery that when I went to Mayfield I 
would have another look at this drawer. The reason why I looked 
a second time was simply to demonstrate to my managing clerk 
where it was alleged to have been. 

By Mr. Justice Darling- —When did you first suggest in any 
proceedings that Mrs. Armstrong committed suicide?—I have not 
suggested it at all. 

You do suggest it here ?— Yes. 

It never was suggested until here at the Assizes ?—Ho, my lord. 

Cross-examination continued —At the first visit to Mayfield you 
went there with a fair expectation of finding the packet of arsenic 
in that drawer?—I cannot say that. I knew two detective officers 
and a police deputy chief constable had been there, and I did 
not expect to find it for a moment. 

Then I suppose you practically felt certain it was not there 

249 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Thomas Alfred Matthews ^ 

when y°u went thcr 6 on the second occasion?—I did, quite T 
pulled out the drawer to about the same extent as it\ad h« * 

P lrtht 6 + St ° CCasi ° n by Miss Pearce > «d I saw UthU 
hut this time you persevered ?—I did. n &- 

It must have been a profound surprise when you found +W 

was something sticking ?_That does not adequately exprei i 

My language, I know, is rather poor, but I nut it« A . 

as I^can; it must have been a very great surprise ?—It was, tremem 

m - 

from a” li did. 01 “* ”E h * 

Febrarr”” 7 “ h “ d S °‘ th> U ‘ i ” g itosl <'—0» tte 9th 

™ Elb“f “ 

abaolS.^fi” a«„“-Yr r “in* 

tiont'r’d “ .’o* 1 !:,ud to Mr. Crntoh.tt in cross-eiamina 

front-! do not th.ni I .aid anything; I may have. LTTZ 

daSEj 

that waa fonnd on J?r. W,..» 0 g i H o did “ ^ 

frhito paierShTnoTi" fr 7 wi™ ¥“° r^ 0 ** 1 pl * c<,d * h " 

I found in W ’ r at , was charcoal-coloured powder “ which 

In^on'pl^»^ P q t"fr, 0 LN*o k '* 0, &>pI *“ “ “» “>»*“ 

y»,^t<ssr i ,^i*did Mr - Cru,cl ““™ put “»• 

and 1 ST D iir n qU ¥ 0n i iS thi - the Statement th at he made, 

ft * WhirlSVy'mlw'MrUlong 

on SatarJy I ".Ct *»“>*/»* th, offlo. 

from Miss Pearce and Mrs PrS^^ tbrf^T 611 ^ Wer ® taken 
search was made of ihe m Kni i riC6 ‘ ™. thorough an -d systematic 

gave ml eve^v facditv a ® f 0use - J 1 ™' Price and Miss Pearce 
tain articles were if bl h ^i mstron ^ offered to show me where cer- 
The searching of the house tf" 0 PP t °. rt ™ % of going to the house. 
■sso g h was P ractl cally done on Saturday night. 



Evidence for Defence. 

Thomas Alfred Matthews 

Since Mr. Matthews was instructed I have had every facility for 
searching the house or office. I was informed before the house 
was locked up and the inmates removed what was being done, 
and at the same time 1 was informed that every facility for search¬ 
ing would be given me, and that I should have reasonable oppor¬ 
tunity for obtaining information from Mr. Armstrong's stall at 
his house and office, but that offer was withdrawn yesterday." 

Mr. Justice Darling —Are those answers in cross-examination ? 

Mr. Vachell —Yes. 

Mr. Justice Darling—T hen every one of those such as if I 
received every assistance " was a leading question? 

Mr. Vachell —That is so, my lord. 

Gross-examination continued —Mr. Matthews, knowing you as 
one does, it is inconceivable that you could have put those ques¬ 
tions and obtained those answers unless you believed that they 
would be assented to by Mr. Crutchett?—Yes. 

That being so, and remembering the knowledge that you 
thought you had, do you not think there is some little mistake 
about the discovery of this arsenic in that drawer ?—I do not. 
I am not quite sure what you mean. Do you mean that 1 did 
not discover it? 

Kg, the difficulty in my mind, knowing you as a very "honour¬ 
able and upright gentleman, is how you could have really made 
those suggestions of full assistance to Mr. Crutchett if all the time 
you knew that there had been concealed from him one of the 
most vital facts in the case?—That is before the 9th; I did not 
know at that time. 

By Mr. Justice Darling —But you knew then that your client, 
the defendant, had told you that in that drawer in the bureau 
there was some white arsenic?—I did. 

Yet you put these questions?—I did. 

Re-examined by Sir EL Curtis Bennett —Let us see what the 
questions are. ££ There was not the slightest obstacle placed in 
the way of my search by either Mr. Armstrong or the clerks." 
Where did that search refer to?—To the office. 

££ They gave me every information and assistance." Is that 
still referring to the office ?—Yes. 

££ I had every facility for searching the office, and every 
assistance from the clerks up to Monday evening." Still the 
office?—Yes. 

“ After finishing at the office on Saturday I went at once to 
Mayfield. Statements were taken by me from Miss Pearce and 
Mrs. Price. A thorough and systematic search was made of the 
whole house. Mrs. Price and Miss Pearce gave me every facility." 
Every facility to search. Is that the question?—That is so. 

“ Armstrong offered to show me where certain articles were 
if he had an opportunity of going to the house. The searching 

251 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Thomas Alfred Matthews 

of the house was practically done on the Saturday ni°ht ” T„ 
that right?—That is so. 43 * s 

“ Since Mr. Matthews was instructed I had every facilitv 
for searching the house or office.” Is that true?— That was J 
I wrote a letter to that effect before I locked the house up. 

Those were the questions that you put to him? _Yes. 

You were asked whether anybody was cross-examined or anv 
defence of suicide was put forward at the Police Court?—I wa s^ 
I was going to take an opportunity of explaining that if my lord 

Ju°ions & l0W m6 ' Ther6 W6re ° ertain T uest i ons put about the de- 

.. A “ d to Miss Pearce about suicide.?—Yes; some of these were 
elicited by my learned friend, Mr. Micklethwait. That was 
present to my mind when his lordship asked me. 

_ By the time when the expert doctors were called, was it quite 
obvious to everybody that this case was a case that would have to 
be tried before a judge and a jury 1 ?—Yes. 

That being so, you did not cross-examine any of the exnert 
witnesses?—No. I did not ask a single question. P 

Because it was desired the committal should take place as 
early as possible, so that my lord could fix a date for the hearing 
of the. case ? Yes, that is what was in my mind when I men¬ 
tioned it a moment ago. 

xir I . do , not c l uitei understand what the suggestion is against you 
My friend says we all know you as a very honourable and upright 
man. With regard to the clerks who were in your employ Mr. 

—Yes 18 ’ y ° U t0ld US ’ y ° U llad a ver y high character of him? 

And Mr. Hawkrigg; what do you say about him?—He was 
with me as a boy, left me for a short time, and then joined up. 

OTer r «^ e r.« Came w r °? th n Arm ? returned > and has been with me 
ever since. He has been with me about seven years. He is a 

young man of the highest character. 

exeenWitWbf 1 ?*’] ^ a ^ thin g to do with this matter 

except with the family and children 1—At that time nothing on 

At aQ y rate, he is here and can he called. He is 
a man of high character also; he has been with me for many years 
Ihe other man whose name was suggested was Mr. Phillips, Major 
Armstrongs clerk. He also is available as a witness. P Outside 

9th February 6 " 6 ^ ° therS Wh ° W6nt to this house prior to 

_ Henry Reginald Chivbrs, examined by Sir H. Curtis Bennett 
. “ managing clerk to Mr. Matthews. I have been with him 

cZL + Tf ili86< ! “- 1918 - 1 h ave assisted him in the 

conduct of the defence of Major Armstrong. On the 9th February 
1 was present at Mayfield with Mr. Matthews, and I saw him go to 

."■ 202 '. ■ . ® ■ 



Evidence for Defence. 

Henry Reginald Cis.brers 

the little drawer at the bottom of the bureau, in the middle. 1 
saw him pull the drawer partially open first of all, and it then 
stuck; he put his left hand inside the drawer and a moment 
or two afterwards pulled out a blue paper packet which con¬ 
tained a packet of arsenic, and which has been produced. It was 
opened in my presence. It was afterwards replaced in the same 
position as it had been when Mr. Matthews pulled it out. On the 
14th February I was present when Dr. Ainslie was there, and in 
Dr. Ainslie’s presence the packet was again taken out and sealed 
up in a tin. 

Dr. Frederick Sherman Toogoqd, examined by ■ Mr. 
Bosanquet —I am an M.D. of London. I am a lieutenant-colonel 
in the R.A.M.C., and I hold a military O.B.E. I have had 
twenty-five years’ experience as medical superintendent of Lewis¬ 
ham Hospital, and advisory medical officer in lunacy for the 
Borough of Lewisham. 1 am in practice at Dr. Johnson’s Build¬ 
ings, Temple, and I am advisory medical officer of various insur¬ 
ance" companies. I am constantly engaged in investigating cases 
of accidents and industrial diseases, and I have made over 7000 
post-mortem examinations. I have examined numerous cases for 
life insurance, and also for the Treasury as well. I am a path¬ 
ologist to the London County Council. I have had experience of 
cases of arsenical poisoning. I have seen one fatal case of acute 
poisoning, one case of acute poisoning which recovered, and I have 
seen several cases of sub-acute poisoning, and also of chronic 
poisoning. I have seen many cases of poisoning from other causes. 

I have been in Court and have heard the evidence which has been 
given by the witnesses for the prosecution, including a specialist. 

I also heard Major Armstrong’s examination-in-chief yesterday. 

I have had an opportunity of reading through the depositions and 
reports in this case. 

First of all, with regard to the period between 1915 and 
August, 1920, in my opinion Mrs. Armstrong was suffering from 
auto-intoxication caused by chronic indigestion, associated with 
the presence of gallstones. She also suffered from neuritis and 
rheumatoid arthritis. Indigestion itself is a very common cause 
of auto-intoxication; the part of the anatomy where the poison is 
elaborated is in the large bowel. She also had albuminuria 
at times, and there was evidence of a dilated heart 
with a murmur. Both these conditions are frequent accompani¬ 
ments of auto-intoxication. The presence of gallstones suggest 
that the digestive processes and the subsequent dealing with the 
digested material were faulty; the natural processes were not pro¬ 
ceeding normally. I have heard_ the description which has 
been given of the neuritis from which Mrs. Armstrong^ suffered 
during those years up to August, 1920. I should describe it as 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Dr Frederick S. Toogood 

an effect of auto-intoxication. It is a neuritis which, existed in 
a number of places, but which did not come under the professional 
term usually known as multiple neuritis. There is a definite 
clinical condition known as multiple neuritis, and that condition 
was not present, at any rate in its entirety. There may have been 
the beginnings of it, but it was not present in its entirety before 
August, 1920. Coming to 1920, the symptoms described indicate 
that she was obviously suffering from melancholia, which is a form 
of unsoundness of mind. The condition in which she went away 
to the asylum was, I think, obviously a condition known as acute 
melancholia, in which there is an acute physical disturbance. 
There is increased rapidity of the heart, there is an increase of 
temperature, there is often congestion of the surfaces of the lips 
and of the fingers, there is frequent vomiting, and, at any rate, 
in this particular case, this disturbance would be particularly 
likely to result in albumen in the urine. Prior to August, 1920, 
there were no symptoms pointing to arsenical poisoning, but prior 
to her removal to Barnwood there were symptoms which were con¬ 
sistent with arsenical poisoning. They were also consistent with 
other causes. It is the routine practice of institutions to give 
the nurse a bowl to he taken on the journey to the institution to* 
prepare for any vomiting. Retention of urine is very common 
in melancholia, and it is one of the things which is always tested 
before a patient is sent from one institution to another. In this 
case I should say it was retention of urine. Suppression of urine 
is a very grave matter. As regards the loss of power in her arms 
and legs after her admission to the asylum, I believe that was a 
functional weakness grafted on to the previous neuritis. I have 
heard in the evidence that in the beginning of October she was 
given doses of arsenic as a tonic. Assuming that she had already 
been given arsenic, the effect of that would be to increase any 
effect upon the nervous system. 

With regard to the evidence which you heard given, that she 
improved after this tonic was given, what do you say?—I think that 
she was not suffering from any arsenical effect upon the nervous 
system. I have heard the report that was made by Dr. Soutar, 
after consultation with Dr. Townsend. In my opinion, that report 
pointed to the condition being functional. I say that because of 
the symptoms which were lacking when Dr. Soutar and Dr. Towns¬ 
end examined her. A person suffering from arsenical neuritis 
in any degree is paralysed in the hands and the arms and legs, and 
he is unable to change his posture. I heard the evidence that in 
this case Mrs. Armstrong was able to change her posture. That 
is in Dr. Soutar’s report. There were two other symptoms in the 
report which also confirmed that view: one was that there was 
no delayed contraction of the muscles, and the other was that there 
were no fibrillary tremors. Delayed contraction means that, when 
254 . 



Evidence for Defence. 

Dr Frederick S. Toogood 

the patient is told, say, to move the foot or the finger, there is a 
long interval between the patient getting the instruction to do 
it and the action. An ordinary person, of course, when he is told 
to move his finger, moves it quickly, but a patient with peri¬ 
pheral neuritis does not. There is a material interval between 
receiving the order and carrying it out. With fibrillary tremors, 
when the muscle contracts, one can see the muscle trembling. In 
my opinion, Mrs. Armstrong had not peripheral neuritis in the 
asylum. I heard Nurse Kinsey’s evidence with regard to her 
being called in to help her to dress and undress. In my opinion, 
that indicated that she was still suffering from functional weak¬ 
ness of the limbs. Dr. Hincks examined her on the 11th 
February, and I have heard the report. I attribute the 
state she was then in still to functional neuritis or functional 
weakness. High-steppage gait is produced by a patient suffer¬ 
ing from weakness of the muscles oi the front of the 
leg, which is often present in functional diseases. Absence of knee 
jerks is also often found in functional diseases. . Having heard 
the evidence, I say there was no evidence consistent only with 
arsenical poisoning up till the 16th February. Having heard the 
whole of the evidence in regard to the course of her illness, and also 
in regard to the post-mortem, I say that in all probability the 
cause of her death was arsenical poisoning caused by arsenic taken 
about the 16th February, but none before. It must have been a 
large dose. 

By Mr. Justice Darling —By a large dose I mean anything 
over 10 grains. It may have been less, but at any rate it was a 
large dose. I should call 10 grains a large dose, and T should 
also call 7 or 6 grains a large dose. I think more than 6 grains 
must have been taken in this case. I have not the remotest idea 
how many grains must have been taken, because vomiting upsets 
the whole calculations. I think that more than 6 grains was taken 
in this case, because of the amount that was found after death. 

Examination continued —Supposing she had taken a large dose 
on the 16th, and having heard the symptoms of the illness from 
which she suffered, how do you account for the symptoms; what 
in your view happened 1—In my view a large portion of the arsenic 
became encapsuled. 

Is that encysted?—It gets covered with mucus and becomes 
attached to the wall of the stomach. It may remain in that posi¬ 
tion, or at any rate a part of it—perhaps the whole—for some 
days, then a portion will become detached and dissolve and get 
into the intestine. The symptoms that we observed were the same 
as I would expect in a case of this kind. I myself have had ex¬ 
perience of a case where a patient took a large dose. In that 
case the patient lived seven days. I heard the evidence with regard 
to what was found at the post-mortem, and I have heard about 
the amount that was found in the various portions of the intestines. 

255 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Dr Frederick S. Toosfood 

1 find from Mr. Webster’s report that in the walls of the stomach 
there were 2.5 milligrams; the amount in the stomach contents was 

2 milligrams; the amount in the jejunum, which is the second 
part of the small intestine—there is no mention made of the first 
part of the small intestine in this report—was 1.16; and on^refer¬ 
ring to the jar No 3 in Mr. Webster’s report I see that the jejunum 
and contents weighed half an ounce. The jejunum is between 
6 and 7 feet long. Then the ileum contained 9.1 milligrams. It 
is in the same bottle. A portion of the ileum and its contents 

was 2 ounces. . 

Having regard to this report, what deduction do you draw 
from what you found ?—I should like to have it explained to me 
how it was the jejunum and the ileum were apparently in the 
same bottle, and yet some inference has been drawn from it; those 
were obviously in the same bottle. 

Sir IT. Curtis Bennett —Yes, they were. 

The Attorney-General —I do not think there is any doubt on 
that. If your lordship looks at the report it gives the various 
jars.* No. 3 is labelled “ A portion of the jejunum and contents, a 
smaller piece, and a portion of the ileum and contents, a larger 
piece.” They are not liquid, they are pieces in substance. 

The Witness —But their contents would be liquid, and if 
they were together, and close together, I say that no inference^can 
be drawn as to the amount which is contained in one or is contained 
in the other. Not only that, but I also notice that one weighed 
half an ounce and the other weighed 2 ounces. 

Examination continued —You have heard the inferences that 
have been drawn from this?—Unless some explanation is forth¬ 
coming, I say those inferences are absolutely valueless. 

Some question was asked as to the possibility of migration 
after death %—Migration after death is a well-known thing which 
occurs in cases of arsenical or other poisoning, and it is impossible 
to form any correct opinion from the findings of a post-mortem 
made several months after death as to what was the condition 
at the time of death—that is to say, any correct deductions. 

Just explain what you mean by migration ?—To put a homely 
instance, migration is the process which takes place when you 
put a piece of meat into salt. The salt gets in the outside and 
gets right through the meat; exactly the same thing happens when 
arsenic is in the inside of a body. It travels; it migrates or 
creeps. 

Supposing that this large dose was given on the 16th Feb¬ 
ruary, would that, in your opinion, account for what was found 
at the post-mortem?—Quite. 

Would it or would it not also account for the symptoms which 
were shown during life 1 —Yes. I have heard the evidence with 
regard to Mr. Martin. The symptoms which I have heard de¬ 
scribed are consistent either with an attack of acute indigestion 

256 



Evidence for Defence. 

Dr Frederick S. Toogood 

or gastro-intestinal influenza, or any irritant poison, which 
would include arsenic. Assuming a fatal dose of arsenic was taken 
at or about half-past five in the afternoon, I think it would be. 
exceedingly unlikely that the person would he likely to be able to eat 
dinner at half-past seven. The vomiting would be • delayed, of 
course, for some hours, particularly if it is taken . on a full 
stomach. But there would be some nausea, some feeling of sick¬ 
ness, some time before the vomiting. 

By Mr. Justice Darling —Is there anything in what Mr. 
Martin describes from which you could say he had not taken 
arsenic at tea time?—There is a symptom which is decidedly 
against it. That is the fact that he returned to work in, I think, 
four or five days, and I think a person who had taken a fatal 
dose of arsenic would be exceedingly unlikely to return to work 
after so short an interval, the constitutional disturbance would 
be too great. I think it would take at least a fortnight before 
he got over it suffi.cien.tly to return to work. 

Examination continued —I have heard that the vomit was 
offensive at the beginning. There is nothing in an arsenical vomit 
to make it offensive, rather the reverse. I have also heard that a 
small quantity, l/33rd of a grain, was found in Mr. Martin's 
urine in a sample taken on the 30th October. I also heard the 
evidence in regard to what he was given in the way of medicine. 
First of all, with regard to the bismuth, samples of bismuth may 
contain a considerable amount of arsenic. By a considerable 
amount I mean there is a case on record where a medicinal bis¬ 
muth contained .44 per cent, of ordinary white arsenic. It 
was very bad bismuth. It is one of the cases quoted in Witthaus. 
During the war there was impure bismuth. A good deal of it 
was imported from America. As to how it got on to the market 
I cannot say, or whether it actually got on the market I do not 
know. Before the war it used to come from Germany. The same 
remarks apply to sulphate of magnesia, but it does not contain 
nearly so much. As regards the way in which the sample was 
taken, 1 should say that the sample was not taken in a scientific 
way at all. In the first place, I heard that the bottle previously con¬ 
tained peroxide of hydrogen. Arsenic is a constant impurity of 
peroxide of hydrogen. Assuming that there was any arsenic in the 
bottle, the washing that I have heard described would not-neces¬ 
sarily remove it. It is conceivable that it might under certain con¬ 
ditions. The proper way would be to go to a laboratory and 
get an arsenic-free bottle. If that were impossible, then the bottle 
should be washed with arsenic-free acid. It ought to be then 
thoroughly washed out with distilled water and tested for arsenic. 
It should be taken by the doctor to the patient, and the urine 
should be passed in bis presence. The washing water should be 
sent to the analyst at the same time as the sample of urine was 


s 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Dr Frederick S. Toogood 

taken, in order to see that there was no arsenic in the water 
itself. Arsenic powder is a light substance. Of course, it can 
adhere to a bottle more easily. The cork, I understand, was a 
new cork, but it should have been taken from a fresh packet, 
and not a cork that was lying about the shop. There would be 
no arsenic in the cork; there is only the question. of arsenic 
getting on to the cork, the arsenic being manipulated in the shop. 
The same remark would apply to the bottle. 


The Court adjourned. 



Ninth Day— Wednesday, ,12th April, 1922. 

Dr. Frederick Sherman Tqogood, recalled, cross-examined by 
the Attorney-General —The two cases of acute poisoning which I 
referred to, one of which recovered and the other which was fatal, 
both occurred in 1899. As regards the case in which the patient 
lived for seven days, that was not within rny experience; that was 
a case from a book. I have known of death following chronic 
arsenical poisoning. I refer to the beer epidemic in 1901, I think 
it was; there were several cases then, and some of them died. It 
was, roughly speaking, about twenty years ago. I am not what 
might be called an analytical chemist, but I have made quali¬ 
tative analyses during the last twenty years to find arsenic. I 
have not made a quantitative analysis; I have merely tested for the 
presence of arsenic; I have not made any examination. to find the 
quantities of arsenic. I should emphatically place Sir William Will- 
cox as one of the greatest authorities in the kingdom on arsenical 
poisoning; he is the highest authority I know throughout the whole of 
the United Kingdom. As regards Dr. Spilsbury, he is a man who 
has had unrivalled experience in post-mortem examinations; there 
is no one in the United Kingdom who I would suggest has a greater 
experience than Dr. Spilsbury. Mr. Webster is a man wlm holds 
a very high reputation as an analytical chemist. I can think of 
no one better qualified than Mr. Webster, on whom I would rely 
for an analvsis in the positions I hold. I have already said that 
between 1915 and August, 1920, in my opinion Mrs^ Armstrong 
was suffering from auto-intoxication caused by chronic indigestion, 
and it was associated with the presence of gallstones, and she 
suffered from neuritis and rheumatoid arthritis. One does not 
always find permanent and increasing swelling of the joints in 
rheumatoid arthritis. In a well-marked case there is abundant 
evidence of the joints getting stiffer and stiffer, and there is a 
bony swelling of the joints. Gradually the patient becomes 
crippled with it. 

What symptoms are you referring to in Mrs Armstrong when 
you say that she suffered from rheumatoid anthritis?—-From Dr. 
Hincks’s description of the attack she had in the wrist. Dr. 
Hincks described it, I believe, as chronic rheumatism. As regards 
the muscular rheumatism in the right arm which was put in a 
sling, I believe there was a swelling of the wrist, and it passed 
away; I heard that in October, 1919, Mrs. Armstrong was once 
more able to play tbe piano. 

Putting those facts quite fairly, do you think that the symp¬ 
toms of Mrs. Armstrong were definitely symptoms of rheumatoid 
arthritis?—Yes, I think that attack in the wrist was an attack of 

259 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Dr Frederick S. Toogood 

rheumatoid arthritis; I do not see what else it could have been. 

I do not think it could have been muscular rheumatism in the wrist 
if there was any swelling. There are actually no muscles in the 
wrist. I think the fact that one has a swelling that passes away 
definitely shows that there is rheumatoid arthritis in the joint. 
One may recover from rheumatoid arthritis to this extent, that it 
may not come on again, but I suppose theoretically each attack 
would leave a little damage, hut I doubt if it could be discovered 
without opening the joint. 

Do you not think that Dr. Hincks would have said it was 
rheumatoid arthritis if it were so?—I do not know; I am afraid 
I cannot answer that question. 

He says, ££ I treated her for rheumatism ,J ?—But that would 
be the same thing as rheumatoid arthritis. It is a commoner term 
than rheumatoid arthritis. Everybody who has so-called chronic 
rheumatism of the joints has rheumatoid arthritis; the terms are 
used more or less interchangeably. By chronic rheumatism I mean 
chronic as distinguished from acute rheumatism, acute rheumatism 
being rheumatic fever. 

We have got one case in the summer of 1919, when she had a 
swelling which passed away. Does that, in your opinion, justify 
the word ££ chronic ” ?—Yes, because it was not acute. 

All rheumatism, then, that is not rheumatic fever and not 
acute is rheumatoid arthritis ?—It must be rheumatoid arthritis. 

By Mr. Justice Darling —Arthritis means inflammation of 
the joints. 

Cross-examination continued —Does anybody who at one time 
for a month or two had rheumatism have arthritis ?—Rheumatoid 
arthritis. As regards the gallstones, I would not say these are 
very commonly found in a number of people; they are not infre¬ 
quent in post-mortems, hut I would not say that they are commonly 
found. 

Unless there is some infection of the gall bladder, is there 
really any sinister interpretation to be placed on their presence?— 
Yes, they are a source of considerable trouble by reason of their 
mechanical presence. 

That is not what I am putting to you. If the gall bladder 
is not infected, is there any sinister interpretation to be placed on 
the presence of gallstones ?—No, they would not cause any consti¬ 
tutional symptoms; the symptoms would be local and not constitu¬ 
tional. I quite agree that in some cases gallstones cause no 
symptoms directly referable to the gall bladder; the gall bladder 
will support the presence of large numbers of gallstones for an 
indefinite period of time. I would not cavil at the statement that 
in cases where post-mortem examinations are made on women over 
sixty years of age 25 per cent, are found to have gallstones 
Indigestion is a very common complaint. In my opinion, every- 

260 



Evidence for Defence. 

Dr Frederick S. Toogood 

body who has chronic indigestion is suffering to a certain extent 
from auto-intoxication. 

Are we to say that everybody who has indigestion is suffering 
from some auto-intoxication 1 —Yes, I should say that, but I should 
qualify it by saying that in the vast majority of cases it would 
cause no signs or symptoms at all. W hen I referred to neuritis 
I was speaking of scattered neuritis—a nervous pain here, another 
there, and another in some other direction. Multiple and peri¬ 
pheral neuritis are the same thing. As a rule you have one cause 
which you can pick out, one central cause which operates through 
the system to the distant parts of the body. 1 have heard nothing 
to lead me to suppose that Mrs. Armstrong had peripheral neuritis 
before August, 1920. If there was rheumatoid arthritis you would 
find indications of it post-mortem in the body if the joints were 
opened. I cannot agree that Dr. Spilsbury would have found 
signs of rheumatoid arthritis if it had been present, because it is 
not the custom in every case to open joints, and, besides that, 
if this were a solitary attack of rheumatoid arthritis, I doubt 
very much if there would be anything very noticeable after the body 
had been buried for ten months. 

Because this rheumatoid arthritis would have cleared away 1— 

I cannot say there would have been no microscopic effects, but^ I 
doubt very much whether one attack of rheumatoid arthritis, 
unless it lasted for a very long time, would cause a great amount 
of change in the joints. * Taking it that the rheumatism started 
in May," 1919, and in June she had her right arm in a sling, and 
by August it had cleared away, I should have expected to find signs 
in the body on a post-mortem examination. The auto-intoxication 
was a cause of the rheumatism. The cause of the auto-intoxi¬ 
cation was a morbid process going on in the large bowel, a putre¬ 
factive change due to the presence of abnormal micro-organisms. 
This process going on in the large bowel would not leave traces 
after death. Constipation and probably flatulence wcrald be 
svmptoms of auto-intoxication in the large bowel. I was in Court 
during the whole time Dr. Willcox, Dr. Spilsbury, and Dr. Hincks 
were being examined. I do not remember any questions being put 
to them on the question of rheumatoid arthritis. I do not think 
I suggested any question to Sir Henry in cross-examination. I 
have helped him to the best of my poor ability both before m well 
as in Court. Dr. Hincks stated that he examined her urine and 
found albumen shortly before she went away to the asylum, on 18th 
August. That evidently had cleared up and was all gone by 
the & 28th August, after she went into the asylum. I am not sure 
that I can recall that the urine was examined after that. Certainly 
it was not examined again at the asylum, because Dr. Townsend 
said so. Whether Dr. Hincks said so I am not clear. The albu¬ 
men in the urine continued for three or four days after her 
entrance into the asylum., and then it cleared away. That points 

261 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Dr Frederick S. Toogood 

to the fact that it was due to a transient cause. It might have 
been due to poison administered before the 18th. Arsenic does 
not always produce albuminuria in the urine. 

Suppose arsenic administered before the 18th August, 1920, 
would arsenic so administered have an effect upon the kidneys?— 
Yes. 

Would not the effect upon the kidneys be shown by the presence 
of albumen in the urine?—Yes, it might. 

And if the effect of arsenic upon the kidneys passed away, 
would you expect to find the albumen pass away ?—Yes, if the 
whole effect passed away. I should expect the arsenic to be opera¬ 
tive for several weeks, because the cause of the albuminuria, if it 
is produced by arsenic, is a fatty degeneration of the cells of the 
kidneys, and it also causes an inflammatory condition; that must 
take some appreciable time to clear up. It would depend, of 
course, very much upon the dose and the period of time the arsenic 
had been administered. If arsenic were administered for a long 
time one would expect to get more changes. I should expect all 
traces of arsenic to be gone from the body, except in the hair and 
nails, in about three or four weeks. I do not think my answer 
differs very much from Dr. Spilsbury’s and Dr. Willcox’s evidence 
when they said it would be got rid of in two or three weeks. 

If the albuminuria or the albumen found in August was due 
to auto-intoxication, why did it clear away in four days after 
admission to the asylum ?—Because that is the characteristic of 
albuminuria from auto-intoxication. , Auto-intoxication is one 
of the commonest causes of transient albuminuria which will come 
and go. 

What happens to the auto-intoxication, whether the albumen 
comes or goes. Does the auto-intoxication go on for ever?—The 
auto-intoxication generally goes on for a very, very long time; 
but the reason why the albumen appears, then disappears, is 
because something or other has temporarily damaged the kidneys. 

Taking the fact that albumen appeared on the 18th August, 
and disappeared on the 28th August, are you able to say that that 
was definitely caused by auto-intoxication, or may it have been 
also caused by doses of arsenic ?—Taking the whole picture, I 
have no doubt that it was caused by auto-intoxication. 

I am not asking you that. I am asking you to take your 
mind to August, 1920, and confine yourself to this, that you find 
albumen in the urine on the 18th August which clears away on 
the 28th. Is not that consistent with a dose of arsenic just as 
much as with auto-intoxication ?—Yes, taken by itself. 

We know that in September of 1920, while in the asylum, 
Mrs. Armstrong developed peripheral neuritis. We have had that 
from the doctors. Would not that be a sequence of arsenical 
poisoning ?—Yes, and of other things. 

262 



Evidence for Defence. 

Dr Frederick S. Toogood 

Let me put it in this way, to be fair to you. If she had l “|® 
doses of arsenic before the 18th August, and then was admitted 
to the asylum, would you not, if she had had that arsenic have 
expected the peripheral neuritis to develop 1—Yes, I think _ lfc J 
likely would have developed. I admitted yesterday that when 
she was taken into the asylum there were signs which were consistent 
with arsenical poisoning. The fact that she developed 
the peripheral neuritis in September would be another symptom 
emphasising arsenical poisoning, provided the penpheral neuri 
gave all the signs of arsenical peripheral neuritis. _ The dila 
heart is also a symptom consistent with arsenical poisomn e . 

With all these symptoms, the heart, the albumen whi 
cleared away, thesubseqaeat peripheral B.aritie, why d. 
auto-intoxication to arsenical poisoning ?—I prefer auto-mtoxica 
tion and the condition of acute melancholia. I m f ever k eard ° £ 
arsenical poisoning emphasising melancholia. The melancholia 
mght be P due to° change of life as well as to auto-mtoxica- 
tion. You sometimes find melancholia accompanying change ol 
life Assuming that it was a case of auto-intoxication, the tonic 
that she was given, iron and a trifling dose of arsenic would be 
a very good tonic to give her. All traces of that arsenic so given 
as an ingredient of the tonic would pass away m the course of two 
or three weeks after it had been taken, except m the hair and 
nails I should think, had the paralysis been due to an arsenical 
origin this tonic with the arsenic in it would have retarded th 
recovery. Her progress, on the contrary, was practically con¬ 
tinuous 7 towards betterment. Fibrillary tremors during the con¬ 
traction of the muscle are symptoms of multiple neuritis. It 
a symptom of spinal cord disease, also of multiple neuritis. 

I have just looked, and I find in Osier and. Witthaus and 
Dixon Mann—all books of great authority—there is no reference 

made to fibrillary tremors as a symptom of ^H^^that thlre 
I know it as a result of my experience. I should say that there 
are no books of greater authority than Osier. I have heard 
what has been described as high-steppage gait after she came ou 
of the asylum. That is not typical of arsenical neuritis, it is a 
constant accompaniment of peripheral neuritis. It 
stantly present in arsenical neuritis. I agree with Sir William 
Osier when he says, in his " Principles and Practice of Medicine, 

“ Arsenical paralysis has the same characteristics as lead palsy, 
but the legs are more affected than the arms, particularly in the 
extensors and peroneal group, so that the patient has the ch 
acteristic high-steppage gait of peripheral neuritis. 

Am I right in saying this high-steppage gait is a character¬ 
istic of arsenical peripheral neuritis!—It is a characteristic symp¬ 
tom of that. It is not confined to that. Arsenical peripheral 
neuritis would, of course, produce that gait, so would other things. 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Dr Frederick S. Toogood 

I am not talking about other things, I am confining myself to 
a case where you have got arsenical neuritis. In a case of arsenical 
neuritis is not the high-steppage gait characteristic 1—Yes. 

My friend put the question of high-steppage gait to you. You 
said it is often present in functional disease. ££ Q. The absence 
of the knee jerks.—A. That is often absent in functional disease. 
Q. Having heard the evidence, do you say yes or no, was there 
any evidence consistent only with arsenical poisoning up to 16th 
February?— A. None.” I want to ask you about this, the knee 
jerks in the case of functional disease, you say that is often absent 
in functional disease?—Yes. 

In a case where the paralysis is a functional disturbance are 
the knee jerks increased or normal?—They are certainly not in¬ 
creased ; they may be normal; they may be very difficult to elicit. 

Let me see if I have got the point quite clearly.’ x ' You would 
regard this condition of Mrs. Armstrong as functional because of 
the absence of knee jerks?—No. 

I have got your answer. The absence of knee jerks—you say 
that is often absent in functional disease. I thought you were 
speaking of Mrs. Armstrong’s case? —I am, but that was Dr. 
Hincks’s observation. He found the knee jerks absent. 

Would this absence of knee jerks point to functional disease? 
—No, it would not. The fact that there were no knee jerks would 
point away from functional disease or disturbance. I would not 
expect to find the knee jerks increased where it was functional; 
they would be either normal or extraordinarily difficult to get. 

I have got what Sir William Osier says about that— <£ In 
functional disease the reflexes are usually increased, deep reflexes 
especially never being absent”?—Surely that is not referring to 
functional paralysis. 

Yes. Let me give you two passages?—Of course there are 
functional diseases in which they are increased, but not functional 
paralysis. 

Usually in trying to find whether it is functional or not you 
would look at the reflexes, would you not?—Yes. 

If it was functional you would expect to find them increased, 
would you not?—No. 

Let me read what Sir William Osier says— <c Reflexes may be 
increased, though the knee jerk is often normal.” Do you agree 
with that?—Yes. 

Then the fact that there were no knee jerks, the absence of 
knee jerks, points away from the condition being functional, does 


* In. justice to Dr. Toogood it should be observed, with regard to this 
passage in the cross-examination dealing with reflexes, that the Attorney- 
General appeared to desire answers upon functional disease in general, while 
Dr. Toogood was answering on the case of Mrs. Armstrong in particular.-— Ed. 
264 



Evidence for Defence. 

Dr Frederick S. Toogood 

it not?—Yes; I have already said that it does, although I qualified 
it by saying sometimes they are extremely di&cult to elicit._ 

You see absence of knee jerks was put to you_ as being an 
indication, and you said that is often absent in functional disease; 
but, as I understand what you say now, you would expect the knee 
jerks in functional disease to be present or increased?—I expect 
it to be present, but I should not expect it to be_ increased m its 
functional condition. Of course, there are functional diseases m 
which they are very much increased. 

The fact that they are there is a helpful symptom on which 
to diagnose that the disease is functional ?—Yes. In a ease ot 
poison like arsenic I would expect vomiting to come on before 
diarrhoea: but there, again, symptoms of arsenical poisoning are 
extremely variable. I should, however, expect vomiting first and 
diarrhoea afterwards. In the case of arsenical poisoning the tem¬ 
perature, as a rule, is not much afiected. The tendency would 
be to an increase, if anything. If in the case of Mr. Martin the 
symptoms had been vomiting first, diarrhoea afterwards, tem 
perature giving no particular assistance, and arsenic found m 
the urine! I would certainly think these symptoms indicated 
arsenical poisoning, if you could rely upon the arsenic having 

been passed in the urine. .... ,, ■. 

What do you mean by having said m this case you attach 
some importance to the fact that the urine was not passed m_the 
presence of the doctor ?—Because it is not a scientific test. I do 
not mean that if it has been passed in the presence of the doctor 
there would have been no arsenic m it. I have had no cases in 
my own experience of encapsulation of arsenic which delayed 
these symptoms. I remember the question was put to Dr. ppi s- 
bury and Dr. Willcox, and they were asked if they m their ex¬ 
perience had known of encapsulation of arsenic, and they answered 
they never had experience of it. I said I should not have ex¬ 
pected anybody who had taken a dose of arsenic at 5.30 to have 
eaten a dinner, or at any rate a good dinner, at 7.30, 

Did you observe in the evidence that he left Mayfield at o.3U, 
got home at seven, and complained of nausea ?—I should have taken 
that as an additional reason why he would not have eaten any 

dinner. . _ ( 

At the urgent solicitation of his wife he ate some dinner, 

although he was not inclined for it? -Yes. . , 

I suppose if any encapsulation ever took place it might have 
occurred in the case of Mr. Martin and delayed the symptoms?— 
I do not see any evidence of encapsulation there. 

Supposing he had taken it with the arsenic enclosed m food, 
took it in some scone: or bread and butter it might have been 
for that purpose encysted or encapsuled m the food he wok i i > 
it does not become encapsuled in tbe food; it becomes encapsuled 
on the coating of the stomach. ^gg 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Dr Frederick S. Toogood 

By Mr. Justice Darling —Why should not the arsenic be¬ 
come encapsuled on the coating of Mr. Martin's stomach ?—I do not 
see why it should not. I do not see any evidence that it did. 

Where is the evidence that it did in the case of Mrs. Arm¬ 
strong—not that it might?—The long-continued illness. 

Cross-examination continued —I will pass to the last matter— 
migration. The liver is enclosed, is it not, in what I might call a 
tough protective tissue called the capsule ?—Yes. 

That encases the liver, does it not ?—Yes. 

Perhaps it is not in composition very different from the 
bladder ?—It has a membrane round it. That membrane would 
not prevent the migration of the arsenic or anything else from 
the liver, because the process known as osmosis goes on, by which 
the membrane takes up fluid one side and passes it out of the 
other. I do not suggest that it did in this case; I do not suggest 
that any material quantity of the arsenic passed from the liver, 
because there was such a large amount found in there that there 
was not room for it to hold much more. In the case of the in¬ 
testines they are encased in the peritoneum, and the same remark 
I made about osmosis would apply to that. 

That depends on whether or not, first of all, the arsenic has, 
so to speak, percolated through the walls of the bowel into the 
peritoneum, and then through the walls of the peritoneum ?—Yes, 
of course presuming the arsenic was in solution. This osmosis 
only goes on where there are liquids on each side of the membrane. 

Therefore, unless you have a case where on the outer side 
of the bowel and on the outer side of the peritoneum there was a 
liquid, this migration would not take place?—No, osmosis would 
not—the oozing conceivably could. Osmosis is a particular form 
of diffusion. I do not remember Dr. Spilsbury saying that the 
contents of the abdomen in this case were not liquid. 

By Mr. Justice Darling —If he did, it would make all the 
difference ?—It would make all the difference as far as osmosis, 
but it would not make all the difference as regards the oozing. 

Cross-examination continued —I agree that on this matter Dr. 
Spilsbury is a past master of post-mortem cases, and if any¬ 
body knows anything about oozing and osmosis Dr. Spilsbury 
would. As regards the parts of the smaller intestine, the jejunum 
and the ileum, they are two continuous parts, and the jejunum 
passes into the ileum. I heard it stated that the walls of the 
bowels were still intact. 

Therefore, taking them as pipes, whatever passes out of the 
stomach in due course passes down the pipe of the jejunum and so 
down into the continuous pipe called the ileum ?—Yes. It then 
travels down in the ordinary way to the caecum. I heard Dr. 
Webster state that the jejunum had 1.6 milligrams, the ileum 9.1, 
and the caecum 37.6. Evidently the arsenic was travelling as one 
would expect it to do, passing along through the jejunum into the 

266 



Evidence for Defence. 

Dr Frederick S. Toogood 

ileum and down into the cmcum. It hadpassed through the jejunum 
down to the ileum into the caecum and collected there. The tact 
that the larger quantity was found in the cecum points to the tact 
that the arsenic was passing down m the ordinary course. 

Re-examined by Sir H. Cubtis BE^BTT-Although I cannot 
aspire to the eminence of the doctors that the.Crown haxe heen 
able to call, I have had thirty-six years’ experience as a doctor, 
and during that time I have conducted over seven thousand post¬ 
mortems myself. During the whole of that time l have had con- 
stant practice of medicine and also surgery. Like many other 
doctors I am a member of the bar, but not a practising member 
It is not possible to get gallstones if there is normal bile and 
a normal state of the galf bladder.. If you do ^ * 

means that there is some disease going on somewhere. As I have 
alreadv stated, two signs of auto-intoxication being m progress are 
constipation and flatulence. The pills Mrs. Armstrong was m the 
habit P of taking were aperient pills. They were taken foi cons _ 
nation You have, therefore, undoubtedly evidence of consti 
pation." Flatulence is very often called indip** 1 on In thi^c:ase 

therefore you have both constipation and flatulence. From the 
S»c that I here got of the hktory of this .dy from 19W 
till 1919 I am of opinion that auto-intoxication of a more or less 
severe tvpe was going on. Assuming it was going on, it would 
lead to “peripheral neuritis. The distinction between P erl P^® ral 
neuritis caused by auto-intoxication and peripheral neuritis caused 
by arsenic is that the tenderness of the muscles on pressing is much 
more pronounced in arsenical or any other metallical poisoning, 
it is not a marked sign of peripheral neuritis due to auto-mtoxi- 
cation In this case it is" clear that there is no evidence of 
tenderness of the muscles. Taking that symptom.into considera¬ 
tion it makes me form the opinion that the peripheral neurit 
was * the result of a continuation of the auto-intoxication, 
was asked whether, if there had been a dose of arsenic gijen be¬ 
fore the 18th August, that might cause the albumen which was 
found on that date. Auto-intoxication would also cause that 

albumen., ^ a i b , s ca used by 

-mfcrEf it clear ut) or not, as this did, by the 28th i—xes, airni 
minuria caused by auto-intoxication has that peculiar cha ™ cter ^° 
that it comes and goes; that is why one so frequently has to haje 
another examination for life insurance. There is nothing m my 
opinion in the finding of albumen on the 18th August, which dis¬ 
appeared on the 28th August, to show that that 'was csaused >7 
arsenical poisoning. It is perfectly consistent with auto-intoxica- 
tion Peripheral neuritis is not a certainty m cases where arsenic 
Ctalimtmi T.k. the e.s. of Mr. M.rtm . = 
was administered there, there certainly was no sign of penpheral 

. neuritis. 267 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Dr Frederick S. Toogoodi 

By Mr. Justice Darling —Would you expect it from one dose? 
—It has come on after one dose. 

Would you expect it?—Mo, I should not expect it, because the 
cases where it does not occur are more numerous than those where 
it does occur. 

He-examination continued —The Attorney-General put to you, 
did this peripheral neuritis give all the signs of the arsenical 
peripheral neuritis, and I understood you to say just now that 
you would expect tenderness of the muscles, which was absent ?— 
That is so. I would also expect to find tenderness of the nerve 
trunks, but that was absent also. You also find in peripheral 
neuritis numbness; the sensory symptoms are very common. I 
would expect to find numbness in peripheral neuritis caused by 
arsenic. As far as I know, there was no evidence of numbness 
here. 

You were asked whether dilatation of the heart was consistent 
with arsenical poisoning. Tell me, in relation to this case, what 
dilatation of the heart would also be consistent with ?—Auto-intoxi¬ 
cation is the most common cause of dilated hearts. I have never 
known any cases of arsenical poisoning where acute melancholia 
has followed the dosing by arsenic. 

You were asked as to an answer by Dr. Spilsbury concerning 
the question of, first of all, the giving of arsenic in Barnwood for 
a month. In your opinion, would the giving of arsenic for a 
month to the extent of 1 /7th of a grain per day materially affect 
the progress of a patient if that patient was suffering from arseni¬ 
cal poisoning ?—In my opinion it would not only have retarded it, 
but it would have made it worse. 

I agree with what the Attorney-General has said, the evidence , 
is that during the whole of the time at Barnwood this lady was 
progressing. Are you able from that fact to form any opinion 
as to whether she was suffering from arsenical poisoning in August, 
1920, or not?—I should say it is a very, very strong factor against 
it. High-steppage gait is not consistent only with peripheral 
neuritis caused by arsenical poisoning; it is also consistent with 
peripheral neuritis caused by auto-intoxication. As regards the 
absence of knee jerks, in the case of nervous women, one dose 
would not be sufficient for one to form an opinion as to whether 
the knee jerk was present or not. In one case which I had I 
tried on three different occasions before I could get the knee Jerks. 

You were asked whether you had any personal experience of 
the encysting or encapsulating of arsenic in the stomach, and you 
were asked whether you agreed with Dr. Willcox and Dr. Spilsbury 
when they said that they had had no personal experience. Do 
you also agree with those two gentlemen that such instances do 
occur?—They do. 

I want to draw attention to one answer of Dr. .Spilsbury—-" 

Arsenic has been found encapsuled or encysted in the stomach; 

268 



Evidence for Defence. 

Dr Frederick S. Toogood 

on© case I remember where the patient died of acute poisoning 
very rapidly.” Putting it quite straight, do cases of the en¬ 
cysting of arsenic in the stomach take place 1 ?—They do. 

And, if they take place, do you then get the arsenic gradually 
coming away from the stomach?—Yes. If you found arsenic 
being encysted in the stomach, and gradually coming away, you 
would then find that arsenic going on down through the jejunum 
and the ileum into the caecum, which is what was found in this 
case. Having heard the whole of the evidence, having read the 
whole of the depositions, having considered carefully the evidence 
which has been given by the other doctors, in my opinion the 
arsenic from which Mrs. Armstrong died was given in one big 
dose on the 16th. 

By Mr. Justice Darling —I stated yesterday that I had read 
Dr. Townsend’s and Dr. Soutar’s report on Mrs. Armstrong while 
she was in the asylum, and that it pointed to her condition being 
functional as distinct from organic. I relied for that jon . the 
report where it says, “ The subjective sensations of which the 
patient complains are common in functional disorders, and the 
distribution and variability of the objective alterations in sensa¬ 
tion which are ascertained point to a functional disability. The 
postures of arms, legs, hands, and feet, which Mrs. Armstrong 
assumes, and her gait suggest functional rather than organic 
trouble.” I recollect Dr. Townsend when he was re-examined said, 
cf I must now say that I do not think the opinion that Mrs. Arm¬ 
strong’s state was entirely functional was correct; at one period 
there was an organic cause as well.” I remembered that when I 
gave my answer. I do not think that contradicts the report. 

Dr. William Ainslie, examined by Mr. Bosanquet — I am an 
M.D. and a F.R.C.S. of Edinburgh, and I practise in Hereford. 

I was present at the post-mortem examination on the body of Mrs. 
Armstrong. The joints were not opened; there was no examina¬ 
tion whatever made during the examination to find whether .she 
had any rheumatoid arthritis or not. I have followed the evidence 
in this case very carefully. Having regard to the history from 
1915 onwards of Mrs. Armstrong, I should say that the probable 
cause of her condition when she went to the asylum was that she 
was a chronic invalid and suffered from chronic indigestion—as 
it has been said, “ a martyr to indigestion ” for years. She had 
chronic constipation, with gallstones, and that condition brought 
on-.toxaemia or auto-intoxication, or whatever other name one likes 
to apply to it, which produced the whole of the symptoms up to 
that time. In my opinion the effect of the arsenical tonic, con¬ 
sisting of 1/7th of a grain, taken three times a day, had she 
already been suffering from arsenical poisoning, would have been 
to make the neuritis worse. Having heard the whole account of 
Mrs. Armstrong’s last illness, and also the account of what was 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Dr William Amalie 

found at the post-mortem, I am perfectly certain myself that she 
died of a large dose of arsenic, which was taken about the 16th or 
17th. I cannot give the date because of Dr. Hincks’s hazy evi¬ 
dence about his dates at that time. 

By Mr. Justice Darling —Then it comes to this, does it, that 
in your opinion the first dose of arsenic, except the little mixture 
in the asylum, was the first dose of arsenic she ever had*?—Yes. 
Examination continued —And the last ?—And the last, 

Mr. Justice Darling —And the only dose? 

Examination continued —I say that this is quite consistent 
with the symptoms found during life, and what was found at the 
post-mortem. I heard the evidence with regard to Mr. Martin. 
As regards the bottle, I do not think it was the proper method to 
take a test at all in a serious condition like this. If I had been 
doing it I should have sent to the laboratory and asked for an 
arsenic-free bottle to start with. I would do that, because there 
is sometimes arsenic in the glass itself. 

By Mr. Justice Darling —In the glass of which the bottle is 
made?—Yes, but not enough to count. 

Examination continued —I should get two of these bottles to 
start with, and then I should wash out Die bottle a few times and 
boil it so as to have a better chance of dissolving out any arsenic 
there, and the last washings I should send with the bottle as well. 
The powder of arsenic is not a light powder. It is a heavy 
powder. I heard the evidence of Dr. Toogood as to bismuth, 
sulphate of magnesia, and peroxide, and I agree as to the fact of 
arsenic being an impurity of each of those substances. 

Cross-examined by the Attorney-General —As regards how I 
came to attend the post-mortem, I got a telephone message from 
Mr. Matthews asking me to go to the post-mortem examination, 
as it was a very important case. I did not know anything about 
the case. I was there merely as a representative of the prisoner. 
The only bones opened were the head pieces, and the middle side 
of the femur was removed, but no joints were opened. I do not 
suggest that they should have been opened, but I was asked had 
any special examination been made to see if there was any arthritis. 
It is not a thing one would generally do at all. If there had 
been any signs externally of rheumatoid arthritis I am sure we 
would have noticed them,' and then no doubt the joints would have 
been opened. I do not recollect of any question being put to 
Dr. Spilsbury about opening up the joints to see if there^ was 
rheumatoid arthritis. I never saw Mrs. Armstrong as a patient; 
I did not know anything about her. What I have been saying is 
based on an opinion formed on what I have heard in the cross- 
examination at the trial, the post-mortem examination, and The 
reports. I cannot say that I have had many cases of arsenical 
poisoning in my practice. I have seen them, hut not in Eng¬ 
land. I have seen one or two cases dealt with by specialists, 
270 



Evidence for Defence. 

|>r William Amalie 

which made me take an interest in it, but I do not place my 
opinion on a level with Sir William Willcox. Some years ago I 
saw cases in China. As a matter of fact, I have had no cases 
of acute arsenical poisoning in my experience. I know Dr. Hincks 
very well. I have often met him professionally. I have had 
consultations with him in difficult cases. I have known him 
altogether for about twenty years, _ and during that time I have 
always known him as a doctor of high standing. 

You said Dr. Hincks, having experience ol this case, in fact 
was hazy. Is that quite a fair description, do you think ?—Well, 
perhaps"not, but Dr. Hincks’s evidence is so little—after the woman 
has been dead ten months. 

I s if?—With the exception of his visiting list. 

Is that what a doctor like Dr. Hincks ought to make his 
record in, in his visiting hook?—If you bring that in, the doctor 
in the Magistrates Court said he had only one note in his visiting 
book except the word neuritis.” 

I am, sure you do not wish to tell Dr. Hincks how he should 
conduct his business, or that he should tell you how to conduct 
your business?—No. 

Dr. Hincks was summoned on the 16th February by telephone, 
and he has told us, referring to his book to refresh his memory, 
that he paid one of the first visits on that day to Mrs. Armstrong 

early on that day?—Yes. , 

I want to call your attention to that, because what I thought 
you said was this, that apparently Dr. Hincks’s visit was on the 
evening of the 16th or the morning of the 17th? Tvo, I did not say 
that. I said that the nurse said it was the 16th and Dr. Hincks 
said' it was on the 17th. It was Nurse Allen who said that. If 
you take the whole of the evidence altogether it does not agree 
in a great number of places between Nurse Allen, Nurse Lloyd, 
and Dr. Hincks. I am satisfied that Mrs. Armstrong did have a 
large dose of arsenic either on the night of the 16th or the early 
morning of the 17th. Supposing she was found to be suffering from 
vomiting and pains in the stomach, and so on, eaily on the morn¬ 
ing of the 16th, that would point to a dose of arsenic already 
having been taken by her, but Dr. Hincks was not sent for till 

the 17th. _ 

We have it as to 16th February that he was summoned by 
telephone, and the evidence is it was his second visit on the 
morning of the 16th. Are you implying that Dr. Hincks did not 
visit Mrs. Armstrong till the evening of the 16th or the morning 
of the 17th?—No, I thought Dr. Hincks said he did not go till 
the 17th. It would he the nurse who was wrong. I put the ques¬ 
tion of the time Mrs. Armstrong had a dose of arsenic at. some 
time before Dr. Hincks visited her. 

And if he visited her early on the 16th, when there were 
these symptoms, the dose must have Been some time on the 15th?*— 
J 271 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Dr William Airasli© 

Oh, no, that does not follow at all. She was well, I think, on 
j5th, and she was ont on the ld-th in the garden, and X think 
the evidence of somebody yesterday was that she was well on the 
15th, so it could not be then. 

But supposing he was summoned by telephone early on the 
16th, and he finds her vomiting and suffering pain in the stomach, 
and so on, would those symptoms be symptoms of arsenic 'Yes. 

I a»ree she died of arsenical poisoning. If she was found to be 
sufiering like this early on the 16th, if she took arsenic, it must 
have been taken before those symptoms appeared. I should think 
that she must have had a dose of arsenical poison half an hour 
to an hour before the nurse found her in the condition in which 
she said she found her on the early morning of the 16th. I have 
already said that I have never known of a case of encapsulation 
in poisoning in my experience, but I liave looked up authorities, 
and I find that it'is not unusual. I think Dr. Spilsbury said it 
was not uncommon. 

If this were & case where arsonic was encysted, would the 
symptoms come on in half an hour'?—Most certainly they would 
have come on. We do not know in the first place how the arsenic 
was taken. If the arsenic is in milk or Benger’s food, for instance, 
it all varies. What happens is, some of the arsenic becomes en- 
cysted, and a little is spread over the stomach, and a lot of 
crystals get stuck to the stomach, but parts become encysted, and 
some passes on, and the arsenic becomes dissolved m the first part 
of the symptoms and the rest is blocked by mucus, but.it is there. 
Those are cases where a pouch has been^ formed and it has been 
encircled by the stomach wall, but that is not my argument, and 
we did nut find it at the post-mortem. We have cases where a 
solid block of arsenic (there is no question of this being liquid, 
it must have been solid'), some of it gets surrounded by mucus. 

By Mr. Justice Darling—- Are you arguing what did take 
place or might have taken place 2 —I am arguing that it might have 
taken place. No one denies the possibility of it. ( A 

Mr. Justice Darling — I will refer to what Dr. Spilsbury said 
on the subject. “ I remember a case in which the encysted arsenic 
was found in the stomach, and, as far as my recollection goes, the 
patient died rapidly.” . 

Cross-examination continued —-I want to know, did you or did 
you not find any encysted arsenic in the stomach at the post¬ 
mortem examination 1 ?—I did not expect to. 

Perhaps you will answer the question. I want to treat you 
as an expert—you did not?—No, I did not. 

A portion of the arsenic taken at some time before these 
acute symptoms came on—a part acted and part encysted? Yes. 

The part encysted gradually ceased to be encysted and acted 
later; is that it?—Yes, it is incorporated. 

272 



Evidence for Defence. 

Dr William AinsHe 

Now, will you tell me, except for some cases in the book, 
have you ever known of this encysting taking place 1—No. The 
hook I refer to is Blythe's “ Poison and their Detection," last 
edition. It is also referred to in a number of other books. 

Is it not remarkable that, if encysting takes place, neither 
Sir William Willcox, Dr. Spilsbury, nor Dr. Townsend ever met 
a case of it ?—Yes, it is, because it is so frequently mentioned. I 
am almost certain it is to be found in Witthaus. 

Sir EL Curtis Bennett —The first reference, 1 think, is at 
page 449. 

Cross-examination continued —I will read the passage refer¬ 
ring to it—“ A girl of nineteen confessed to having taken arsenic 
during the morning, and it was thought she took it at eleven 
o'clock in soup. No very serious consequences were observed be¬ 
fore evening, although she several times changed colour, and gave 
other signs of suffering and anxiety. She dined fairly well at 
2 p.m. At 7 p.m. she vomited with extreme violence. She was 
seen at 11 p.m. by Tonnelier, who observed the symptoms ol 
severe arsenical poisoning." A little later on is the question of 
encysting. “ In the stomach was found a cyst, in which traces 
of the vessels could be seen and in the interior of which was thin 
partitions, forming a cellular structure containing fragments of 
crystalline arsenic of varying size. In the opinion of Dipuytren 
this cyst dated from one of the previous attempts at suicide." 

That means that in that girl's stomach there was, in conse¬ 
quence of attempted suicide by arsenic, a cyst forming a cellular 
structure ?—Yes. 

And some of this arsenic got into this, and a part was formed 
in part of the stomach of that girl?—Yes, I think that was in my 

mind. 

And this case was not a case where the arsenic was walled with 
mucus round it, but a case in which there was a cyst attached to the 
stomach of the girl?—Yes. 

And it so happened that arsenic got into that little pocket 
attached to the stomach ?—Yes. 

And then, unless there were a growth or pocket attached to 
the stomach, it would not have happened?— Not in that case. 

Come now to page 497, which is the passage I referred to. I 
think I shall have to go a little back to the case of Regina v. 
Madeleine Smith. “Professor Penny separated 3.2 grains of 
crystallised arsenic from the stomach. These particles are most 
frequently found in the stomach, but they have also been found 
elsewhere, in the duodenum, in the ileum and jejunum, in the 
large intestine, and in the mouth and between the teeth. In an 
early case a cyst containing crystallised white arsenic was found in 
the stomach." This is the one case in which is given the passage 
I referred to of Madeleine Smith, and has no reference to a cyst 

273 


T 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Dr William Amslie 

at all?—No, but it has reference to the particles found in the 
stomach, attached. 

But may we keep to one thing at a time ? 

Mr. Justice Darling —We are talking about arsenic that 
may become encysted or encapsuled. In Madeleine Smith’s case, 
if I remember, she gave a Frenchman a large dose of arsenic in 
a cup of chocolate, and some was found in the man’s stomach. 

The Attorney-General —Yes, I think a cyst was found in 
the stomach, not that the arsenic had been encased. 

The Witness —It does not necessarily follow. 

G toss' examination continued —With regard to page 526, I 
think that refers to the length of time arsenic would remain in 
the stomach, because it says, “ In a case of accidental poisoning 
in which death occurred in three days, Aguilham and Barse found 
arsenic in the stomach by Marsh’s test. In a suicidal case 
in which death occurred in two days de Bartholomew found 
crystals of arsenic in the stomach.” I have also read the passages 
on page 526, where it is stated, f< With regard to the maximum 
limit of time during which some portion of a poisonous dose of 
arsenic may remain unabsorbed in the stomach, the data are 
equally unsatisfactory. In very few fatal accidental or suicidal 
cases of long duration have analyses been made. In the case of 
the Due de Praslin, whose death occurred on the sixth day, arsenic 
was found in the intestines in a small amount, but no mention 
is made of the result of the examination of the stomach, although 
that organ was submitted to the experts.” I do not find in those 
passages any case recorded of what has been called balled or 
capsuled arsenic, but it says there, as regards the length of time 
in which the arsenic remains in the stomach, the data are equally 
unsatisfactory. I cannot tell at what time Dr. Hincks first called 
on the 16th February. I do not think the symptoms from which 
Mrs. Armstrong suffered before that time were consistent with 
arsenical poisoning. High-steppage gait is not necessarily con¬ 
sistent with arsenical poisoning. 

I did not say “ necessarily.” I asked, is the high-steppage 
gait consistent with arsenical poisoning ?—Yes, it is consistent 
with arsenical poisoning, and it is consistent with a great many 
other things. 

I dare say, and the murmur in the heart, is that consistent 
with arsenical poisoning?—No, but it might occur. Vomiting is 
a symptom I should expect from arsenical poisoning, but it does 
not always occur. I believe I have heard of cases that have 
occurred where the person died without vomiting. 

In the case of Mr. Martin, I think this history of 1/33rd of 
a grain in the urine indicated nothing to you?—If I were abso¬ 
lutely certain that this man had passed that urine with that 
quantity of arsenic in it, then he must have taken some arsenic to 
have given him that amount. 

274 ■ ' 



Evidence for Defence. 

Dr William Ainslie 

Supposing alter lour days he passed I/33rd of a grain, what 
do you think he would have taken four days previously ? We have 
absolutely no data upon which we can go to say. 

Are you familiar with a paper written by Sir William Will- 
cox in 1917 on arsenic to be found in urine some days after the 
administration of arsenic 1—That paper was written on the ab¬ 
sorption of salvarsan. I am not familiar with that paper. I 
knew before I came to this Court that Sir William Willcox had 
made a number of tests. 

And did you know that he had made a particular study of 
traces to be found in urine after arsenic had been administered 
some days previously 1—After salvarsan had been administered. 

That includes arsenic I—'Yes, but there is no comparison. You 
cannot compare the results. 

If Sir William Willcox says you can, do you say you cannot? 
—Most certainly I do, because the salts are quite different. Sal¬ 
varsan is an extremely soluble salt and the other is extremely 
Insoluble. 

And may X take it irom you that the tests of Sir XYilliam 
Willcox are quite unreliable?—Oh, certainly not. 

Do you say that the evidence given by Sir William Willcox as 
to the amount of arsenic found in the urine after the administra¬ 
tion of arsenic is all incorrect?—I have not said so; but h© said 
it was done through using salvarsan; when he used salvarsan one 
cannot compare the results. 

Then you differ from Sir William Willcox in that?—The one 
is Injected into the veins and the other is taken into the stomach, 
unless he says he does it with oxide. 

Do you know he has also tested white arsenic 1 No; if he 
says so 1" agree. 

Do you know that these results are found in white arsenic 
as well ? If he says he has done it with white arsenic would you 
accept it?—Yes; I always accept an expert. 

And do you agree that Sir William Willcox is the greatest 
authority on arsenical poisoning?—Yes; at least I do not know 
any better; I cannot think of anybody better known. The margin 
allowed for arsenic as an impurity in bismuth by Act of Parlia¬ 
ment is very small, but it does not follow that those Acts passed 
during the war are still operative. If it is stated in Taylor that 
the limit of arsenic allowed In bismuth should be two parts of a 
million, I should say if used with a greater margin of arsenic It 
was improper. But then there Is a law stopping men driving motor 
cars beyond a certain speed, but it is not always observed. What I 
mean is, to put It shortly, those laws were very special during the 
war. I do not dispense my own medicines. _ I do not think it is 
right to cast any slur on Dr. Hincks’s dispensing. I know 

275 ' 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Dr William Ainslie 

Messrs. Philip Harris <fc Co., of Birmingham. They are a firm of 
high repute, a trustworthy firm from which to get ingredients. 

Do you think they could he trusted to supply bismuth ?—Yes; 
but there is no reason why you should not get a sample which 
might not be up to the standard it should be. We know there are 
many things like that. 

If you had sent that sample up to Dr. Webster and received 
his report, would you have treated his report as valueless!—No, I 
do not say his analysis was wrong; I accept it at once. 

Re-examined by Sir H. Curtis Bennett—You asked to refer 
to certain things you had read in Witthaus, and I want to 
draw your attention to this passage on page 496, one of the pass¬ 
ages referred to—“ An examination of the surface of the mucous 
membrane with the aid of a magnifying glass will, if the poison 
has been taken in the shape of a crystalline powder, usually reveal 
the presence of minute particles firmly adherent to and embedded 
in the layer of mucus or even in the substance of the membrane.” 

Is that one of the matters you had in your mind!—Yes Arsenic 
is sold in a variety of forms. It is sold as what is known as 
white arsenic, but the solubility is different in each kind. In 
this case it was a mixture of the whole lot altogether, and the 
symptoms are not the same. In Blythe I find a single dose of 
arsenions acid may cause a prolonged fatal illness. dhat is the 
case I had in mind. The man endeavoured to commit suicide 
and took a large dose of arsenic, and lived for six days. He had 
symptoms of arsenical poisoning going on the whole time. _ 

By Mr. Justice Darling —I had read of the case of the Due 
de Praslin before I gave my evidence, and 1 had told Sir H. Curtis 
Bennett about it. It was not because it was a case of six days, 
and it was six days before the death of Mrs. Armstrong, that I told 
Sir H. Curtis Bennett about it. , . _ , 

How did you fix on six days before her death for the dose that 
killed herl—Because, as I answered before, I did not think the 
symptoms occurring before the 16th were due to arsenical poison¬ 
ing. 

Dr. Joi-in Steed, examined by Mr. Bo banquet — I am a doctor 
of. medicine and a master of surgery of Edinburgh, and I ain m 
practice at Stanton, on the Wye. I have been in Court during 
part of the hearing, and I have also studied the evidence m the 
case of Mrs. Armstrong. X have read the reports. Having regard 
to the whole of that evidence, I should say the cause of her con¬ 
dition when she went into the asylum in August, 1920, was un¬ 
doubtedly some internal condition from which she had been suffer¬ 
ing for a long time. That condition caused Her to have^ symp¬ 
toms of indigestion, rheumatism, forms of neuritis, and gall¬ 
stones. I look upon the gallstones as a symptom reacting back 
•on the original cause. I heard that Mrs. Armstrong had a tonic 
276 



Evidence for Defence. 


Dr Joins Steed 


given to her for a month while she was in the asylum, which con¬ 
tained 1 /7th of a grain of arsenic per day. Assuming. that she 
had already taken arsenic into her system and was poisoned by 
arsenic, in my opinion that tonic would retard recovery and 
probably increase the symptoms. Having heard part of the evi¬ 
dence, and having studied all the evidence with regard to Mrs. 
Armstrong'’s symptoms, and having heard what was found at the 
post-mortem, assuming also that arsenic was the cause oi her 
death, I should say that it was taken in the form of solid arsenic 
in a large dose on the 16th February, in the morning. I heard, 
the evidence of Dr. Ainslie with regard to Mr. Martin, and also 
the evidence of Dr. Toogood. 1 agree with what was stated by 


LJJLGAU. , 

Cross-examined by the Attorney-Gbisferal —I ^agree with what 
they said about the standing and reputation of Sir William Will- 
cox, also of Dr. Spilsbury and Mr. Webster. I have not had many 
cases of arsenical poisoning. I was present while the doctors^ were 
being examined on the Crown side, with the exception of Sir 
William Willeox. With regard to August, I put down Mrs. Arm¬ 
strong’s condition at that time to what has been called general 
toxaemia I know that in life the diagnosis of arsenical poisoning 
is a little difficult; there are other poisons which cause 
symptoms very similar. If Mrs. Armstrong had been suffering from 
poisoning from arsenic she would have multiple neuritis after the 
effect of arsenic had ceased; at least I would expect that to come 
on after the immediate symptoms of the arsenical poisoning had 
passed away. I do not care to give an opinion on when to expect 
the arsenic to pass away from the body, quite apart from the nails 
and the hair. Assuming that she had a vomiting on the loth 
February, that might he quite consistent with arsenical poisoning. 

In view of the fact that we know she did die from arsenical 
poisoning, do not these symptoms of which you have been good 
enough to speak point to it being arsenical poisoning before the 

16th?—In my opinion, no. . , 

What I want to get from you is when did the symptoms that 
you said are consistent with arsenical poisoning cease ?—Indi¬ 
vidually ? . . , , 

When did they cease to be auto-intoxication and become 

arsenical?—When she had acute vomiting on the morning of the 


16th. , . , , 

What makes you say that?—The symptoms which we have 

heard from Dr. Hincks seem to me to prove fairly, almost de¬ 
finitely, with the nervous symptoms from which she was sufiering 
when she came back from Barnwood on the 11 th, I think, when 
the examination was made, that she was not sufiering certain y 
from arsenical neuritis. Her symptoms as detailed by him were— 
“ She had an absence of knee jerks, no ankle clonus, no planta 
reflex action, and this high-steppage gait.” I admit those may be 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Dr John Steed 

and are symptoms of arsenical poisoning, but there was no mention 
made of any tenderness along the course of the nerves. That, in 
my opinion, is a sine qua non; it is # a thing that you cannot 
make a diagnosis of multiple neuritis without finding. 

You are taking it from the evidence that Dr. Hincks said 
definitely that there was no tenderness ?—He said he did not know • 
he had not examined for it. 

I think his actual words were, “ I have no recollection ” ?— 
Perhaps it was in some deposition somewhere else. 

You know that sometimes depositions and the actual evidence 
given do not coincide completely ?—No. Dr. Hincks is well known 
to me. He would know quite well how to test reflexes. High- 
steppage gait occurs in arsenical paralysis. 

Re-examined by Sir H. Curtis Bennett— High-steppage gait is 
apt to occur in all forms of peripheral neuritis. 

Sir H. Curtis Bennett— That is my case, my lord. 

Mr. Justice Darling— I want to ask Mr. Matthews a question 
or two. 

T. A. Matthews, recalled, by Mr. Justice Darling —I want 
you to understand in what I am about to say I do not make the 
very slightest suggestion against the propriety of anything you 
did. You begin by understanding that?—I am much obliged. 

I want to ask you about the discovery of the arsenic in the 
bureau. As I understand it, from something said to you by the 
defendant, you went to look for that on the 1st January, and you 
then, from what had been told you, imagined you might find 
arsenic in that drawer where you ultimately found it ?- If it had 
not been taken away. I looked to find a packet of white arsenic. 

You did not find it on that day, and you went back and then 
you received some other instructions. In consequence of what 
he told you you went again ?—No; what I went again for on 
the second occasion was in consequence of what my clerk had told 
me in reference to the recipe; it had nothing to do with the white 
arsenic. 

You understood the police had not discovered the recipe, 
and so you went again on the 9th February to look in the drawer to 
see if the arsenic was there?—No, if I may very respectfully 
explain it, on the 9th February I went again expressly for the 
purpose of seeing whether the recipe was there, and of examining 
it, and it was after I had done that that I made a casual remark, 
which your lordship said I must not mention, to my managing 
clerk, and then I put my hand in the drawer. # / 

If there is no objection taken, I do not mind it?—I turned 
to him and said, “ This is the drawer where the white arsenic-/S; 
supposed to have been/* and I opened it. I found the arsenic. 
I placed it back in the drawer and took Dr. Ainslie on the fol¬ 
lowing Tuesday, and he saw it still in its place. Dr. Amslie 

278 



Evidence for Defence. 


T. A. Matthews 


took it away with him, and it was in his possession from that time 
onwards. I considered that that had a great bearing on the case. 

On the Friday I consulted Mr. Bosanquet; he was here on the 
Assizes; he was doing some other cases for me, so I consulted him. 

You are acquainted, I suppose, with the law concerning being 
an accessory after a fact to a felony ?—Generally speaking, yes. 

Did it occur to you that you must make your own position 
very clear ?—It impressed me so much that I went on the Sunday 
afternoon after seeing Mr. Bosanquet to see Sir Henry. 

You realised, I take it, that from that moment you might not 
destroy that arsenic 1—Yes, I had not the slightest intention. 

I said at the beginning I am not imputing a bit that you 
meant to do anything wrong; in fact, 1 am quite sure you did 

not? —I am much obliged. . _ 

What I want to arrive at is that you appreciated that it 
would not do for you to do away with that arsenic?—I did. 

Or to allow anybody else to?—Certainly. 

And you appreciated, did you not, that anybody who did that 
wonld most certainly be interfering with the administration of jus¬ 
tice. I suppose you have read Coke’s Institutes ? In my earlxei 

^^Tou realised that it would be at least that 1 I cannot say 
that I appreciated it to that extent, hut I realised I could not 

destroy (it.^ ^ degtroy ^ that wcmld be making yourself 

an accessory after the fact to a felony if you knew that the felony 
had been committed; after you had talked to Mr. Bosanquet. 

I cannot say that I appreciated it in that light. I will be quite 

Did you before this case came here look at the case of The 
King v. Levy in 1911?—No, I did not; I consulted Sir Henry, and 

I was quite content. , , 

Having consulted Sir Henry Curtis Bennett, you did not 
mind what Lord Coke thought or what Mr. Justice Hawkins 
thought?—If I may say so, I thought the responsibility was shitted 

I thoroughly appreciate your position. I say again, “O'? 0 .* 1 ! 
must think for a moment that you did not do everything which 
was perfectly right and proper such as a professional man acting 
for a prisoner ought to do in the circumstances. Ill migh g 
further, after what your lordship has said one of the reasons for 
going up on the 9th February was that I had arranged for the 
family to go back on the following day, and I wanted to take 
the opportunity of going up and inspecting the ^fore they 

went Back. Immediately we discovered this I took steps to stop 
the family going up till I knew what I could do. , 

I want everybody to understand that there is not the slightest 

279 ■ 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

T. A. Matthews 

reflection on you. If anybody thought it I should be the first to 
inform them that there is no ground for it whatever ?—I value that, 

my lord, more highly than I can say. 


Closing Speech for Defence- 

Sir H. Curtis Bennett —-If your lordship pleases—gentlemen 
of the jury, only two days ago I had the opportunity of addressing 
you, I am afraid at some considerable length, in opening the case 
for Major Armstrong to you. Having opened the case on that 
occasion at some considerable length, and, if 1 may say so, having 
realised how carefully you have attended to what 1 then ventured 
to put before you for your consideration, I hope in addressing you 
now for the last time to be able to confine my remarks to a very 
much shorter period of time than I occupied on Monday. Gentle¬ 
men, you have reached now very nearly the last stage of this most 
remarkable case, because to-morrow, I take it, you will have to 
consider, each one of you, your verdict, and you will have to give 
your verdict; and you will not forget when you do come to con¬ 
sider that verdict that it is a verdict not only of you twelve gentle¬ 
men collectively, but of each one of you individually. Each one 
of you is just as responsible for the verdict as any other one; and, 
therefore, each one of you will have to form your opinion 
absolutely upon your own view of the evidence; and, having formed 
that opinion, you will then consult together and be able to give, I 
hope, a unanimous verdict. 

After I addressed you on Monday his lordship cautioned you, 
or at least exhorted you, not to discuss the matter unduly until 
you had heard everything that could be said on either side. I 
must say, with respect, l a little regret that that caution was not 
given at the end of the Attorney-General's opening for the prose¬ 
cution on Monday of last week; and I a little regret, and I say it 
with great respect, that it should only have come when the defence 
was for the first time put before you, and that you had not it 
before you when you were going to hear the evidence given for 
the defence, because, if it was a good exhortation at all, it was 
an exhortation which in my view ought to have existed all through 
a trial which has such nice issues as this trial has. 

Mr. Justice Darling —I say at once that I regret I had not 
given the advice sooner. It is advice that I ought to have given 
the jury before, but I gave it the first moment it came to my mind. 

Sir H. Curtis Bennett —Yes, and I am sure your lordship 
will not mind my saying what I have. 

Mr. Justice Darling —Not in the least. 

Sir H. Curtis Bennett —I agree with what his lordship has 
already said, that if such advice were going to be given I regret, 
appearing as I do for Major Armstrong, that that advice should 

280 



Closing Speech for Defence. 

O l sir H. Curtis Bennett 

only be given when my time had come to put the prisoner’s case 

^Alfof you who know Mr. Matthews will be pleased that to-day 
and last evening a very strong stand was taken by the prosecution, 
and bv my lord, in withdrawing any sort of insinuation against 
that Gentleman’s good faith. It was thought necessary by the 
prosecution not <£ly to recall Superintendent Weaver, but also 
that o-irl Price—that some suggestion was going be 
somebody had put that little packet of arsenic into the bureau 
after the police had searched. That suggestion was the result of 
the course" taken by the Attorney-General during the case, and I 
desire now before‘i finally deal with the facts of the case, to say 
that I am most grateful for the assistance I have received m this 
case not only from both my learned friends, who have been oi the 
greatest assistance to me in a most anxious, difficult, and cornpli- 
fated case but I also desire, if I may, to express my grateful 
thanks to Mr. Matthews and those who have worked with him for 
the assistance they have given me. It is quite ™P 0SSlbl ® * 
conduct a case of this sort unless one has a number of loyal heip^- 
It is possible to come into Court and ask questions, but tiios 
Questions ^re the result of a great deal of hard work anxiety, and 
inquiry; and, although I put those questions do not imagine tnat 
T am not °rateful to those who have assisted me. 

Now 'gentlemen, for the last time let me point out to you 

again what in my submission shows what your verdict must be in 

this case, and I want again, if I may, to f s 

Monday morning, to take the two cases and look at them ^ the 
case that Major Armstrong administered arsenic to 

WM °e S that di Mrs “rnSrong wasTf suicidal tendency, and in 

r^omm-tteTsuic-r 3 "iTyou 

two points of view II^ whanW 

a proper conclusion here; and just 1 ®? a ® I ? Der ' , : ’ • f -u at i aY 

go 1 to consider your verdict, your verdict 

at that time It is no use your saying m a fortnight or a montn s 
time “ Well I hope we were right; I hope that verdict was right 
I hove there was not anything in that suggestion of her committing 
suicfde ’’ Let your minds have nothing of that sort to deal with 
in future life You have to give your verdict where you are after 
Ss lordship has summed up. You will then have to consider that 
verdict, and it has to be given then, and it is final. On aqm*tu>“ 
of law there might be an appeal, but, so far as your veidict is 

!L*r»d. it i.°.h»l«t.Ir »d *>»•* STf?. J .° U Co?S Of 

as sometimes gets into jurors minds, that there is a L 
Criminal Appeal, and that the verdict is not final. _ 

Now, quite shortly, what again is the position of this case? 
The prosecution set out to prove their case (not tomA 
suggestion, for that is so easy), not to say to one doctor after 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Sir H. Curtis Bennett 

another, is one system and another system consistent with arsenical 
poisoning, and so on. I do not know, bnt I should think you 
must be sick to death of rheumatism, multiple neuritis, neuritis, 
auto-intoxication, and peripheral neuritis. You have to decide 
the question not on a single answer of that sort, but you have to 
give your verdict, as I know you will, on the whole evidence in the 
case; and, taking the whole evidence in the case, you have to say 
to yourselves, are we, or not, satisfied beyond any reasonable 
doubt—which means the sort of doubt which may influence you 
in your ordinary affairs in life—that the prosecution have proved 
that Major Armstrong administered poison to his wife, from the 
effects of which she died? And if you are not satisfied to that 
extent, then there is only one verdict open to you, and which as 
honourable men you would desire to give. Gentlemen, doctors 
have been called on each side, and 1 want to say this, when a 
man is charged with an offence in this country he has 
not got the great advantages that the Crown has got, and I 
rather deprecate this sort of drawing of distinctions all the 
time between the position of a man like Sir William Willcox 
and Dr. Toogood, and between Dr. Spilsbury and Dr. Ainslie, and 
between Mr. Webster and any other analyst. Of course, the 
Crown are in a position to call the best-known experts in this 
country, but because they are in a position to do that, is not it 
rather a pity that when a man who is charged—and as I said to 
you on Monday morning it might happen to you to be so charged 
—that he can only call the best men he can get and that his purse 
will run to; and, gentlemen, you have heard these doctors on both 
sides in the witness-box, and I am quite content to leave this matter 
entirely to your judgment, for you have listened to the evidence 
most patiently, and to the witnesses for the Crown who were 
examined at great length, then cross-examined, and re-examined 
at great length. Nobody complained of their answers; nobody 
complained of the length of their answers; but when 1 was cross- 
examining, you will remember I was often told to wait for an 
explanation when 1 wanted yes or no. The doctors who were called 
for the defence—I am not complaining of my friend the Attorney- 
General—have been told to answer yes or no. They have been 
stopped when giving an explanation time after time. It is for 
yon to say whether my criticism is right or not, but I do submit 
to you that it was a pity that doctors, though they may not be on 
the one side in the position of Sir William Willcox, are yet gentle¬ 
men of great experience and honour who have come here to tell you 
to the best of their knowledge the true explanation of this case, and 
I am certain that you will take their evidence into your considera¬ 
tion just as seriously as that given by people who have been accus¬ 
tomed to give evidence and are experts in the truest sense of the 
word. Suppose it were not a murder case where any question of 
poison came in, or if it were an abortion case, these gentlemen 

282 -v. 



Closing Speech for Defence. 

^ 1 Sir H. Cttrti* Bennett 

give evidence as do Dr. Spilsbury and Sir Willia “ ^ illc ^‘ 

Ire accustomed to give evidence over and over agam and ^ng 
accustomed to give evidence, they go into the witness-box, ana 
you notice how extraordinarily careful they are and 
to give a studied answer; and all I say is that Aosej£nta® 

Iho have had not so much expert experience or f ^Af l medlcS 
have had, perhaps, a good deal more ordinary'business ofaxgd** 
m ,. their ordinary experience as a doctor. nr. ji.ins.iie ^ 

Dr Steed are well known, and are of great experience, and I as 
to take their evidence into consideration as seriously as the 
evidence given for the prosecution; and, directly you do that, what 
® + v, „„S+;nn vrai are in? That there are doctors for the prose¬ 

cution P on the one side, and three for the defence taking entire ? 
different views as to the symptoms in this case, and ° n a n n g 
tion of those symptoms are you going to say, when you are deal mg 
with a Question of life and death, We are goin B to p 
to twHnddisregard the three ”? Are not -tness^es^or 
the defence just as credible as those for the prosecu - _ . 

you are left in doubt and in the position of being able to say to 
“W. hear so much .boat Dr. SpiUtary 
William Willeox, but, on the other hand, we know 
and Dr. Steed ”—if you are left in that P°siti°n “ you 

that in dealing with a matter of this sort you will n , J 

ought to find, for tte pris.h.r J “ 

doubt, and that you will give a verdict oi n °* , Uttle 

From 1915 rio-ht up to 1919—1 will not deal with the Uttle 
detaMr. Lm;,r,ng P was suffering more or 
tism and loss of power m her bands and_ feet- A the!? were 

were in existence before May, 1919 and in , M ,ay 1919 they were 
s0 severe that Dr. Hincks is called in, and he tr eats her up 
August, 1920—perhaps in the early part ox th at }'e ar19 ^ it fee 

not suffering from neuritis m such a serious form, ft _ ,, t 

said that is a fair basis to start the case on? Can you s *y *bat 
up to August, 1920, Mrs. Armstrong was a normal healthy woma 
1, hid b«n suffering not only from n.nrrtis, 
loss of power in the hands and feet, but from indigestion l d 
not use the expression “ a martyr to indigestion, but she_had 
suffered from indigestion all that time, and you have heard 
the doctors“o-day that she was suffering from poisoning beisel, 
.wint to some of her organs not acting properly, and you will 

the svmptoms in this case are found to he consisten , J 
with the cause of the illness of Mrs. Armstrong up to February, 

1921 being the result of natural causes. , 

Then she goes to Barnwood Asylum on the 22nd August, 1920, 
and uptillthlt date, when these experts for tbe Crown are cross- 
examined, they have to admit that there is no evidence of arsenical 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Sir H. Curtis Bennett 

poisoning; but_they say up to that date, 22nd August, because 
there was vomiting that, therefore, there was evidence on that 
day of arsenical poison. ^ Of course, it is easy to take one 
symptom, as Dr. Steed said to the Attorney-General, and say 
if she was suffering from vomiting on the 22nd August, is not that 
a symptom of arsenical poisoning? Of course it is, but you have 
to see^ what her past medical history has been; and if there was 
vomiting that day, are you, because it is consistent with arsenical 
poisoning, to shut out everything else and say, “ We are satisfied 
that she was suffering from arsenical poisoning ” ? They pass 
then to the tests, the albumen and peripheral neuritis which came 
on a few weeks after. It is not suggested there is no evidence 
of rheumatism or neuritis, or that it was likely to become multiple 
neuritis. There was evidence of it for years past, but because 
they started with this suspicion of Major Armstrong, then when 
you get symptoms of multiple neuritis it is said to be due to 
arsenic. The history of the case is the other way. You can test' 
again whether that disease from which she was suffering in the 
latter half of. 1920 was due to arsenical poisoning or natural 
causes. You can test it in the best possible way, because it was 
agreed to by Dr. Spilsbury, as well as by Dr. Toogood, Dr. Ainslie, 
and Dr. Steed, that the administration of arsenic to the extent 
of A /7th of a grain a day, if she was suffering from arsenical 
poisoning at that time, would retard her progress, and in their 
opinion it would have brought out arsenical symptoms again, which 
undoubted fact was brought out by the Attorney-General when 
examining those doctors. This is a -question about which there 
can be no dispute. Is it not a case of working back and saying, 

■ because she was suffering from that on the 22nd w© come to the 
conclusion that she was taking arsenic in 1920? But of this there 
can be no dispute, that during the whole time that Mrs. Arm¬ 
strong was in Barnwood Asylum she was improving all the time. 
Is not that (you will consider it, and I only put it forward for 
your consideration) one of the best tests you can take? How can 
you in^the face of that evidence say, 61 We are satisfied that she 
was suffering from arsenical poisoning It is the strongest test 
you can get, and Dr. Spilsbury was bound to admit in cross- 
examination by me that if she was suffering from arsenical poison? 
ing you would expect her to have at any rate her progress.,:re¬ 
tarded, and it would probably have brought out other symptoms, 
and yet you find that administration of arsenic of 1/7th of a grain 
and her suffering from auto-intoxication, and if she was suffering 
from auto-intoxication you would expect, says Dr. Spilsbury and 
the other doctors, that sh© would be getting better from day to 
day, and that is what she did do. I believe that you can appreciate 
that as easily as I can ; but when you come to consider your verdict 
in this case, take that very seriously into your consideration, and 
284 



Closing Speech for Defence. 

Sir H. Curtis Bennett 

use it as a test, and do not take the test whether she vomited 
once or twice on a certain day, but take a test of that sort on 
which there is no dispute in the evidence; and when you come to 
test it in that way, in my opinion you can only answer in one way 
the question whether the whole basis of the prosecution is not 
founded on a falsity. 

The whole basis of this case is that in August, 1920, Major 
Armstrong started to poison his wife, and you must not forget 
that evidence as regards the affection and attention that were being 
displayed at that time by Major Armstrong to bis wife. You will 
not forget that this alleged poisoner at the moment he was going 
to set out to poison his wife, according to the prosecution, sends 
for the doctor, and for his sister-in-law, and for the best male 
friend of the family, and do not forget that, because it throws a 
great light, in my submission to you, upon the whole of the events 
which took place right away from August, 1920, to this unfortu¬ 
nate woman's death in 1921. We are bound to deal, as you will, 
with a case in Court as we would with our affairs outside. For¬ 
tunately, when we come into a Court of justice we do not leave 
outside that Court the common sense that years of experience have 
imbued us with. Is not it at any rate in the balance, if we come 
to consider the matter—a matter that weighs much in the balance 
of innocence—that a man who is alleged to be a poisoner should 
send for the doctor, and later, in February, you remember he said, 

“ Come and keep your eye on her ” ; that is what he said to Dr. 
Hincks—“ Do you think she must have a nurse ” %— C£ Certainly,” 
and everybody who was brought into contact with this woman 
and who was brought forward by the prosecution is alleging she 
was poisoned By the man who was doing all that. Is not it again 
apparent, is not it again a matter which is tremendously against 
the theory of the prosecution ( l She came away from Barn wood, 
as you know, on the 22nd January, and a great point was made 
of that—I do not know if it is still going to be made, for I am not 
in the fortunate position of being able to tell what the Attorney- 
General will say when he comes to sum up the case for the prose¬ 
cution. I have merely to anticipate what he will say to you; but 
I venture to think that what he does say to you will be a good 
deal different from what he said to you on Monday weak when he 
opened this case. I think you will find some of those points that 
he made have disappeared, and that some of the motives sug¬ 
gested will not be in existence. To take an example, I shall be 
interested to hear, as no doubt you will, seeing what the Attorney- 
General said in his opening—1st August, copy will; 4th August, 
Major Armstrong buying weed-killer; 15th August, Mrs. Arm¬ 
strong becomes ill, and so on to the time of the 22nd August, and 
you will remember that the Attorney-General said, “Mark the 
importance of those Sates.” We do, and we find that on the 4th 

285 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Sir H. Curtis Bennett 

August it was not a purchase by Major Armstrong at all of weed¬ 
killer, but a purchase by his gardener, and the whole of the pur¬ 
chase made on the 4th August had been used by the gardener, 
excepting a small tin. It may be interesting to see whether during 
the course of this case evidence will have come out which will have 
somewhat altered the way the case had to be presented to you. 
The case I have presented to you to-day you well know is the 
one I presented to you on Monday morning. The case I have pre¬ 
sented to you to-day is not altered one scrap or one iota from the 
case I presented to you on Monday morning. I wonder if the 
Attorney-General will make a point about Major Armstrong getting 
his wife away 1 The Attorney General said, “ Of course, he wanted 
to get his wife away, and not on leave, for if she were on leave the 
authorities would be making inquiry if she died in the institution, 
into her death.” Nothing of the sort. All that Dr. Townsend 
would have wanted to know was that a medical man had attended 
the deceased, and would be able to give a certificate. 

Now I am going very quickly over the time between the 22nd 
January and the 16th February, because the only importance of 
that period of time which affects us is when Major Armstrong on 
the 6th February called on Dr. Hincks and said, “ Keep your eye 
on my wife and see how she is getting on.” You are now within 
a few days of the 16th February, and can there be any doubt that 
Mrs. Armstrong had in her mind suicide'? She was talking of 
suicide to Nurse Kinsey, and as long as six months before 
Mr. Chevalier formed the opinion that she was likely to commit 
suicide. It is no stretch of imagination here if you accept 
the case for the defence, but it will be a very large stretch of 
imagination if you accept the case for the prosecution. I am 
not coming here and putting this case before you as 
that of a strong-minded, strong-willed person who never 
showed any symptoms of suicide, but the history of 
the case shows that you are dealing with a woman who was at 
this time off her head, and who, instead of being a woman of 
strong mind, had just come out of an asylum and was at this 
time talking of suicide. Where is there anything to wonder 
at that she did on the 16th February in fact commit suicide? 
There would be a great deal to wonder at if Major Armstrong 
had been trying to poison her. It would be against all the facts 
surrounding the evidence of the case, and against all the theory 
given by the different witnesses of the affection between them— 
it would be against his calling in the doctor and against the care 
he was taking of her. All those things are never consistent with 
his having poisoned her, but in my submission the whole, history 
of this case gets her info a position in which she was likely to 
commit suicide. You have to rely, as Dr. Ainslie said to-day, 
upon two directly contrary accounts of those last few days. You 
286 ■ 



Closing Speech for Defence. 

Sir H. Curtis Bennett 

have to rely on the account of Dr. Hincks, perfectly honestly 
given, of course, and given as the result of being able to see in 

his book his attendances on her, and symptoms; hut he has to rely 
on his memory for other matters, and you have to rely on the 
memory of Nurse Allen. Do you think Nurse Allen was correct 
when she said from 15th February Mrs. Armstrong never got out 
of bed ? Do you think you can rely on that 1 Do not think I am 
suggesting that she was wilfully misleading you, but she, like you 
and me, is a human being with a great deal of work to do and 
may forget. Are not you satisfied from the evidence put before 
you that 13th February was when they thought at the time it was 
a mere bilious attack, and that Mrs. Armstrong was so much 
better the next day that she was out? Have you got any reason 
to doubt Mrs. Price, the bank manager’s wife, who came yesterday 
and told you that she sat in the garden, or outside the house, for 
three-quarters of au hour; that she found her outside on the 
verandah and left her outside? She says she remembers it, 
because that day she had a new costume sent home, and that upon 
that day she wore the costume up to Mayfield. Then Mr. Vachell, 
who cross-examined her, tried to test that, but he found how 
strong it was. She said, “ When I got home that night I sent a 
cheque for the costume,” and she produced a cheque of 14th 
February, and produced the receipt dated the next day, the 15th 
February. She said, “ Not only do I fix it from the fact of re¬ 
ceiving my new costume and having my receipt, but I also re¬ 
member that she died on the 22nd February,” and that she then 
said, “ Eight days ago I was sitting with her out in the garden.” 
And' Mrs. Price’s evidence does not stand alone, because Miss 
Pearce told you that she had reason for remembering it, as it 
was Valentine’s Day, and she remembered that on Valentine’s 
Day Mrs. Armstrong was out in the garden. Where does the case 
go to, put by the Attorney-General, that for nine days this poor 
woman was suffering from her last illness? On the 13th February 
she was sick after that meal, and on the 14th well, and again 
downstairs. Of course, the opening of the Attorney-General or 
the evidence of Nurse Allen and those who visited her not only 
is that she was downstairs and out in the garden on the 14th, 
but the evidence of Major Armstrong in the box was that on the 
15th she was downstairs, and I think he said on the 16th she was 
down in the morning, and, he thought, Pearson, the little boy, 
and then it was she was taken ill after lunch. Therefore she was 
in the position on that morning, the 16th, to be in possession of 
arsenic in the house, and the position is that she could have got 
it, and that she was of suicidal tendency that day. She came 
out of the home in the hope of becoming a normal member, of 
society again, and had gone back again, and she was suffering 
again from neuritis, and, as far as her head was concerned, suffer¬ 
ing again from delusions. Are you going to say in the face of that 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Sir H. Curtis Bennett 

evidence that she did not take that poison herself ? I have not to 
prove that she did; but do you not think, when I asked you to deal 
with the probabilities, that the probabilities are very strong indeed 
that she did in fact take poison on that day; and if she did, the 
doctors I have called (all three of them) say that the symptoms 
from which she suffered then up to her death were consistent with 
her taking one large dose on that day? You well know that Dr. 
Ainslie and Dr. Steed are honest men, and those doctors tell 
you that as the result of their experience (and it is all very well to 
cross-examine them as to how many cases in their life of arsenical 
poisoning they have' seen j and I put it then to Dr. Uincks, and 
he fairly admitted it was only one he had in the hospital), from 
their knowledge as medical men, the symptoms from which Mrs. 
Armstrong suffered are consistent, in their opinion, with what we 
allege existed on the 15th February, and not consistent with the 
story of the prosecution. 

The only thing the prosecution say is this, “There he is 
standing in the dock, and we charge him with murder, and we 
say he did it by arsenical poisoning, because he had arsenic 
in his house, but we do not know when he did it or how. he did 
it, or the motive, or the means by which he administered it. We 
leave all that to guess. We say he had arsenic in his possession 
and could, if he wanted to, murder his wife.” I submit on the 
whole story it goes to show that she was not unlikely to commit 
suicide. I do not put it higher than that. When the learned 
Attorney-General was opening his case he said, “ Who could have 
done it, and who had a motive for doing it?” and he pointed to 
Major Armstrong. I would say, in answer to "Who could have 
done it?” Mrs. Armstrong could. What does the evidence show— 
that she was in a condition of mind to do it, and Mrs. Armstrong 
from her general condition of health was likely to do it. Who 
could have been in possession of the arsenic for the purpose of 
doing it? Mrs. Armstrong. What was the motive for Mrs. Arm¬ 
strong to do it? She had been in the home and was recovering, 
and then returned home, and her state of health we suggest then 
was the motive. Let me deal with this motive for your con¬ 
sideration. I do not know whether you waited to see whether 
the Attorney-General was going to suggest that the will was not 
Mrs. Armstrong’s will at all of July, 1920. No doubt you waited 
to see if there was any cross-examination as to her will. Not a 
word. What does the whole suggestion come to? If it is her 
will—and there is no suggestion it is not her signature to the will; 
according to their case she was perfectly well on that day, the 1st 
August. They cannot have it both ways. She was perfectly well, 
and, according to their evidence, their case is that Mrs. Armstrong 
at that time vtas an extraordinarily sensible woman of the world. 
What is the suggestion of motive ? If she was perfectly fit at that 
time and absolutely sane, it then will stand, but (I am not even 

288 



Closing Speech for Defence. 

Sir H» Cttrtis Bennett 

suggesting that it was not her will and her signature) if it is her 
will she knew of the will she was making, did she not? And where 
does the point of the Attorney-General go to, that he was in such a 
hurry to get it signed that he did not get "both the witnesses to¬ 
gether—that they were in a hurry on the 8th July, and the evi¬ 
dence is that it was signed when they were in the room together, 
and that Mrs. Armstrong signed ^ it, putting ^ her hand on the 
paper, and Mrs. Armstrong said, ‘ c There is Lily Candy, she can 
come and sign it too.” That was set up before you for the want 
of a better motive. I do not want to use any extravagant terms 
about such a motive. What do you think of it? It is this, that 
there was some motive, and that Major Armstrong wanted to get 
rid of his wife, and that the motive was shown partially in the 
production of that will, a will made and duly signed by her 
at that time (and they say she was perfectly sensible), and that it 
was signed by Miss Pearce, Major Armstrong and Mrs. Armstrong 
being both present; and remember the will was made by Mrs. 
Armstrong, who had told her sister in October, 1919—eight months 
before—“ I am thinking of altering my will, because I have not left 
my husband enough,” and yet that is put up as some sort of motive, 
because, of course, the prosecution realise perfectly well that 
they are not going to present a case to twelve men of the world 
and say, Here is a man who murdered his wife,” unless they 
can show some motive. I leave the motive for you to deal with* 
The second part of the motive is, in my submission to you, 
more ridiculous than the first, and it is all founded on an entry 
in a diary—an entry “ ask,” and then two initials. Of course, I 
do not pretend to have experience in these matters, but if any man 
has ever to make a note in his diary of something he would not 
wish to forget, he would not want to make a note that he was 
going to propose to some young lady. That is the suggestion in 
this case, that he made that note, although he had made up his’ 
mind to propose to a young lady, lest he should forget it; and to 
show how ridiculous is the suggestion, they say that shows he 
wanted to propose marriage to that lady; and, forsooth, lest he 
should forget it, he wrote it down. And what do the defence say 
about it? The reason given by Major Armstrong is that he was 
very worried as to who was to come and keep house for him when 
Miss Pearce went away, and that with that highly respectable lady 
(you saw her in the witness-box, and there is no suggestion of her 
being a flighty girl) he entered into correspondence. She is a 
highly respectable lady of middle age who came here into the 
witness-box. She was a friend of the family, &nd Major Arm¬ 
strong says, and I suggest it is reasonable— <c Being worried about 
who I was to get to come and keep house for a certain period, of 
time, I made a note to bring it to my mind that the first time 
I saw that lady I should ask for her advice upon it.” That is 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Sir H. Curtis Bennett 

what he says, and is not it perfectly reasonable that he should 
put down the initials to remember to ask. her something? 

It is but reasonable; but to say he put it down as they 
suggest is puerile, and it is an insult to your intelligence to put 
that before you as one of the motives, that he wanted to get ridj 
of his wife because he was going to propose to this lady. Gentle¬ 
men, what do you think of it? What do you think of all that 
being seriously put before you by the prosecution here as being part 
of the motive for which this man was going to murder his wife? 

Now we come to the October. I can deal with the Martin 
affair in a moment. I am going to use no hard words about Mr. 
Martin. There is no point in using hard words, and I am never 
quite sure that it is fair to use hard words, especially when the 
person against whom it is said has no opportunity of answering 
them; and, therefore, I am content to leave Mr. Martin to your 
judgment. You saw him during this case, and you can form your 
opinion of his evidence in the box. I do not desire to say any¬ 
thing harsh about him, and I leave it to you; you will form your 
opinion about it. What is the story there ? The story there is 
(and my submission to you is that it is as ridiculous a story 
as that in relation to Mrs. Armstrong) that a solicitor who has 
lived to the age of fifty-three, and has had, I suppose, thousands of 
letters from other solicitors complaining about certain things not 
being completed—an everyday occurrence, I suppose, with soli¬ 
citors—and the suggestion is that because there were proceedings 
about this Yelinewydcl estate he wanted to poison Mr. Martin. 
We say again, if this defendant wanted to poison Mir. Martin, the 
only place for him is an asylum. Just one moment to deal with 
the facts on that day. Undoubtedly Major Armstrong arrived back 
before Mr. Martin arrived, but from the moment he arrived back, 
except for the moment when he was walking through the house 
and hanging up his coat in the place which was just near a door 
into the garden, just walking through that hall, that is the only 
moment that he was in the house before Mr. Martin arrived after 
the tea was laid. MacGeorge is in conversation with him until 
the time Mr. Martin arrives. Where was the opportunity, first of 
all, even if a man desired to do so, to place (I do not care whether 
it was the scone, bread and butter, or currant loaf, or cup of tea) 
arsenic in it? There was no opportunity that has been proved at 
all. You are not going to search about and say perhaps this 
might have happened ” or “ perhaps that might have happened,” 
or “ perhaps the other might have happened you are going 
to look and see what the evidence Is, and there is no evidence 
to show reasonably how; there is a good deal to show that he had 
no opportunity before they went into that tea for him to have 
put arsenic upon those scones. As I pointed out the other day, 
(you will have it pointed out by my lord to-morrow, no doubt), it 
is only for the purpose of assisting, it is supposed to assist you to 

290 



Closing Speech for Defence. 

Sir H. Curtis Bennett 

come to the conclusion as to whether or not he murdered his wife 
that that evidence is put before you. You are not trying it, you 
have not to give a verdict upon it; you have had to listen to a 
great deal of it, but you are not trying it; you have not to 
say if he did it or did not. You have to take it into your con¬ 
sideration and to say to yourselves, 44 If we are satisfied that he 
did this, then we have not to say that he murdered his wife; if. 
we came to the conclusion he attempted to murder Mr. Martin, then, 
of course, we shall have to very seriously consider whether he did 
not murder his wife/ 31 That is why it is put heiore you, and it 
will he put much better for you by my lord what the_law is; hut 
I venture to say in my lord’s presence, that is putting it quite 
shortly in very ordinary language, the way in which you have to 
consider Mr. Martin’s evidence. You have to be satisfied that Mr. 
Martin was sufiering from arsenical poisoning. There is nothing 
to show that he was sufiering from arsenical poisoning, except 
the analysis of l/33rd of a grain in his urine, because all the 
doctors for the prosecution or the defence say, we are agreed upon 
that, that the symptoms from which he suffered were not like what 
they saw in Mrs. Armstrong’s case, they were consistent with 
gastric enteritis, gastric influenza, or whatever you like to call it, 
they were consistent with a natural complaint. 1 dare say some of 
us have suffered from much the same symptoms in the course of 
our lives; I hope none of you have. At any rate it is consistent 
with natural illness, and it is only 1/33rd of a grain of arsenic 
in the urine which shows that he was sufiering from arsenical 
poisoning. So you have to be satisfied that he. was sufiering 
from arsenical poisoning. Then you have to be satisfied upon the 
evidence that such arsenic had been administered to him by Major 
Armstrong, otherwise the whole of that evidence is of absolutely 
no value at all. In my submission that analysis which was made 
of that urine was not satisfactorily made, when you are dealing 
with questions involving such issues as this case does. There are 
ways in which that arsenic could have come into that urine, many 
ways in which it could have come into that urine, except through 
the agency of Major Armstrong. Gentlemen, if you come to the 
conclusion that there is no proof here that Major Armstrong ad¬ 
ministered that arsenic, then you ought to leave the whole of the 
Martin case, and my lord, I am sure, will tell you the same thing; 
unless you are satisfied that the arsenic was administered by Major 
Armstrong to Mr. Martin, and that it could not have come into 
that urine in any other way except through Major Armstrong, then 
you ought to leave the Martin incident out of consideration and 
deal with what you are trying, the question of the poisoning or 
otherwise of Mrs. Armstrong. 

Major Armstrong did what he was not obliged to do. He did 
what a few years ago he could not have done, he went into the 
witness-box. It was quite open to him to have said as many a man 

291 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Sir H. Curtis Bennett 

does upon a criminal charge, “ You prove your case against me 
and I am quite content to remain where' I am and to rely on the 
statement which I have made ” ; but he went at his own desire, and 
strong desire, certainly with my approbation, into the box at the 
earliest moment during this trial that he could. It is quite use¬ 
less of course in a case of this sort to go into the whole of a 
defence like this at the Police Court. Once it was clear that this 
case had to go for trial there was no great object in prolonging 
it there, and it was not prolonged; Mr. Matthews did not cross- 
examine the expert witnesses; but at the earliest moment here Major 
Armstrong went into the box and told his stoiy. You are the 
iudges and you only, of facts in this case; you will receive, of 
course’ the law from my lord, but, as far as facts are concerned, 
that is why you are here. In criminal cases we still have trial by 
jury, in civil cases to a great extent trial by jury has disappeared. 
Trial by jury means that you, and each of you, have to try the 
case as regards the facts, receiving the law as it applies to the 
facts from the learned judge, but yours is the responsibility, and 
yours alone, to deal with the question of fact. Did not you think 
that Mai or Armstrong gave his evidence in the box like an honest 
man? Do not you think, and I put this before you as strongly 
as I can, that he emerged from four hours, I think it was, of cross- 
examination by the Attorney-General absolutely unscathed? His 
story when he came out of the box was the story that he told when 
he first went into the box. His story at the end, after all that 
cross-examination, question after question—of course, one welcomes 
the questions when the man is being tested; tested as no man has 
been tested before—1 will not say no man has been tested before, 
but no man has ever been tested more thoroughly before than Major 
Armstrong was during that four hours. Was there any difference 
in his evidence at the end; was not he at the end, m the beginning 
and in the middle, what you would expect an honest person to be f 
It was only in the last few minutes that he was in the witness-box 
that he was asked a number of questions by my lord with which I 
am going to deal, that there was anything on which I need com¬ 
ment Remember when the Attorney-General is cross-examining, 
he is not just cross-examining on the spur of the moment m Court; 
he was being cross-examined as the result of a great deal ol anxious 
thought and consideration; every matter upon which it was thought 
he should be tested, asked questions, he was asked upon, i 
venture to think, it is for you, again remember that it is not tor 
me to prove his innocence, but in my submission to you Major 
Armstrong was an excellent witness. ^ 4 

Now, a word or two about the white arsenic. My lor # $ 

yesterday afternoon that it was difficult to see how the finding ot 
that white arsenic affected the case, and in which way it affected 
it whether it was for or against. Gentlemen, I ventured to say 
then, and would make it quite clear, if it is not already clear to 

292 



Closing Speech for Defence. 

Sir H. Curtis Beacett 

you, how it does affect the case. The evidence for the prosecution 
has always been that Major Armstrong had purchased coloured 
arsenic from Mr. Davies—coloured with charcoal. Their evidence 
was that the arsenic bought in 1919 was coloured, that the arsenic 
bought in January, 1921, was coloured. Upon Major Armstrong 
on his arrest is found a little packet of, not coloured arsenic, of 
white arsenic. I submit to you, gentlemen, this is a most extra¬ 
ordinary instance showing the very great danger of evidence upon 
which juries might even convict a man of murder sometimes. 
Supposing: that packet of white arsenic, which undoubtedly was 
bought from Mr. Davies (which is admitted now by the prosecution 
to have been found honestly and properly by Mr. Matthews, and 
not to have been put there by anybody, but left there) had not 
been found, this case to a very large extent would have been^made 
to turn upon, “ How did you, Armstrong, become in possession of 
the white arsenic which was found upon you? 55 He would have 
said in the box^, “ I purchased that white arsenic from Davies/ 5 
and the Attorney-General would have said to him, “ That cannot 
be true; produce some of it; it cannot be true, because Davies has 
sworn that the only arsenic you ever purchased was coloured, and 
all we have found on your premises was coloured arsenic/ 5 and it 
would have been said, “It is all very well for you, Armstrong, to 
say you were buying your arsenic perfectly openly in your own 
native town where you could be traced; you must have gone outside 
to make a secret purchase of arsenic/ 5 and they would have said, 

££ By great good fortune upon you we have found some of it, 
therefore we know that you bought it elsewhere. 55 How would 
you have dealt with that case 1 I say it is an extraordinary 
instance of sometimes the great danger upon which even a man 
might have gone to the gallows. There he would have been found 
with white arsenic upon him; the whole of the evidence for the 
prosecution would have been, he never purchased white, he pur¬ 
chased grey, and it would have been useless for him to have stood 
in the box and said, “ J purchased it from Davies 55 ; and imagine, 
just put yourselves, if vou will, into the position that you would 
have been in then. This man in the box, white arsenic is upon 
him; his story, “ I purchased it from Davies. I purchased all 
the arsenic I have had from my local chemist where it could be 
traced at any moment; I am no poisoner. 55 And on the other 
side, “You could not have done it. This is the only bit found. 
Davies swears, and so does his assistant, that it was mixed with 
charcoal; tell us where you bought it ? 57 And the prosecution 
would have said, “ If you wanted white arsenic for the purpose of 
destroying plantains or dandelions, why did you have, to go to 
Birmingham or Manchester or London/ 5 or wherever you like to 
suggest, “ to buy it; why did you not buy it at your local 
chemist! 55 And would not you, gentlemen, have been in grave 
danger of saying, “ We do not believe this man about this; we do 
not believe that he purchased that white arsenic from Davies, he 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Sir H. Curtis Bennett 

must have gone elsewhere, and if he went elsewhere to buy his 
arsenic why did he go elsewhere? “ And you would have been in 
grave danger of saying he went elsewhere so that the arsenic could 
not be traced to him, because he wanted it for the purpose of 
poisoning his wife; and might you not have allowed that evidence? 
And you know in your own minds the effect it would have had upon 
you if the case had been put in that way, if this other white arsenic 
had not been definitely found. You would have been in very o*rave 
danger of saying, “ We are satisfied that he bought that elsewhere 
and not from Davies, and if he did, of course, he must have 
bought it somewhere else, because he had some ghastly motive 
behind/" That is the importance of the finding of this white 
arsenic. That is the importance of it, because it may, as I say, 
and as I ask you to say to-morrow by your verdict, it may well 
nigh have saved this man's life. 

It is the most dramatic thing which, has happened in any case 
of this sort within living memory, because one can imagine what 
a terrible miscarriage, what a ghastly miscarriage of justice might 
have resulted; you quite honestly saying upon the'evidenced as 
you would have been entitled to, “ Well, the evidence all goes to 
show that he never bought white arsenic; what was this little 
packet doing upon him; where did he get white arsenic; why was 
it he went elsewhere to buy it? "* You might have said, " We 
cannot believe this man upon his oath/" and yon might have con¬ 
victed him because you could not believe him upon his oath. If 
you had, we now know your verdict would have been a wrong one. 
That is why I implore yon, as far as 1 am entitled to, to weigh 
every scrap of evidence in this case, weigh it, as carefully as you 
can, and remember that even in those things which seem, strongest 
against a man, sometimes there is nothing. How do you think 
I should have dealt with the case if that while arsenic had not been 
found? Gentlemen, if that white arsenic had not been found the 
probability is, that you would have said to yourselves, cc That is 
the thing we cannot get over, how was ho in possession of that; he 
did not buy it from Davies ; if ho did not buy it from Davies, as 
he bought everything else from Davies, ho must have bought-it 
somewhere else, and must have bought it lor some sinister .purpose/" 
I cannot be too grave upon this matter. You all appreciate 
my anxiety to make it clear, and, after all, my anxiety is nothing 
to what yours must he. I have only to put the case before you; 
you have to determine it. Does not'that bit of evidence and what 
might have happened throw a great flood of light upon the care 
which has to be bestowed by juries upon evidence and not say, 
** We think this and we think that""? There -would have been 
definite evidence; white arsenic found upon him; definite evidence 
that he never bought it in his local town; you would not have been 
asked to deal with the case upon surmise, suspicion, or anything 
else. It would have been said there is a definite, clear-cut issue. 

294 



Closing Speech for Defence. 

Sir H Curtis Bennett 

If that may fail, and if you might have been led into convicting 
this man upon such a suggestion as that, think of the danger of 
convicting him upon such a case as is put against him here. 

At the end of Major Armstrong’s evidence yesterday he was 
asked a number of questions as to why he had not at first told 
the actual story about this white arsenic. Let us try and deal 
with this, not in any pedantic way, but let us try and deal 
with this as the result of years of experience either of appearing 
in cases or of trying cases, let us deal with it from the ordinary 
point of view of members of the public, of yourselves. You 
gentlemen, with the positions which you have made for yourselves 
in this county, are suddenly confronted by police officers, a 
number of them—I do not make any criticism of this, although 
one occurs to one at once, and no doubt occurs to you. They 
start by getting what they call a voluntary statement, as they are 
quite entitled to before they arrest you, for the purpose of 
getting an explanation and clearing things up; they are entitled 
to say, “ You make a voluntary statement and we will take it 
down.” Directly they have got the voluntary statement in this 
case they arrest the man. It does not look as if it had been 
very^ much for the purpose of clearing the thing up; they did not 
consider the statement or test it; they arrested him; I do not mind. 
After they have arrested him, about an hour after, Major Arm¬ 
strong is looking through his business letters. Do you not think 
that you might have been under the same misapprehension 
as apparently he was, that if a police officer said you can look 
through your business letters, do you not think it is quite likely 
you would have thought he meant all your business letters,, unless 
lie particularised special business letters? Major Armstrong 
thought he meant all the business letters, and found there caught 
up, you remember the expression, caught up by an envelope, this 
little packet. He says that he then realised that he had some, of 
that white arsenic left. At that time, between the time when 
he made his statement and finding that, he was under arrest. 
It is very easy to be wise, and very easy to criticise what a man 
does under those circumstances, just having been arrested. Imagine' 
the position. The clerk to the justices, who, as one knows, and I 
do not say this under any sort of feeling of criticism of justices, 
but the clerk of justices is the most important person at Petty 
Sessions—he advises the judges. Here is the man, who has been 
in the position of administering justice, suddenly arrested and 
taken, I was going to say to his own police station, so it was, to 
the police station of which he had had some sort of control. Of 
course, it is quite easy now to say it would have been far wiser to 
have said at once, et Oh, I beg pardon, I have made a mistake in 
that voluntary statement, very sorry, I want to correct that.” Of 
course, it would have been much wiser to have said it, much better 

295 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Sir H. Curtis Bennett 

that he should, hut I cannot see what the criticism of it is. if 
Major Armstrong had been trying to deny that he had got arsenic 
upon his premises at all, then I could understand it. He knew 
they were inquiring about arsenic, and told them where they would 
find one packet. He made a mistake and called it the 1921, and it 
was the remainder of the 1919 packet; that is quite clear by’the ad¬ 
mission made by the Attorney-General about the finding of this 
arsenic by Mr. Matthews. He had not been trying to deceive them 
that he had got arsenic. Where is the point that he had only 
told them of one lot and not of two? Once they got him in pos¬ 
session of a lot of arsenic, that is quite enough. I should think 
nobody who has any common sense would ever buy arsenic again 
to make weed-killer. I do not know whether any of you ever have* 
nothing in this world would induce me to buy arsenic. If you 
happen to have a member of your family who, unfortunately, has 
died, and it is found that she lias arsenic in her body, if you have 
arsenic you will be put in the dock. He was not trying to deny 
that he had bought arsenic, he was admitting that he had bought 
arsenic. Of course, he ought to have said, ic I have made a mistake, 
and I have not told you ail about it/’ but are you going to say that 
because he made a mistake in not saying, “ I have made a mistake 
in what I said just now; 1 ought to have told you; 1 suddenly 
realise, of course, I had some more, and it is in the drawer/’ are 
you going to say because he did not say that that he is guilty of this 
offence? If he was denying arsenic at all thou I can understand 
it; then they would say, “ You wanted to keep the police without 
knowledge that you had got arsenic, and you hoped they would 
not find it. That is not the case; he has told them that he has got 
arsenic and where it is. ^ Where is this wonderful point that he 
made a mistake in not doing what would have been much wiser of 
him, telling the police, c< I have made a mistake, I am sorry. 
I will tell you all about it now ” ? 

The next day he sees Mr. Matthews, and Mr. Matthews from 
that moment takes charge of his defence. No higher compliment 
can be paid to any solicitor than the compliment my lord paid to 
Mr. Matthews to-day about the whole of the conduct of this defence. 
They thought the police had got the white arsenic ; Mr. Matthews 
goes up there, pulls open that drawer about 4 inches, then it catches ; 
you would think there was a stop on the drawer if you did not know. 
It is not as if it was a drawer you had opened every day of your 
life; you would think there was a stop, as there often is upon 
these bureau drawers; you puli it out, look in it, nothing to be 
seen. So they imagine that the police have got the white arsenic. 
I do not think any criticism is levelled against Mr, Matthews for not 
having set up the defence of suicide, and not cross-examined about 
the white arsenic now. If any such criticism is to be made, do you 
think it is part of the duty of a solicitor for a prisoner to cross- 

296 ■... 



Closing Speech for Defence. 

Sir H. Curtis Bennett 

examine the police to show that there was white arsenic when they 
have had every opportunity of searching, and ought to have found 
it? Of course it is not. When you are defending a man for a 
murder at the Police Court it is not part of your duty to say to the 
police, 4 4 Although you have searched heaps of times you do not 
search thoroughly. I will go and search for you.’ 5 If that is the 
way which is going to be suggested people should defend, I do not 
think many people would be employed at Police Court proceedings. 
Of course, it was not his duty, and it was only when he had pressed 
Mr. Miekiethvait over and over again for a list of what had been 
found, and it was only when he found they could not find this 
arsenic, that, happening to he at Mayfield for another thing alto¬ 
gether, he says to the clerk, “ This is the drawer where that arsenic 
was supposed to have been/ 5 and then for the first time put his 
hand right at the back. I wonder what you think of that evidence 
of Mrs. Price, who said she pulled it right out and looked at the 
back. The drawer which she pulled right out is the one where the 
key was, where the label was; that must have been the drawer she 
pulled out. There that white arsenic was found. Gentlemen, do 
not be too hard on Major Armstrong because he did no do what a 
wise man would have done. A wise man would have said, c * I have 
made a mistake; I will tell you all about it. 75 I hope I am not 
wearying you by putting these matters, but I am sure you will 
consider it all when you come to consider your verdict. An hour 
more or less to you and me in this trial is a mere incident; it is a 
drop in the ocean, because you have to determine whether a man is 
to live or to die. 

Now, what is the story about the packet of white arsenic? 
Things are apt to assume a very different appearance and very 
different proportions when you get into a Court of justice. You 
have to realise that you are dealing here with an amateur gardener; 
many of us are amateur gardeners, and you are dealing with a man 
who likes making experiments. I thought at one moment there was 
going to be a point made against him that he writes down water as 
H a G. He likes to make experiments. He says he divided that 
arsenic into two halves, one-half put away, the other, used partially 
for experiments in that glass, so that he could see the effect of the 
solubility of arsenic and caustic soda, and the rest he divided up 
into little packets. Like that point I put to you just now as to 
what that might have been if it had not been for the finding of 
that white arsenic, look at this—it was as cheap a way of destroy¬ 
ing dandelions as one could possibly imagine. You could destroy' 
sixty-six for a penny if it worked every time. At any rate you 
could dose, to use my lord’s expression, sixty-six dandelions or 
plantains for a penny. A man who has nothing on earth to do in 
the afternoon, who has an instrument by which he had been putting 
poison down to the root of the plantain, amuses himself in experi- 

297 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Sir H. Curtis Bennett ^ 

merits by making a hole and dropping these little proportion, 
of arsenic down to the root. That is tested quite properly T 
not complaining, by the prosecution, and they say, “ Why do it Tin 
into little proportions, why not take the lot out and take your oen 
knife and empty it in each time » ? It might have been as good • T 
do not know. I suggest it would not. You would have to maka 
your hole, carrying your packet all the time; arsenic is stuff which 
blows about very easily, and you would have the whole packet in 
your hand the whole time. It might have been as easy I do not 
know; but it seems easier to divide it up into little packets before¬ 
hand, so that when you have made your hole out comes your little 
packet; no fear of spoiling the lot, no fear of it blowing awav- 
you have your little packet which you can use in the hole which you 
have just made. In my submission, it is a more sensible thing to 
do than to carry a packet about and drop it in from the end of a 
penknife from the top. That is what he says lie did ; is there anv 
reason to disbelieve him? There is no sort of evidence that he did 
not. That man is just as worthy of being believed in the witness- 
box, no more worthy to be believed, as any witness for the prosecu 
turn, and he says that is what he did, and there is nothing in the 
world to contradict him. Is not that what lie did? Having made 
a lot of packets and put them into the inside pocket of his coat, he 
thought he had used the lot, and he wears that coat again on this 
particular Saturday in December. He has got all his letters in 
his pocket, and then he finds that one little packet is left. Of 
course, like the point that might have been made against him, 

Where did you get your white arsenic,” if it had not been proved 
by the production of this packet that he bought it from Davies it 
is quite easy to say, oh, yes, but that little packet happens to have 
contained the right amount to kill anybody. As I say, nobody is 
safe m possession of arsenic, because if you happen to”be arrested, 
and you have some m your pocket, it is going to bo said you are 
carrying it about for the purpose of poisoning somebody because 
you do not like them. That is what it comes to. Did not he satisfy 
you that his evidence upon that was the truth, that, lie had got that 
in his pocket left over from these little packets, which ho had made, 
I think,, m June, and had used at that time. 

I think I have really dealt with all the material matters that I 
need deal with. I hope I have. I have tried to. There were 
all sorts of dates which occur to one’s mind, all those points which 
were made against Major Armstrong—" You would not be buying 
arsenic m January because it would not be time to put it on the 
weeds. Then, If you did buy it on the 11th, why did not you 
use it before the 22nd, when your wife came home? ” 'There, again, 
there was an extraordinary bit of luck; it was purely by my looking 
at the diary which Mr. Lloyd handed me yesterday, when I was 
wanting to look through the 1920 diary, there I saw the only 
oaturday. between the 11th and the 22nd was the 15th, and I saw 
298 



Closing Speech for Defence. 

Sir H. Curtis Bennett 

a not© against it <c In bed. 5 ’ There was the answer. I was 
wondering why he had not used it upon that Saturday afternoon, 
and by pure good fortune, happening to look at that diary, I saw 
(I think you have seen it, my lord has, and you will see it) that 
the only Saturday between the 11th and the 22nd was the loth, 
and then he was in bed. When you find one thing after another 
turn out in that way in the case, does not it make you hesitate! 
There was yet another point being made—“ Buying this stuff on the 
11th January, wife does not come home till the 22nd, why did not 
you use it! ” The man says there was only one Saturday. c< Well, 
why did not you use it on that Saturday! ” And by nothing but 
fortune one finds that entered up in the diary is the fact that upon 
that day, the day before and the day after, partially he was in 
bed. . It shows the great danger of accepting things which look to 
he quite good arguments when you find they are answered on the 
moment purely by good fortune—a thing one might never have 
looked at—purely by good fortune the point is answered. 

That is what you have, in my submission, all through this 
case; all those points which looked as if they had something in 
them, taking them one by one (I tried to deal with them as the 
evidence came along), one by one they have disappeared. I ventured 
to take them on Monday, and I have tried to the best of my humble 
ability to deal with them fully and properly. Having done that, 
I have, as far as I can, discharged my great responsibility—a re¬ 
sponsibility which, believe me, is a terrible one, which has given 
me the greatest anxiety for weeks, and it is now finished,, as far 
as I am concerned, and that responsibility which I have borne 
passes on to you. You have each one of you the responsibility. 
It is no use feeling that it is all together, but you,. each one of 
you, one as much as any other, has from now, from the time 
that you have heard the Attorney-General and the time that you 
have heard my lord, the responsibility of the future of Major 
Armstrong. The time is very near when you will troop out of 
this Court to consider your verdict, a verdict which, when you 
have determined upon it, will be read by people who merely take 
interest in sensations and say ” guilty ” or “ not guilty,” and 
pass on to the next sensation. But for the friends of Major Arm¬ 
strong it means, I hope, his freedom; for his children the restora¬ 
tion of their father to his home; and for Major Armstrong it means 
life. 


The Court adjourned. 


29 $ 



Tenth Day—Thursday, 13th April, 1922/ 
Closing Speech for the Crown. 


The Attornet-Oenbiial—M ay it please your lordship—gentle¬ 
men of the jury, it is ten days or more since 1 had the opportunity 
of presenting to you in outline the features of this case, and I 
realise the strain that has been put upon you during the whole of 
that ten days, and I realise that yon must have been feeling both 
tired, and, well, perhaps even reluctant to listen to a long speech 
from me. On the other hand, I know quite well that each one of 
you will wish to hear me present (he case for the prosecution, and 
1 doubt not that each one of you will give me that attention which 
has been such a marked feature throughout the conduct of this case. 
May I say at the outset that I shall endeavour to compress 
my observations, and to compress them within a reasonable limit 
having regard to what I have lo say; and I may say that, with the 
assistance of my learned friends, to whom T owe so much, the 
adjournment last night has helped mo to focus, and 1 hope com¬ 
press, those observations within a reasonable limit. May I also 
at the outset of iny speech make one or two more observations. 
It is a matter of pride and satisfaction to us all that the prisoner 
at the bar has had the opportunity of securing the great services 
of Sir Henry Curtis Bennett. It is a pride and satisfaction, 
because no man is more able—none a more powerful advocate, and 
none a more able and devoted servant of (lie cause he undertakes, 
and it is no small satisfaction to me in the responsible position 
I hold in this case to think that the prisoner's case has been pre¬ 
sented to you in a manner worthy of a serious and difficult 
occasion; and it is, therefore, a matter of pride to me, and to all 
of us, to think that under the system that prevails in this country 
a prisoner charged, as the prisoner at the bar is, is given the 
opportunity of having great services rendered to him and his case' 
presented with all the feelings and emphasis that my learned friend, 
is so capable of, and that that position is afforded to a man 
standing where the prisoner does. 

My learned friend said that in the course of the lapse of time 
since I opened this case my case would be widely changed. Yes, 
it has been changed, and, I think, in three or four points which 
have strengthened it, and made it easier for me to deal with, and 
have enabled me to present it more forcibly to you than I did on 
Monday last week. Let me also say that the prisoner is entitled 
to your reasonable doubt. I agree that the prosecution have to 
prove their case with reasonable certainty. They have to give 
you the highest degree of certainty. The prosecution are not 
300 




The Attorney-General, Sir Ernest M. PollocK, Bt., K.C. 

(Photo. Elliott & Fry, Ltd.) 



Closing Speech for the Crown. 

The Attorney-General 

bound to give you absolute demonstration, for I doubt whether in 
any case at all it is possible to give absolute demonstration without 
the danger of want of veracity on the part of some witness; and 
at the same time the certainty you will require is one on -which 
we act in our ordinary dealings in life, a certainty which forms 
and determines the actions of each of us from day to day; and in 
this case let me remind you that it is a poisoning case; and let 
me at the outset also remind you that I doubt whether throughout 
the history of the world the poison cup has been seen to be admin¬ 
istered and known to be the poison cup administered. You will 
have to act on evidence sure and certain in other cases, but in a 
case of poisoning you will always find a subtlety and an endeavour 
to cover up the tracks of so wicked and sinister a crime. 

I am going to address you now on the matters I have to put 
before you. It lias been the sincere wish and earnest endeavour 
of my learned friends and myself not to press the case unfairly or 
unduly—to endeavour to focus your attention upon what is rele¬ 
vant germane to the charge before you, and that endeavour has 
been maintained throughout the case, and I will endeavour to 
fulfil it now; but I may claim I think that that endeavour has - not 
been wholly unsuccessful, and that by measured language and by 
thoughtful—yes, perhaps sympathetic—consideration for the 
prisoner, we have striven to be fair. 

Now I must come to the outstanding features., of the case which 
have altered since I opened the case to you last Monday week. 
Then I did not know, as I do now, that it is admitted, as it is 
now, that Mrs. Armstrong died of arsenic. That is admitted. I 
did not know then, as do now, that it is admitted that during 
the last four days of her life she was stretched upon her bed, 
incapable of feeding herself or of taking any nutriment or sub¬ 
stance whatever; and I did not know then that no reliance would 
be placed on any question of her taking homoeopathic medicines. 
Indeed, through some days last week I thought by some questions 
that my learned friend put—the question whether the cupboard, in 
which the medicines were kept on the mantelshelf would be within 
reach of the bed—the question put whether an outstretched hand 
from the bed could reach the cupboard, and so on, I did, perhaps 
wrongly, surmise that some point was going to be made of the 
homoeopathic medicines being taken. That third point has gone. 
And, lastly, I did not know, as I do now, that in January, 1920, 
the prisoner was possessed of some 2 ounces of arsenic, the balance 
of what had been bought in 1919. I did not know that that 
remained in the cupboard in the study. I had thought then that 
the arsenic of which the prisoner had possession was the arsenic 
that was bought in 1.921, which I thought was'represented by that 
portion of coloured arsenic. But I know now that, in addition 
to the small packet that was found on the prisoner, he had not only 
the 2 ounces of arsenic in August that lay in the cupboard, but 
that there was found upon him the little quantum of arsenic folded 

301 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

The Attorney-General 

up in paper—3f grains; I know now that, in addition to that 

he had some white arsenic which he bought in January, 1921 and 
more than once Sir Henry, as he was entitled to do, in his opening 
speech and closing speech, poured something of scorn on the 
suggestion made that weed-killer had been purchased on the 4th 
August, 1920. Had 1 known as 1 do now that in August H99n 
there was this 2 ounces lying in the cupboard; had I known then 
as I know now there was while arsenic purchased in 1921, I would 
not have made the remark which lias called forth, twice over the 
observations of my learned friend, but it* .1 felt sure it was to be 
attributed to me, may not it be laid to the fact that I did not 
know until it was revealed by the prisoner—! did not know the 
circumstances under which we'now know he had two lots of arsenic 
in his possession, as well as the little packet in his pocket. On 
those two salient points the position of the prosecution is enor¬ 
mously strengthened, arid what, you have to impure is this, agreed 
that Mrs. Armstrong died of arsenical poisoning in 1921, how was 
that poison administered to her? “ Suicide,” says my learned 
friend. That is really the central feature of this case. My 
learned friend also suggested, and ho is entitled, of course, to 
make the suggestion, and every suggestion that could be made by 
the counsel in sympathy with the prisoner ought to be made, but 
he suggests that we had worked back in (his case, and that when 
we found the arsenic in the body of Mrs. Armstrong w© worked 
the ease back and got it up, and 1, think my learned friend said 
that it amounted to this, “ You found arsenic in the body, ard 
you found arsenic in the possession of the prisoner; put him in the 
dock and charge him cm suspicion.” 

Gentlemen, that is not our case. What I do, however, put 
before you is that Mr. Martin had an illness, an illness somewhat 
inscrutable and difficult to account for. The suggestion is made 
that Mr. Martin's urine could be examined. It was examined, 
and found to contain, not a trace but an appreciable amount of 
arsenic; and then, and then only, it was thought, “Yes, what 
were the symptoms of which Mrs. Armstrong died? ” And then 
the order was made to exhume the body; and the body which was 
to have lain hidden for all lime in the cemetery at Cusop was 
exhumed, and a startling confirmation was then found that in 
that body there was more arsenic than Mr. Webster had ever found 
in a body before. There was discovered, what is to-day an accepted 
fact, that Mrs. Armstrong died of arsenical poisoning. That was, 
the sequence of events. There was the sequence which had not 
worked back, but that had been worked forward. The exhumation 
was mad© and the body was examined, and arsenic was found to 
be present. There was found no organic disease, and it was clear 
to demonstration, and it is accepted now by all, that she was done 
to death by arsenical poisoning. Now we have her life right away 
to her death, and my learned friend has got this difficulty in 
setting up what is called the theory of the defence, 1 use the 
302 



Closing Speech for the Crown. 

The Attorney-General 

word theory not in any disparaging sense, because it is a compre¬ 
hensive term for a matter the defence are entitled to put before you, 
and of which they ask your acceptance, hut you are to accept this 
theory—you have got to do this—to dissociate the symptoms of 
August, 1920, from those of 1921 before her illness, and you have 
to separate those two illnesses of Mrs. Armstrong. The one has 
to be attributed to a wholly different cause—(that in August, 1920) 
—and the illness of 1921 has to be segregated entirely by itself, 
and then, and there they suggest suicide. Now, in order to deal 
with the symptoms that occurred in August, 1920, the suggestion 
is put forward that all those symptoms were due to acute indiges¬ 
tion and severe rheumatism, and both those causes are grouped 
together as justifying the opinion that her illness was clue to what 
is called auto-intoxication—that illness is now called by Dr. 
Toogood rheumatoid arthritis. It is a disease of which most of 
us unhappily have had some experience amongst our friends, 
neighbours, or relations. We know what it is like, and are not 
unfamiliar with its insidious effects, but here it is—Dr. Toogood 
calls it rheumatoid arthritis, and one cannot .help seeing that when 
evidence is called on behalf of the defence there may be, and here 
I make the criticism not unkindly, a certain amount of sympathy 
with those on -whose behalf that evidence is called, and it is 
suggested in calling the witnesses we have—the expert witnesses— 
we have placed the prisoner in a somewhat unfair position because 
of the great experience and ability of the doctors we have called 
on our behalf, Dr. Spilsbury, Sir William Willcox, and Mr. 
Webster, and that their experience ought to be discounted in favour 
of the prisoner, and that you ought to consider how it is that the 
prosecution are able to bring such a heavy weight of material, a 
position denied to the prisoner. On the other hand, that leads 
me to make this observation, that if, in considering the case of the 
death of a subject of the Crown, the Crown did not engage the 
highest skill and best experts of the highest ability, comments 
might not unjustly be made; that they should have got not only 
qualified experts, but some one of the highest and matchless ability; 
and you have to judge by the manner in which my expert witnesses 
gave their evidence whether or not they were careful to observe 
every sort of care in giving their opinion, and to try and place 
before you with fairness and care all the matters with which their 
evidence dealt. 

Let me pass now to the illness of 1920. I am not going to 
detail every story told as to both illnesses from which Mrs. Arm¬ 
strong suffered in 1919, and it is, I think, sufficient for me to 
recall to you (for you have every bit of the evidence in your minds) 
that the medical attendant looking after her treated her as 
described, and tells you it was muscular rheumatism, which cleared 
away. It was in the right arm, and, though undoubtedly she had 
this rheumatism, it was not rheumatoid arthritis, but it was 

303 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

The Attorney-General 

rheumatism from which many of us have suffered, and will suffer, 
from time to time. It is called rheumatoid arthritis, but I am 
struck with the fact that when Dr. Toogood gave us this descrip¬ 
tion he introduced a new term which had not been cross-examined 
to by Sir Henry, and its gravity was enhanced by the term that 
was used. We have a document that does not entirely describe 
the condition of Mrs. Armstrong when she went into the asylum. 

It is a document under the hand of the prisoner. It is a docu¬ 
ment under the hand, let me take it, of an affectionate husband— 
a document under the hand of a man who wished his wife to get 
better in the Barnwood Asylum. He wished, therefore, to give 
information which would be a guide and help to the doctors who 
took care of her. I will not place that document too high. I 
will not ask you to be unfair from the way in which it is signed. . 
It is not a document like a policy of insurance in which extreme 
accuracy is needed, or anything of that sort ; but, taking it fairly 
and not placing it too high, does not it give one a test by which 
one can say whether or not it describes her condition in August, . 
1920—whether the man who knew her best did present those 
features that she was a martyr to indigestion, that ^ she suffered 
from rheumatoid arthritis, and was in such a condition of bad 
health that you may attribute all that happened in August to her 
condition at that time? I will not read it all to you, hut let me 
recall two or three sentences in it. It is this. She is described 
as a martyr to indigestion, as cheerful but anxious^ Then the. 
document refers to her being anxious, and the question is asked 
whether her health is good, bad, or indifferent. If she was a 
martyr to this indigestion, if she was suffering from rheumatoid 
arthritis, if she was suffering from auto-intoxication, should not., 
some trace be found in this document? It says, “ Health fairly 
good, but of livery tendency.” You observe that the qualification 
is put on her health being good generally, but that, she is of livery 
tendency. Gentlemen, does not that justify me, taking that docu¬ 
ment fairly and not too high, in saying that at that time she was 
in a condition of health which shows that the.description now given 
for the purpose of proving auto-intoxication is an exaggerated one? 
I do not want to put it higher. And there is one more answer— 
■“ Has she ever suffered from any serious disease, or is she subject 
to any particular constitutional or bodily ailment? ” Would not 
it be fair to say that if she was a martyr to indigestion, if she. 
•was suffering from rheumatoid arthritis, you would put down that 
she had got acute indigestion, constant rheumatism, and so on? 
But one other question is put. “ Has she ever suffered from any . 
serious disease, or is she subject to any particular constitutional .or. 
bodily ailment? ” and the answer is “ No,” and I ask you to take 
that 'document which gives you a standard by which you can 
measure the question of whether or not the evidence now presented 
to you as to her condition in August was exaggerated or not. And, 
I claim that document does definitely establish this, that, speaking 
304 



Closing Speech for the Crown. 

The Attorney-Generals. ■ 

generally, her health was good, her disposition cheerful, and that*' 
she was not suffering from any particular ailment or disease. I 
observe that Sir Henry made no reference to that document in his 
speech; and, as I say, I do not wish to put that too high, but is not 
it a test by which we can see whether the observation is endorsed 
by those who separate her illness in 1920 from that of which she 
died 1 That document seems to me to be treated fairly as an esti¬ 
mate on which you can rely on her true condition at that time. 
The date of it you will bear in mind is the 23rd August, 1920. 

Now let me quite shortly remind you of the August illness. 
The doctor had seen her on the 1st August. Dr. Hi neks was asked 
for a sleeping draught on 15th August. We know that Dr. Hincks 
took a specimen of the urine, and found albumen in it. On' an 
earlier occasion she had been suffering from vomiting, and her 
tongue was clean, pulse 120, and sordes round her mouth. He 
visited her first at twelve o’clock, and the symptoms which had 
returned at three o’clock had been increased and were marked. 
Those are the symptoms I am dealing with. She suffered from 
vomiting, her pulse 120, instead of 80, and sordes round her 
mouth, heart dilated and sallow complexion. At three o’clock 
Dr. Hincks was doubtful whether she was in a condition in which 
she could be taken to the asylum. That anxiety had not existed 
in his mind at an earlier time, hut when he came back those 
symptoms had progressed in such a marked manner that he hesi¬ 
tated. She was taken, not in a car sent from the asylum, which 
would contain as part of its equipment- something in which the 
patient could vomit, but she was taken in a car by Dr. Hincks, 
and there was put in a vessel because of her condition that caused 
such anxiety. She was taken to the asylum, and arrived there 
in an exhausted condition. She arrived, and her urine was found 
to contain albumen, which cleared up, and by the 28th it had all 
gone, to be quite accurate, and her condition had shown a startling 
rapid alteration in the course of the few days from the 18th when 
Dr. Hincks visited her. 

Arsenical poisoning we know a great deal about now. It has 
two features—an immediate effect on the stomach, at first indi¬ 
cated by vomiting, and it has also an action, after the vomiting 
and after the arsenic itself has been expelled, upon the nervous 
system, and you would expect to find (this is agreed on both sides) 
that after the acute symptoms had passed there would he an effect, 
on the nervous system, which comes on in ten or fourteen days..,. 
What happens 1 She is taken to the asylum, and is there treated, 
and the albumen passes away, and the anxiety of her condition 
is. modified; and yet you find that early in September—about a 
fortnight \after her admission to the asylum—there is the second 
stage of her arsenical poisoning—neuritis, peripheral neuritis—we. 
know what that means, not local neuritis in one joint or one arm, 
but it is from a central force which saps the vitality of the nerves 
and finds expression in a general inability to - make use of the 
x * 305 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

The Attorney-General 

extremities of the limbs. All those symptoms came on and were 
marked quite clearly. Now, was dial due or not to arsenical 
poisoning., or was it due to an to-intoxication ? I will not repeat 
but when you regard that document and see what her general 
health was, and when you find those symptoms'—both of them 
primary and secondary results 1. ask you to accept the evidence 
now clearly given by Dr. I Snicks and others that what she was 
suffering from when she went to the asylum was arsenical poison¬ 
ing. In the course of the stay at the asylum wo were told by Dr. 
Townsend that it would be the ordinary practice to examine the 
urine from time to time, a,ml, as (hero was no statement, of any 
albumen, we may assume that on the "28th August she was better. 
The evidence of Dr. Townsend is perhaps not so definite as to 
her actual condition in October, November, or December, but it is 
a general march forward, and she hud (had tonic that contained 
arsenic for thirty-one days, from 3rd October to {1th November. 
All that would pass away in the seventy-nine days which elapsed 
before the last dose of (bis tonic, mixture. We know that all traces 
of that would pass away, ami that the only signs that one might 
get would be in the hair and, tuu'Is which were, grown, or which 
commenced to grow while she was taking the tonic. You would 
find traces of the arsenic, but for all practical purposes you may 
eliminate that tonic.. It is suggested that during the time there 
was some clear evidence, of which I am not aware, that she defi¬ 
nitely showed a retardation of her condition while she was taking 
that tonic. If you look at the matter in a straight way I think 
Dr. Townsend’s evidence is that she made progress, and, as far as 
I remember, there was no indication (though the experts spoke of 
it) or record that in October she was suffering again, or anything 
of that sort, and you will then judge whether or not there is any¬ 
thing to disperse the opinion given with weight and with confidence 
by Dr. Hi neks. Dr. Spilsbury and Sir 'William Willeox say that 

in August her condition was caused by arsenical poisoning. 

Now we come to her release. You will remember Major Arm¬ 
strong writes, or gets Dr. Llincks to write, on the 11th January, 
and the statement is that there her mental condition has much 
improved, and so on—-a statement made with the care you would 
expect from a physician in charge of her, hut that is not fully 
accepted by Dr. Townsend, and Dr. Townsend, in all the circum¬ 
stances of the case, thought it one in which it would be wise to let 
her go out on conditional release—on probation. I said in opening, 
that.the prisoner refused to accept that, and I said that he may 
have done that because he did not want to have another responsible 
authority who would inquire into her death; and my learned 
friend is quite right in saying that the evidence of Dr. Townsend 
was that he would accept the certificate of a responsible doctor like 
Dr. Hincks. But what does the prisoner say about it % What 
does he say was his reason for not accepting this conditional 
release? He thought it would mean that from time to time doctors 

308 



Closing Speech for the Crown. 

Tke Attorney-General 

would come over from the asylum to examine her condition, and 
if these doctors had come from, the asylum, knowing what they 
did, if they found a recurrence of the symptoms, would not there 
be the danger, from their recurring visits, that the truth would 
out? I am quite content to leave that matter where the prisoner 

left it_that he was unwilling to accept conditional release because 

of the intermittent but recurring visits which he thought would 
have to he paid to her if she came out. Be it remembered that m 
order to certify a patient you have to get a second doctor’s opinion, 
and in this case it would be necessary to get Dr. Jayne to come 
Q-,-0r_ and he would have to pay a professional visit, with the con¬ 
comitant expense, and so on, and you remember Dr. Townsend 
said he did not accept the position that mentally she was cured. 
Her physical condition had improved enormously, but mentally 
(and that is the reason she went to the asylum) he did not accept the 
statement that she was fully cured; and you will ask yourselves 
whether or not that was a wise and prudent course for an affec¬ 
tionate husband, knowing of the difficulty of a re-certification 
warrant by a doctor that her mental condition was. not completely 
re-established—you will consider whether an affectionate husband 
would have said, yes, I think the right course is to accept what 
Dr. Townsend offered, because in his judgment perhaps the best 
judgment at such a moment—it would be the better course to 
pursue. On the 11th, the day on which this release is first con¬ 
templated by a letter from Dr. Hincks, that is the day on which 
there was the purchase of these 4 ounces of white arsenic. 

Now she comes hack, and my learned friend has this difficulty 
to vet over. He wishes to attribute the whole of the illness from 
which she died to a fatal dose of arsenic taken wilfully by the 
deceased at some date about the 16th—I think on the 16th Feb¬ 
ruary. He has overlooked a good deal of evidence to which 1 am 
oping to call your attention. It is not on Dr. Hincks alone that 

her condition before the lfith depends. Let me remind you. On 

the 23rd January he secured the services of Nurse Kinsey, because 
at that time she was still suffering from this peripheral neuritis. 
At that time Nurse Kinsey came in to help her an hour m the 
morning and an hour in the evening, but Nurse Kinsey tells us 
that she was told that Mrs. Armstrong had vomited on the 27th 
January. She says that on the 26th she took two puls. Ihe 
prisoner and she told me of this. 1 asked him why, and he said 
he thought for indigestion. He told me that she had vomited m 
the night after taking them.” Of course, you may suggest that 
these pills—(some homoeopathic pills, or Dr. Andrew. Clarke s pills, 
which she had taken for a period of years, and her sister had taken 
them)—that the sickness was to he attributed to them. But that 
is the definitely proved vomiting on the 27th January, and^ Nurse 
Kinsey calls back on the 10th February. She had been for four 
days seeing Mrs. Armstrong night and morning. She calls back 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

The Attorney-General 

to see Mrs. Armstrong, and she finds, and her words are, she was 

very surprised at her condition. “ I called to see Mrs. Arm¬ 
strong and was very surprised at her condition. There was a 
deep discoloration of the skin, she was very wasted, and complained 
of severe pains in the stomach, and vomiting badly. She was on 
the sofa lying down. Major Armstrong was alone with her.” 
There you have Nurse Kinsey’s evidence regarding her patient— 
that she vomited and was worse during that time, and that on the 
10th February there is a marked change in her condition—she 
complained of vomiting and pain in the stomach. She had thus 
got an indication of her condition, discoloration of the skin, and 
she was very blue round the mouth. Do you believe that those 
symptoms told you by Nurse Kinsey have got no relevance to the 
subsequent illness? Does not it point to this, that the prisoner 
had commenced once more, it may be but small doses, but was 
living her doses of arsenic which once more brought into the light 
the very symptoms which arise on the giving of arsenic—vomiting 
and pains in the stomach, and so on 1 On the 11th Di. Hmcks 
calls and he made a somewhat close examination of her, and he 
endeavoured to get her to walk. He thought there was some want 
of co-ordination, but what was her condition at the time.. lou 
remember he described it, that she could not pick up a pin, that 
this peripheral neuritis prevented her doing so, and she complained 
of a spring pressing her up from the ground, and he said she 
complained of a return of this symptom—the high-steppage gait 
Now pause there for a moment before we get to any controversial 
point which may be discussed on the one side or the other. I put 
it interrogatively to you, have you not, by the evidence of Nurse 
Kinsey and by the evidence of Dr. Hindis, sure and certain evi¬ 
dence of a return of the symptoms of arsenical poisoning! Now,, 
there is a controversy raised whether or not Nurse. Allen was right 
in saying she thought she walked down on the lllth or 12th and 
took to her bed on the 13th, or whether she was sitting m the 
garden on the 14th, as Mrs. Price says she was. She was sitting 
in the garden when Mrs. Price saw her; under what circumstances! 
She was helping Mrs. Armstrong to sit up and enjoy the fresh air. 
With no sign of illness at that time? Not so. 1 hen the witness 
Price says she was sitting up with an eider down round her and 
a hot-water bottle, and she describes her condition as very trail. 
Add that to what I have said and see if I am not right that during 
that period of time you have evidence of the return of these 
arsenical symptoms—not as acute as before, but at the same time 
definite and clear, and my learned friend has to get over that if 
his suggestion .of suicide is to be established. Now during th _ 
time sht betrayed, as Dr. Hindu told us, certain symptoms, Mid 
I can deal quite shortly with the subsequent days. On.the loth 

he called, and some question has been raised as to what time ne 
called. We know he was telephoned for, and we know his booh 
records a second entry of a whole long day. He went to see Mrs. 

308 



Closing Speech for the Crown. 

The Attorney-General 

Armstrong. Let me read it to you. C£ 1 went and found her in 
bed; she told me she had been vomiting; she complained of 
abdominal pains. 1 examined her abdomen, and found it intensely 
painful on slight pressure; it was not swollen, but contracted; 
there were no signs of organic disease in the stomach. I examined 
her heart, and there was a pre-systolic murmur/’ &c. c ‘ Her 
anxiety was to get better.” We know that during the last four 
days of her life the paralysis increased, and she was quite unable 
to take any food. I am willing on this, perhaps, to assume little; 
but it is of great importance to show that those symptoms were 
acute on the 16th, that they had existed and had recurred, it is 
said by Armstrong that he did not know she was going to die 
until Dr. Hincks told him so on the Monday. Dr. Hincks’s state¬ 
ment is that he told him on the 18th, which, if I recollect rightly, 
would he Friday. He says he told him on Friday, and there is 
no doubt that from this time (for this is agreed between us, these 
last four days) she was lying helpless, and the evidence of Dr. 
Hincks, I submit to you, is of greater value and of greater weight 
than I think anybody else 7 s evidence, because you have got the 
evidence of a man, a trusted physician, who was seeing her and 
observing her day by day. 

Ho "attack can be made on Dr. Hincks. Ho one doubts his 
ability, his experience, his judgment, his reliability which he 
exercised in the course of the illness of which he tells us. Did she 
take it herself? A religious woman, a virtuous woman; anxious, 
as Dr. Hincks tells us, to recover; and it is suggested that this 
woman committed suicide; that she had at some time on the 16th 
February taken the arsenic and poisoned herself. She was still 
able to speak; she was a person for whom they had no anxiety. 
Armstrong himself said, speaking of this very time; “Did 
you get anxious about your wife’s suicidal tendency?— A. Ho. 
Q, So that from the time she became bedridden down to the time 
of her death, the anxiety you had in August, 1920, did not recur 
to you?— A. Ho.” What is the suggestion of suicide? In August 
you know Mr. Chevalier had suggested that he (Armstrong) should 
put razors, and so on, away, Mr. Chevalier being a person who 
had come to his friend’s house. He said that in case of delusions, 
and I suppose any one of us would be anxious to do something or 
make some suggestion and would say, tc Well, if the person has 
.delusions, be careful,” but you will remember the evidence, that 
nobody attached any importance of any kind to the matter of 
August, but when you come to February this ease of suicide depends 
on this. It was said by one of the witnesses that she said going 
up to the attic, <c If anybody jumped out of that window would 
. they kill themselves? ” What does that mean? A mere observa¬ 
tion which depends entirely on circumstances and the occasion on 
which it is made. Does it mean “ 1 am going to commit suicide 
and want to find a way to commit suicide”? Do you attach 

309 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

The Attorney-General 

importance to that, or do you trace the cause of her illness as I 
Lave traced it to you? Dr. Hindu says she was anxious to get 
better and Nurse Allen tells us the same.. So far from their 
putting on this woman, as I have said a virtuous and religious 
woman, any anxiety to destroy herself, no word is told while she 
is suffering from acute pains. No word is told or revealed by her, 
and almost her last words on that morning, the 22nd, when she 
casts one lingering look on this world as she passes into the valley 
of the shadow of death were, “ I am not going to die, am I? I have 
everything to live for.” Suicide! Can you believe it 1 Can you 
accent it? It is upon that evidence you have got to say whether 
you will accept Nurse Allen and Dr. Hindu, or whether you will 
accept the suggestion kindly made, sympathetically made, to try 
and get something to say for the prisoner. Will you accept he 
suggestion in thkcase of suicide? Gent omen it you do not, the 
position is clear. You know what the household was m AugMt 
and February. One man and one person alone constituted the 
household on both those occasions, and here let me tell you of a 
remarkable piece of evidence, and I was astonished to hear the 
answer given by the prisoner—“ Yes, I was alone with her; there 
was milk and soda in the room. There was a pot ot Benger s or 
something in the room. <3- Did you ever put a cup to her Ups; 
did you ever slake her thirst; did you ever minister to her as a 
devoted, loyal, faithful, and loving husband?—A. No If he 
were the loyal and faithful husband, put yourself m that position. 
Is it not absolutely impossible that, being at the bedside of your 
wife suffering these agonies, you should detach yourself so far 
from her bedside and her sickness and from her pam as to say 
you never gave her anything to ministei to her ? , 

Gentlemen, when you are considering this matter take those 
matters I have presented to you into your consideration. The 
body is exhumed. Are there traces in it? We have given clear 
evidence on that, and I ask you to accept it and form an estimate 
based on exactly the same line of reasoning as the doctors about 
arsenic found in the body. If you are driving a horse vehicle or 
motor car, you know about the pace at which you are going, and 
-will be able to form an opinion from the time yon start of the hour 
at which you will arrive and reach your destination. That is one of 
the simple methods of ordinary reasoning m daily life. A _ doctor, you 
know, can tell us that he finds traces of poisoning, it they are 
found on its passage through the course of the body. He can tell 
you how long it has been there, and when it was taken, it is 
purely the same reasoning that happens in daily life. if y° u ar ® 
passing over a snowfield and see footmarks, you can tell that some 
person has passed over the snow. If you see marks on a moistened 
piece of land or road, then you know a person has passed going 
in a particular direction. All those are simply indications of 
daily life; and what do doctors do ? They find here through the 

310 



Closing Speech for the Crown. 

The Attorney-General 

bowels—and tlie bowel wall was not broken down-—what they ex¬ 
pected to find, that a certain quantity of this arsenic is there— 
less in the upper portion of the bowel, the jejunum, more in the 
ileum, and a larger quantity in the caecum. They know to a cer¬ 
tainty, within a"few hours, at what time the arsenical dose must 
have been taken in order to reach that point, and they tell you 
there must have been a fatal dose administered ^ to that woman 
within twenty-four hours of her death. Dr. Spilsbury and Sir 
William Willcox both had the points of these hypotheses put to 
them by my learned friend, and they were put to them in all 
good faith, and with every sympathy on the prisoner’s behalf, and 
they gave them every consideration. Sir William said as to the 
suggestion made, iC It Is quite impossible, and Di. Spilsbury 
took the same view. You have, therefore, the sure marks in the 
body itself, clear to the doctors—just as clear to them as I have 
said the footmarks would he to any on© showing which way^some- 
body has passed along—just as clear, and the only suggestion to 
try to get rid of this evidence Is that there has been what is 
called a & migration of the poison, and the doctors say they found 
in the liver^a large quantity had collected. You have It that the 
bowel wall was not broken down, and one of the doctors, I think, 
o*ave an illustration of what took place, and says the pipe of the 
bowel was intact—'indeed, the whole body had been preserved by 
the amount of arsenic that was in It. This is what Sir William 
Willcox says. He thoroughly understood Sir Henry’s proposition. 

<< | think his hypothesis quite impossible to account for Mrs. Arm¬ 
strong’s death. I understand the suggestion is suicide committed 
according to the system of that hypothesis. 

Well, gentlemen, that Is the close of the February Illness and 
the death. ^Now it is said, what possible motive can there be for 
such a wicked crime? Motive, gentlemen. Is a relative term, ho 
motive should be strong enough to bring the prisoner into the posi¬ 
tion he now occupies. The wealth of the Indies cannot oner a 
motive; there can never be an adequate motive toyou or tome, 
calmly considering the matter, for committing a crime so terrible, 
so sinister, so wicked—no motive. Ought I to have suggested that 
he would reckon £50,000; ought. I to have suggested that he would 
reckon £100,000, or that he would do it for £250,000? 

Motive is a relative term,but what do we find in fact here? We do 
find that the prisoner secured to himself a new will, entirely placing 
him in a different position. .Under the old will he is entitled to 
. receive, .in case of her death £50, and no more until 1933. Under 
■ the new will be would get some £2300 immediately. That new 
will.had one remarkable feature in it. The previous will .was 
drawn with particular care for. the sake of the children, and 
contained a small, hut never mind how small, true and honest 
expression of gratitude and love for their faithful servant, Miss 
Pearce The will was produced. It Is entirely different, cutting 

311 ', 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

The Attorney-General 

out and removing all the provisions that had been inserted in the 
old will, and it is a will which was signed under circumstances 
which I submit to you render it invalid. What is the purpose of 
the provision that a will shall he executed by the person signing it 
in the presence of two witnesses? It is that the testimony of one or 
other of them should after death be clear. Now, she makes a will, 
and states it to be her last testamentary disposition. What 
happened here was that the will is drawn by the prisoner, and under 
it he alters his own position. He displaces Miss Pearce. It was 
a will to which Lily Candy, afterwards Mrs. Evans, was a witness 
when Mrs. Armstrong was not present. Miss Pearce was there, ■ 
and has given us three accounts of it. “ I remember on one 
occasion I signed a paper in the drawing-room at the request of 
either Major Armstrong or Mrs. Armstrong, who said, ‘ Here 
is Miss Pearce, she will sign that 7 ; and I did as requested. I 
signed the will; I was not told it was a wall. I signed other 
papers for Mr. and Mrs. Armstrong, but I never knew 
what they were.” They are at variance on that, and in the box. . 
she had a sudden recollection, and then remembered Mrs. Arm¬ 
strong holding the will and saying, “ 1 will hold it while Miss 
Pearce puts her signature to it.” But it is for you and not for 
me to take the variation of the testimony Miss Pearce has given. . 
I submit to you it is clear, when you have regard to the will, that 
the will was signed irregularly, and that you can rely on Mrs. 
Evans's evidence. The only suggestion which my learned friend 
made with all the energy of which he is so capable .was that Lily 
Candy said that was the only document she had signed for Mr. 
Armstrong. I think she was right. It is said this was a deviation, 
and showed that her memory was bad. She had signed at some, 
anterior period when she came into the service some paper that 
she should be transferred to the panel of Dr. Hincks, and for that 
purpose she had to give her signature to the form filled up by 
Major Armstrong. It was a document signed for her purpose, 
and I think the evidence she gave that the will was the only docu¬ 
ment she ever signed for Major Armstrong was true. What she 
had done was that this form had been filled up by Major Arm¬ 
strong, and she had signed her name to her own document, 
but that is the only discrepancy, because the defence know if you 
accept Mrs. Evans 7 s evidence there is quite clear testimony 
under which that will was shown to have been signed and 
wrongly signed. It does not stop there. You will remember 
the question about the epitome and matters that arose just before 
Mrs. Armstrong left Barnwood Asylum, and her letter was. pro¬ 
duced, which I put to the prisoner, fC I forgot to ask where is my 
original will. 77 At this time Armstrong tells you she was quite 
clear and had no delusions about this. £f All executors ought to 
know. H. has a copy. You locked it up while he was on service 77 ; 
parts that are admitted by Armstrong to be perfectly accurate. 

312 



Closing Speech for the Crown. 

The Attorney-General 

The epitome was found after her death. I submit to you it was 
abundantly clear on this evidence that the prisoner was minded 
to get for his advantage under the new will immediate possession 
of his wife’s goods. Whether they were large or small I^care not. 

1 agree 1 can make a strong observation as to what motive would 
justify a prisoner in doing what he did. but I repeat to you that 
motive must be taken in its proper perspective, and you have 
there the motive of a man moved by the design and purpose 
to get, as he did, immediate possession of his wife’s property, and 
we know the securities were placed under circumstances not very 
clear. 

Let m© deal with one other matter. A lady ^was called as a 
witness, and perhaps it is a matter for your consideration at the 
time when this will was purporting to be made. Early in July 
they dined together. There is no sinister interpretation to be put 
on that, that they dined together, but within three months of his 
wife’s death the loyal and affectionate husband has so fax recovered 
as to go down to Bournemouth, and on the 14th or loth May he 
proposes marriage to that lady. Scorn is poured by my friend 
on the fact that the initials of the lady are entered in his diary, 
and he asks if a young man ever records that in his diary when 
he is going to pay addresses to a young lady. What are the 

circumstances ? Is it not rather this—a widower sorrowing foi 
the loss of an. affectionate and loyal wife with whom he was on 
affectionate terms, might not it be that he had recovered so quickly 
that three months had passed since the death, but though he was 
affected so much as to write that letter and to state he had become 
unstrung that he not unnaturally wanted change, and he arrives 
back from Paris on the 28th April, ' and he goes at once to Bourne¬ 
mouth, and in a friendly manner he asks the lady to engage her¬ 
self to him? You wilf take that into your consideration. It, 
too, has a bearing on the affection and devotion of a husband 
towards his wife. It all adds weight, and you will know what 
weight to give it in the relation of a husband^ to his wife. Lastly, 
in passing from this matter, let me deal with one more matter. 
It is said by my learned friend, again with force, and not undue 
force, “ Can you imagine a man committing this crime who m 
August when negotiating with a busy friend, Mr. Chevalier, to 
com© down and see his wife when taken from the asylum can you 
imagine this man taking steps to get Dr. Hindis to visit his wife 
when she came from the asylum and to pay visits from time o 
time-—can you imagine a man corresponding with Miss Bessie 
Friend on a post card,” and all the rest of it? “ Can you 
imagine a man engaging a nurse to look after his wife in January, 
and talking afterwards to Mr. Chevalier, and so on, to whom he 
explained that, though he had obtained the property under the 
new will, he would carry out the terms of the old will? In© 
prisoner is in this position—do you suppose that if he adopts the 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

The Attorney-General 

subtle method of poison he will not endeavour to cover the tracks! 
Do you suppose that a magistrates 5 clerk, well acquainted with 
evidence, and the way in which men have felt the way to hide 
what they are guilty of—do you suppose he would take no steps! 
Yes, the very fact that this crime is one which is so difficult to 
discover—is one which would lead him to apply the ingenuity 
which he possessed and the experience he had acquired—led him 
to cover up every possible trace of his crime if he could, and it is 
that sort of case in which he might expect to meet with success. 
Many murders are committed, and many other crimes committed 
in hot blood, but murder by poison is committed by deliberate 
thought and by carefully and well-chosen means. It is as I have 
said, sinister—it is a design, and then a device no doubt is made 
use of to secure that the discovery of the crime shall be well-nigh 
impossible. 

Now I will pass to the next matter to which I must ask your V 
attention—the 'Martin case. You know the story. On the 20th 
October the position was this, a situation of some difficulty—do not 
let me put it higher-—had arisen whereby Major Armstrong as the 
stakeholder knew that unless completion took place the stake could 
be re-demanded and the sale would be off. That had been made 
perfectly clear, because at the interview of the 20th, the day tie 
purchasers were present, they had emphasised their position. On 
the 21st there is an invitation to tea, the hospitality offered. 
Pause for a moment. Who was this man whom Mr. Armstrong, 
was beginning to invite to tea? Once and once only previously 
had he been invited to the Armstrongs 5 house, and then he com-'., 
rnitted, according to Mr. Armstrong, an intolerable offence: he . 
went unsuitably clothed to this house in the country on an after¬ 
noon, and he arrived dressed in flannels and what is called a sports, 
coat, when, to pay proper respect to the invitation, he ought to 
have dressed himself differently. If you believe the story, on 
which I confess some comment might be made, if you believe'it, 
Mrs. Armstrong had taken such exception that he was never invited 
again; Mrs. Armstrong was particular. It was after this situa¬ 
tion, which was more or less acute, that an opportunity is sought 
by the loyal, faithful, and affectionate husband to once more .offer' 
hospitality to the man whom his wife had taken exception to. It 
is curious, he does offer hospitality, no reason can Be given for it, 
and finally the tea is fixed up for the 26th. He declines to accept 
the.lift in the car which Mr. Martin offered; it is a time at which, 
they are both working at high pressure, very busy; these sales have 
to be completed. He says in declining the lift in the car that he 
had something to do at Mayfield first. He left the office at about 
four o'clock; he says he went into the house and took off his hat 
and eoat; he does not remember going to the caf6 that day. What 
happened? At the tea a scone was handed to him, you have 
heard from Mr. Martin, with the definite statement, <( Excuse 
fingers. 55 What was it? Here there is a remarkable concurrence 

314 



Closing Speech for the Crown. 

The Attorney-General 

of testimony. Miss Pearce says they were not buttered in the 
kitchen, the maid Price says they were uncut and unbuttered, that 
is the ones that were supplied in the house. Miss Pearce made 
them. So that the household say that these scones which were 
provided from the kitchen at Mayfield, made by Miss Pearce, were 
uncut and unbu ttered. Martin says it was n buttered scone; U e 
prisoner’s statement concurs in that. This is the statement 
written when be was first challenged—” The food consisted ©i 
buttered scones, buttered currant loaf cut in slices, and bread and 
butter. I handed Mr. Martin some scone on a plate.” It is 
curious that you have got the testimony of the household— scones 
not buttered; the testimony of Mr. Martin and that statement}— 
scones buttered; the testimony of the prisoner £ I handed him a 
scone,” not a question of the bread and butter, a scone on a plate. 
Then he goes on to say this, and you mark it—” I shall be able 
to ascertain by going to my house where the scone and the currant 
loaf were bought.” We know from Una Baker that buttered scones 
from the cafe were bought by her once or twice and once by another 
clerk when Mr. Martin was invited to tea at the .office, as he was 
subsequently on several occasions. You will consider whether you 
accept the evidence of Mr. Martin and the prisoner that it was a 
buttered scone; and, if it was a buttered scone, it was not difficult 
to place a small amount of arsenic, such as the prisoner was tound 
in possession of at his arrest, into the buttered scone; there was an 
opportunity at anv moment of putting that on a cake plate. 
Times are far too uncertain for you to say that Jay or MacGeor^e 
or the prisoner or anybody else accounts for every twenty seconds 
between four o’clock and six o’clock. 

He left the office on this day when lie was very busy at lour 
o’clock, and you have the scene before you, and you will ask your¬ 
selves whether the opportunity is not abundantly .shown by what 
had happened and what did happen. Dr. Ainslie says that “ 
that bottle.in which the urine was taken was clean, and 1/dJrti ot 
a grain of arsenic was found in it, Martin’s case was a case or 
arsenical poisoning. The charge has been made that this trace 
of arsenic may have arisen from a dirty bottle. Mr. Davies 
selected the bottle, a chemist of experience and repute; he tells you 
he washed it half a dozen times, it was a new cork, and he. realised 
the importance of a clean bottle. .Dr. Toogood makes the some¬ 
what remarkable statement that apparently he would not be satis¬ 
fied unless the urine was passed in.the presence of a physician. 
What that observation is worth I know not, and why it was made 
I'know not, but vou will have ,to consider this— here-are the 
symptoms of Mr. Martin. He goes home, suffers at-once from 
nausea., feels disinclined to eat. his food, does in fact yield to Ills 
wife’s solicitation that he should eat; he does eat the food., vomit¬ 
ing comes on, he has very severe pain in the stomach, diarrhoea, 
and all the rest' of it. But I am content. Dr. Ainslie’s own view 
is if you can rely on.that test of 1 /33rd of a grain, it was a case 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

The Attorney-Genera! 

of arsenical poisoning. He said, “ If I was certain of the sample 
1 should agree that Martin had taken some arsenic/ 7 What other 
source had this healthy man to get this arsenic from? What other 
source than the man who afterwards invites him to tea, repeated 
invitations? According to his own story, he invited him a full 
half a dozen times to tea during this busy period. On the 6th 
December there was the threat of the writ followed on the 7th hy 
an invitation to tea. Then it was found that Martin had failed 
to come, but would come at 5.45. Martin tells you then the 
message was, “ Do not bother to come now, come to-morrow to 
tea/ 7 On 12th December, the date when the time was up and the 
writ would have to be issued against him to recover the money of , 
which Armstrong was the stakeholder, again “ Come to tea. 77 “ Oh, 

1 am engaged to Davies. 77 £< Put Davies oil/ 7 How do you 
explain this sudden change of attitude which has come about from 
the 20th October to this man who had occupied a position, so far : 
as the Armstrong household went, of not being more than a pro-/ 
fessional acquaintance, or a professional friend, and of whom the 
recollection of Mrs. Armstrong’s judgment of him, if true, must : 
have lingered in Armstrong’s mind? And yet you have this re¬ 
markable circumstance, that remarkable illness, and the discovery 
of l/33rd of a grain of arsenic in the urine. It is to that tea, 
to those circumstances, to that illness, to these remarkable and 
curious symptoms that this case owes its origin, as I pointed out 
originally. You will consider what explanation can be offered of ; 
that tea and of those circumstances. 

Then there follows the December arrest; the statement is made, 
and the leave is given to see the morning letters. Let us pause, 
there for a moment. We have this coat, wluit is called for this 
purpose a garden coat, but on this occasion it was being worn' 
by Mr. Armstrong at his office. There is this small parcel of 
arsenic, and the letters are lying on the desk as if they needed 
attention or signature. Inspector Crutchett gives leave for him to 
see those letters; the others, the contents of the pocket, are all 
folded up in a brown paper parcel, and upon that there is placed 
a blotter to keep them. While Inspector Crutchett is not observing 
the prisoner, the prisoner releases the parcel, goes to pick it open, 
and Inspector Crutchett says, What are you doing? 77 The 
letters 1 allowed him to examine, 77 says Crutchett, “ had come by 
the morning post; the pocket contents 1 did not examine until 
4th January; I gave him leave to examine the business ones only; 
he had not examined these business letters when he got to the 
heap of contents of his pocket/ 7 In other words, so says 
the inspector, he had not made use of the opportunity accorded 
him, but he did take an opportunity of going to the brown paper 
packet. Inspector Crutchett did not examine this little parcel of 
arsenic which was taken from his pocket until 4th January/ he 
had no knowledge of it; they were mere “ contents of the pocket 77 

316 




Closing Speech for the Crown. 

The Attorney-General 

so far as he knew on the 31st December. He stopped him. What 
does the prisoner tell us? He examined that brown paper parcel ; 
he discovered a little packet of arsenic; he, as he told ns, realised 
what the parcel was and its importance. My learned friend in 
his candour says he would have been wise to tell inspector 
Crutchett. Why did lie not 1 ? Mark you, it is not Crutchett who 
knows anything about the arsenic, it is the prisoner himself who 
finds the packet of arsenic, realises its importance, and it is con¬ 
science that comes to the prisoner’s assistance, and he realises 
what the deep importance of it is. Yes; and conscience makes 
cowards of us all/’ and the man who had written his statement 
telling us that he was giving the whole matter to help the police, 
with candour, with completeness, says nothing. What is the story of 
the prisoner? It is precise, in detail, and it had its effect. It 
says this, ££ The first time I purchased arsenic was in 1914,” and' 
so on. ££ I came across a recipe for making liquid weed-killer; I 
remember him telling me arsenic had to be mixed with charcoal, 
and he mixed it accordingly.” Then ££ The purchase of \ lb. of 
arsenic in June, 1919, was for the same purpose, and was used 
in exactly the same way. The liquid and powder weed-killer were 
purchased to my order by Jay, of Castle Gardens, Hay* who 
attended to my garden at that time. I don’t even know how much 
was purchased, and I -never saw it. I believe it was kept in the 
stable. In January, 1921, I made a further purchase of J lb. 
of arsenic at Mr. Davies’s shop. A small amount of this was used 
as a weed-killer after being boiled with caustic soda by myself. 
It was not a success, which explains why I have some left at 
my house. When I purchased this arsenic it was mixed with 
charcoal. I am keeping this to make a further trial later on/’ 
and the final sentence is this, ££ The cupboard where I keep the 
arsenic at my house contains boot-cleaning materials, and is un¬ 
locked. Nobody in the house, as far as 1 know, is aware of the 
presence of arsenic in the house. This arsenic I speak of is the 
only poison in my possession anywhere, excepting, of course, any 
contained in medicine. I have a medicine chest in a bedroom.” 
There is a particularity in that, a meticulous particularity, and 
that is the statement which he realised, when he saw and knew 
what the little packet was in the brown paper parcel, was false 
and misleading; and we came here, and my opening was based 
on this statement that the 1921 arsenic was bought with charcoal, 
and it was the only arsenic at the house. Of course, I knew of 
the little packet. 

Mr. Justice Darling —The little packet in the pocket ? 

The Attorney-General —Yes, the little packet in the pocket.. 

The prisoner realised the deep importance, for, according to 
his case,, in the jacket which he did sometimes wear at the office 
there was this final dose, and if it was worn and in his pocket, 
for apparently it remained among his letters, caught up among 

317 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

The Attorney-General 

them, during the time of these repeated invitations to tea, there 
■was the evidence, the sinister evidence, of the reason for and the 
purpose of giving these repeated invitations. 

Now, we know that after that the house was searched, the police 
failed to find it, and we know the dramatic circumstances under 
which Mr. Matthews ultimately did find the packet. He said, 
and 1 sympathise with him, that he could hardly believe what it 
was when he discovered it. Let me here say, as 1 am entitled 
to, holding the office that I do, with what pleasure I heard the 
statement made by my lord to Mr. Matthews yesterday. Whether 
it is of one branch of the profession or another, all that attaches 
to or concerns the great legal profession has a deep concern for 
me, and rightly, and I was delighted to hear Mr. Matthews had 
the opportunity of showing that in his case he observed the strictly 
professional and right attitude, but 1 know that he perfectly 
appreciated what my friend had done, that when this startling 
information was given to us he put questions in which we realised 
exactly what the' position was, and after that time 1 made the 
statement (which I think I made not once or twice) to which on 
my own motion I should like voluntarily to make and to join with 
my lord in the tribute which he paid to Mr. Matthews. It was a 
difficult situation, and he acted rightly. But how does that 
affect the prisoner 1 The prisoner is in this position, he has 
made a false statement, and realises it to he false; he has to account 
for this little packet in some way. The statement was made before 
the packet had been either considered or examined, and he now 
tells us how he came to make these little packets of arsenic. He 
tells us that on an afternoon in June, 1921, he, minded to try 
this dry arsenic on a dry day upon the. dandelions, went and folded 
up these little packets, and he mad© a score of them; he then 
immediately took them out and, packet by packet, dandelion by 
dandelion, daisy by daisy, he endeavoured to place them at the 
roots of these weeds, and to empty the little packets which he, a 
solicitor, busy, and so on, had made with his own fingers but a 
few moments before. Gentlemen, is there a man, woman, or child 
in this Court who heard that statement who would attach the 
smallest credence to it? Do you believe that that man made those 
packets on that day and then went out and emptied them, daisy 
by daisy, dandelion by dandelion? It is an almost pitiable device, 
but it is and it remains a falsehood to deceive. A falsehood; 
perhaps the best that could be contrived to explain, but a false¬ 
hood none the less. Yes, says my friend for the prisoner, “ this 
attitude of suspicion which places him there/ ? There is a weapon 
in the hands of each one of us, a trusty weapon in the armoury 
of each one of us, a weapon that belongs to high and low, the 
poor and the defenceless, that can pierce through doubt and 
resolve suspicion; the weapon is.truth. Tell the story, tell us 
what happened, take away the falsehood, explain, candour from 

318 



Closing Speech for the Crown. 

Tiie Attorney-General 

the accused man, candour from the loyal husband, candour from 
the affectionate and sorrowing widower, suffering from this atmo¬ 
sphere of suspicion. Yes, truth is a great and faithful weapon, 
and if it is not used by a man so well acquainted with the serious 
danger of the devious path of falsehood, if it is not used by a 
man well acquainted with police court proceedings, the course of 
justice, comments that may be made, am I not justified in saying 
that there was a reason for it 2 And this, may I say pitiful story, 
is made out, and you are asked to believe that that is how the 
3f grains came into the pocket of the prisoner. Gentlemen, if I 
am confident of one thing in this case, I am confident that no 
one will believe that story. What does it bring with it ? It brings 
with it this, that that story was realised to be a misleading story; 
it did not contain the guidance which it purported to contain; 
it put the police off the track; it secured time for the prisoner 
to make up the story as to how the little packet came into his 
pocket. Gentlemen, you will judge; I am not going to read that 
again, you are fully acquainted with that story. What does it 
bring with it? A falsehood; it brings down the structure built 
up upon it. It collapses, and we have to contemplate the prisoner 
at a moment when we might have called upon him from his experi¬ 
ence and position to exercise candour, it shows him a man making 
up a falsehood, relying upon a falsehood to explain this sinister 
discovery in the pocket of his coat. How much can you rely upon 
his evidence? 

Gentlemen, I think I have now gone through the whole of 
the case that I present to you, and I hope I have dealt with it not 
in too great detail, but I hope I have dealt with the salient 
facts. The story that I have told, the evidence that I have pre¬ 
sented, I submit all fits together, it all points to one conclusion, 
that the illness of Mrs. Armstrong in August was due to arsenical 
poisoning; the illness in January and February of 1921 was due 
to arsenical poisoning, and we know she died of it. The extra¬ 
ordinary similarity between the symptoms in both those illnesses 
is so remarkable that you have the confident opinion of the experts, 
and you have to ask yourselves, who would minister it? Was it a 
case *of suicide? No.- Are you to believe the story told by the 
prisoner; are you to accept his explanation ? And what of Martin’s 
illness? I submit to you that we have carried this case far out 
of the range of suspicion, far beyond all range of legitimate 
doubt, far beyond the uncertainty that has been suggested; we 
have carried it into a realm where you can rely upon what the 
prosecution has told you. 

My friend has rightly more than once called your attention 
to the fact that this is a case of life and death. Yes, but whose 
life? Whose death? Has there not risen before you in these long 

319 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

The Attorney-General 

days a picture of the scene, of that wan figure lying helpless on 
her bed of sickness, unable to help herself in any -way, that 
figure who has already passed to her death? By whose hand! 

I say, and I submit to you with confidence, by the prisoner’s 
hand. 1 submit to you that the evidence compels you to that 
verdict. 1 submit to you that, sympathetic as I know you have 
been and would be to listen to any legitimate cogent explanation 
which can be put forward on behalf of the prisoner, the evidence 
is too strong, the evidence is too convincing, and if 1 am right 
and that evidence compels you, you will not fail to do your duty, 
you will not be frightened to do your duty, and I shall ask you 
in the name of the well-being of our community, in the interests 
0 f our whole social bond, I shall ask you in the interests of the 
community at large, the interests alike of the poor and the 
lowly the defenceless, the sick, all happily included in the one 
word,* the Crown, I shall ask yon to find a verdict that the 
prisoner is guilty. 


Charge to the Jury. 

Mr. Justice Darling —Gentlemen of the jury, the long and 
anxious inquiry in which wo have been engaged now approaches 
its end, and it becomes my duty to surn^up to you. the case as 
it has been presented. I am glad to think that it will not be 
necessary fox* me to go through the whole ol. the evidence piece 
by piece; you have heard it, you have listened to it attentively, 
and a great deal of it has become immaterial,, because when the 
Attorney-General set out to lay this case before you he opened 
to you that he would have to prove that; Mrs. Armstrong died of a 
dose or doses of arsenic administered to her, and the proving of 
that necessitated the calling of a groat deal of evidence. The 
Attorney-General could not omit to call it, because in a criminal; 
case no admission short of guilty can be made on behalf, of a 
prisoner, therefore Sir Henry Curtis Bennett could not at any: 
moment say, “ You need not trouble to prove that, I admit it.” 
But the course of the defence was this, that a great deal of what 
the Attorney-General had to prove would not be disputed, and., 
the first thing which is no longer in dispute, and has not been in... 
dispute since the evidence began to be given, is that, so far as 
anything can be agreed upon in a criminal case, it is agreed 
that Mrs. Armstrong died on the 22nd February, last year, of 
arsenical poisoning, of arsenic taken into her system. So the 
real dispute between the prosecution and the defence is this, 
have the prosecution proved that the defendant gave it to her! 
Then, in order to persuade you that the prosecution have not proved 
that the defendant gave his wife that arsenic, the defence contend 

320 



Charge to the Jury. 

Mr Justice Darling 

that they have proved that she took it herself intending to kill 
herself. If he gave it to her he committed a felony. If she took 
it herself intending to kill herself she committed a felony. 
These are the matters upon which yon will have to. use your 
judgment, having* regard to the evidence. 

Now the case itself, as has been said to you, is a remarkable 
■one, a deeply interesting one, and 1 doubt whether any of ns 
■engaged here" to-day have in recollection a case so remarkable in 
its° incidents. It is, therefore, very fortunate, and I think the 
public should be satisfied to know, that this prosecution was con¬ 
ducted by no less a person than the Attorney-General. It is a 
case of great importance to the public, and, when the Attorney- 
General is engaged on behalf of the Crown, the duty towards 
the public and towards the prisoner is more fully discharged 
than if any other counsel appeared in the case, or it may be 
presumed to be so. The interest of the Crown in this matter is 
this, it is the duty of the Crown to protect the weakest, the 
meanest, as well as the strongest and most highly placed of its 
subjects; they are all equal before the Crown, rich and poor, 
■old and young, strong and weak; and if there is good reason to 
suppose, as there is when a grand jury have returned a true 
bill, that a subject of His Majesty has been murdered, it is of 
the highest importance to the whole community that if the mur¬ 
derer can be discovered he should be discovered. It is of import¬ 
ance that the whole case should be fully and fairly investigated, 
.and it is of importance that the right conclusion should be 
reached, whatever be the consequences, by the jury to whom is 
•confided the duty of deciding the case. My duty, an anxious one 
enough, I assure you, is to see that nothing is given in evidence 
which is not fair and legal evidence, that no unfair questions are 
put (there was no . difficulty with regard to that, because none 
were put by either side), and it is my duty to see that all that 
can be elicited by fair and proper questions from any witness 
whatever is at your disposal, because you have a grave and onerous 
duty to perform when you have to deliberate upon your verdict. 

Having said this, let me turn to this particular case in a 
little more detail. You know (I dare say it is unnecessary to say 
it, but. my duty is to say it) that it is not for any person accused 
in an English Court to prove that he is not guilty; he pleads not 
guilty; that means, cc I call upon.the Crown to prove my guilt . 97 
A verdict of not guilty consequently does not mean that lie has 
. proved himself to be innocent, nothing of the kind; it means that 
the Crown has not proved him to be guilty ; that is all. There- 
• .fore you must ask yourselves always, has the Crown proved this 
or that against the prisoner to our satisfaction, this, which 
involves his guilt ? If not, it is not proved, and you say not 
guilty; that is your. duty. If you have a reasonable doubt as 
to whether he is proved guilty or not, you must say not guilty. 

321 ... 


Y 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Mr Justice Darling 

That is the law of England, and a reasonable doubt means this, 
it does not mean that you do not like to do it, it does not mean 
that it is disagreeable to you, it does not mean that by some 
possible hypothesis you can arrive at that conclusion. There is 
hardly anything of which a really subtle and ingenious mind 
cannot convince itself; there is hardly any truth that a subtle and 
ingenious person cannot bring himself honestly to doubt. But it 
means that you say you are convinced, unless when you consider 
the facts you have a reasonable doubt as to whether the matter is 
proved or whether it is not, a reasonable doubt in this sense. If 
it is the kind of doubt, not such as you would conjure up in the 
middle of the night, but such a reasonable doubt as in the day 
time when you are about your business would lead you to say, 
well, I cannot make up my mind about it. Suppose you were 
buying a horse or selling one, and you had to resolve suddenly 
whether he had got some disease, say, spavin. You say, I am 
not sure he has, maybe he has not, but it is so uncertain that I 
cannot say one way or the other. That would be a reasonable 
doubt. Of course, that is not exhaustive as to what is reasonable 

doubt; I only give you that as an instance, because we are here 

in the country, and "the kind of doubt that a man has to do with 

in his daily life is the kind of doubt which the law looks to in 

order to justify a man in saying, when he sits as a juryman in a 
Court of justice, “ I am not convinced of this or that.” It has 
been said here that in this case you are dealing with what is palled 
a case depending upon circumstantial evidence. That is so. 
There are people, I dare say you have come across them, who will 
say, oh, it is only circumstantial evidence. Nothing can be more 
foolish. Circumstantial evidence is as valuable as any other 
evidence, provided it be good evidence. Circumstantial evidence 
going to prove the guilt of a person is this, that one person proves 
one thing, another proves another, and another proves another, 
and all these converging facts are proved to conviction beyond 
reasonable doubt. Neither of them proves the guilt of the person, 
but taken together they do lead to that one inevitable conclusion; 
and if that is the result of circumstantial evidence it is a very much 
safer means of arriving at a conclusion than if one witness gets 
into the box and gives direct evidence and says, “ I saw this 
crime committed.” What would you have thought if some one 
had come and said, “ I never was in Mayfield before, I have never 
been there since, but I went there on the 16th February, and I 
happened to see the defendant, or let us say I happened to see the 
deceased, Mrs. Armstrong, go to the bureau and take out the 
packet of arsenic and measure out 3A grains, or 6 grains, or what¬ 
ever you like, and go and fetch a glass of water, and put the 
powder in, and swallow the stuff and walk upstairs and get into 
bed, and I heard her say, f There, that will settle it/ ” What 
would you think if you got that % That would be a piece of direct 
322 



Mr Justice Darling 


Charge to the Jury. 

evidence, there would be no circumstantial evidence about that. 
It would prove the very thing that is suggested, that she com¬ 
mitted suicide, and the only other thing which would have to be 
proved would be that she died. But would you believe that] If 
you find a number of things proved, one thing by one witness, 
another thing by another, another thing by another, and another 
by another, and those witnesses not acting in concert, Mr. Davies 
proving one thing, Dr. Spilsbury proving another, Nurse Allen 
proving another thing, Nurse Lloyd proving another. Sir William 
Willcox and Dr. Toogood (because in' many things they agree) and 
Dr. Ainslie proving the same thing, and they all point to the same 
conclusion, be it the conclusion of guilt or innocence, would not 
you say there is nothing like circumstantial evidence if you get 
enough of it trustworthy ] And yet it remains that some ignorant 
people who have not studieu the question call this only circum¬ 
stantial evidence/ 7 

With regard to this particular case, the charge is that 
the defendant murdered his wife, Mrs. Armstrong. You have 
had introduced into the case a kind of side issue; it has been said 
that he attempted to murder Mr. Martin, and you must remember 
that the charge upon which he was arrested was not the charge of 
murdering Mrs. Armstrong; that had not then been thought of,* 
so far as I know; what he was charged with was attempting to 
murder Mr. Martin. It was for that that the police went to 
investigate at his office, and it was only after Mr. Martin's illness, 
after people who knew of that and of the symptoms, were coming 
to the conclusion that the defendant might have attempted to 
murder Mr. Martin, it was only then that it occurred to some one, 
well, Mr. Martin seems to have suffered from arsenical poisoning, 
these symptoms, this vomiting, this diarrhoea, this pain in the 
abdomen, the suddenness of the attack, the taking of the food just 
before it with the defendant in whose house he had never taken 
food before, unless he had some tea on that occasion when Mrs. 
Armstrong was alive, all of this led some one or another to think, 
what about Mrs. Armstrong, what did she die of? Dr. Hincks 
gave a certificate pointing to natural death, hut that certificate was 
not false; the certificate did not say Mrs. Armstrong died of 
arsenical poisoning; no, but it did not untruly say that she died 
of anything. Arsenical poisoning is difficult to detect, and those 
who considered the case of Mr. Martin, and came to the conclusion 
that Mr. Martin had had a dose of arsenic given to him, after 
medical examination, analytical examination, had taken place, 
those people then came to the conclusion that it would he just as 
well to look a little further and see if by any chance Mrs. Arm¬ 
strong died of the very thing which Mr. Martin was supposed to 
be suffering from—arsenical poisoning. So an order was obtained 
and the body was exhumed on the 2nd January, the defendant 


# Of course it had. See Introduction.—E d. 


323 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Mr Justice Darling 

having been arrested for having: nil ein pled to murder Mr. Martin 
on the 31st December. What was found in regard to Mrs. Arm¬ 
strong ? Is it a remarkable coincidence or is it not ? Those 
who thought that Mr. Martin was suffering from arsenical poison¬ 
ing, and had thought that it would be well U> mvesligaie the case 
of’Mrs. Armstrong, found on the exhumation of her body that 
there was still in that body more arsenic, than some who are accus¬ 
tomed to deal with these things have found in any exhumed body 
before. Yet, mind, that body was not. exhumed because it was 
supposed that Mrs. Armstrong had commiiled suicide; that body 
was not exhumed at the suggestion of anybody now concerned with 
the defence; it was not exhumed to prove that. Dr. Hincks had 
given a wrong certificate and that Mrs. Armstrong had committed.' 
the felony of suicide—not at all. it was exhumed because a man 
who had lately had tea with the defendant was believed to be 
suffering from arsenical poisoning, and il was thought that it 
might be that the wife of the very man who gave the tea to Mr.: 
Martin had died of similar arsenical poisoning. So when it is 
said for the defence that the prosecution worked backwor.ds, so 
they did. What did they iind? They found exactly what the 
most suspicious expected to find; they found (hat, whereas the 
poison from which it was said that Mr. Martin was suffering was 
arsenic, the very same poison was present in extraordinary quan¬ 
tities in practically all the organs of the body of Mrs. Armstrong, 
and, that being so, what could be said? Could it. be said that she 
took it accidentally? It has not been suggested. It has been 

said on one side that points to the administration of arsenic with 
intent to destroy life, and on the other side if has been said it 
points to suicide. 

Something has been said to you about motive. The Attorney- 
General and Sir Henry Curtis Bennett both addressed you upon 
that, and, naturally enough, because whenever it is said that a 
person has committed a crime anybody says, but. why ? For what 
reason? In the case of Mr. Martin, what; was suggested was that 
the arsenic was given to Mr. Martin because the moment had come 
when Mr. Martin and the defendant had reached a point which 
made the situation very unpleasant for the defendant. Money 
had been paid by Mr. Martin’s clients, tenants who wished to pur¬ 
chase their farms; there was a day for completing and giving them 
their farms. The day went by, and Mr. Martin was continually 
pressing that the conveyance should be signed and the property 
made over to the tenants, and he never could get it done. He 
said, <£ I do not care whether your client can do it or whether he 
cannot do it, but if he does not do it you return mo the deposit 
which you have got ”; and Armstrong had got over £500, deposits 
made by these two gentlemen. Mr. Martin was saying, c< You are 
the stakeholder, you owe these farmers this money, or you owe 
them the conveyances which will make the land theirs.” He has 

324 



Mr Justice Darling 


Charge to the Jury. 

told you how he was being put off, whether because it could not 
be done or not you need not trouble, but it was not done. Then 
Mr. Martin was asked to tea, and he suffered from the symptoms 
you have heard, and lie recovered. He told you how then he was 
pressed again and again to go and have tea with the defendant, 
and how it got to this, he was not asked to Mayfield, but the de¬ 
fendant took to having his tea down at his office, it may be for a 
perfectly good reason; he got a gas ring on which he could heat 
some water, it may be for a perfectly good reason, but he kept on 
pressing Mr. Martin to go and have tea with him in his office, and 
Mr. Martin never would go, and never did go. Sir Henry Curtis 
Bennett said there is nothing remarkable about it; Mr. Martin 
took to having tea in his own office. So he did, but he told us 
why, and the reason he gave was that he wanted to have an excuse 
lor not going to tea with the defendant. 

Sir H. Curtis Bennett —One reason. 

Mr. Justice Darling —One reason, and a very sufficient one. 
It is. not as though it suddenly occurred to both the defendant 
and Mr. Martin that they would take tea in their office instead 
of going home, but the defendant, having taken to it for some 
reason or another, Mr. Martin took to it because, he told you, 
he wanted to have a good excuse for not accepting these pressing 
and constant invitations to go and have tea across the road. 

Now, how comes this case of Mr. Martin to be important 
here? That was a question of law which was argued when you 
were not present in Court. It is purely a question of law. It 
was submitted that Mr. Martin's case had nothing to. do with this 
one, and many cases were cited, some to show that it had and 
some to show that it had not, and the conclusion at. which I 
arrived was that the evidence in Martin's case was material her© 
and should be heard by you. (And, let me tell you,, if I was 
wrong in that, if 1 decided that point wrongly, and there is a 
conviction in this case, that will be quite enough to upset the 
whole proceedings,) Therefore you may depend upon it that I 
gave my best consideration to it, and I came to the conclusion 
that Martin's case has a hearing upon this one. What is the 
bearing ? The bearing is this, that ■ it is of value as showing 
that the defendant had .arsenic in his possession, and that he 
would use it to poison a human being. Let me say at once, if 
he is not proved to have given arsenic to Mr. Martin with intent 
to injure and kill him, if you come to the conclusion that he 
did not do that, then all the evidence given in Martin's case 
has. no bearing whatever upon this case—none at .all. ' But if you 
come to the conclusion that he did give it, why, then, it has a bear¬ 
ing, as showing that he had got poison and what he was pre¬ 
pared to do with it; as showing that he was prepared not merely 
to use it,on dandelions and things of that kind, but that he 

325 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Mr Justice Darling 

was prepared to use it on a human being if he had what to him 
appeared sufficient reason to do so. 

What is the suggestion now of how he did it? He asked Mr. 
Martin to tea at Mayfield. He was there before Mr. Martin 
arrived; it is said he was about in the garden, and the suggestion 
is that he had in his pocket, or that he might have had at all events, 
one of these little packets such as he had in his coat in December, 
and that he put the poison upon the food of Mr. Martin, upon 
something that Mr. Martin ate, just such an amount of arsenic 
as was in that little packet, because we know that what was in 
that packet was capable of killing not only a dandelion, hut was 
possibly a fatal dose for a human being. On what did he put it? 
Of course, the prosecution cannot tell you on what he put it. 
Who were there? Martin and Armstrong. Martin did not see 
him put it on to anything; if he had he would not have touched 
it. Many, many people have been poisoned, and poisoned with 
arsenic, some in this country, more in others, but, of course, 
these people did not see what was being done. No one who had 
been asked to dine with Cesaro Borgia would have eaten anything 
if they had seen him putting while powder on the victuals. So 
the prosecution cannot be expected to say exactly what it was that 
Martin may have taken with that stuff, if the defendant gave it to 
him. It is suggested that it was a scone; it is said that defendant 
picked up a "scone and handed it to him and said, <c Excuse 
fingers.” It is only a suggestion. The prosecution do not pledge 
themselves to that. Suppose you came to the conclusion it was 
not in the scone; that is not an end of Mr. Martin’s case; there 
were other victuals. What was there besides? In particular, Mr.;.; 
Martin told us, there was a currant loaf, and it was cut up and 
put on a plate, and.Mr. Martin said that was placed on a little 
tin. It was taken off the tin, and it was not placed on the 
tea table on which the teapot was, but was placed upon another/ 
table which was in the window—all this took place in the window, 
a small space. Mr. Martin said he at© everything that was on. 
that plate. If he did, and if the poison was on that, he would 
be the only one to suffer if it was on one of those pieces of bread, 
and butter; and he said he ate everything that was on that plate. 
What does the defendant say about that? The defendant was 
suspected of having given arsenic to Martin, and the police went 
to his place, and he made a statement which was taken down in 
writing. I shall have to come back to that for another purpose, 
but very early in it he dealt with this tea, and he said this, fC I 
afterwards placed the dish of currant bread by his side on the 
table and asked him to help himself.” That is not the scone, 
that is the plate of currant bread. That is what the defendant 
tells us he did, placed it by Martin’s side on the table, asked 
Martin to help himself, and Martin tells us that he ate the whole 
contents of that plate. The poison may not have been on that, 

326 



Charge to the Jury. 

Mr Justice Darling 

it may be that there was no poison. It may be the doctors are right 
who suggest to yon that any poison which was in anything sub¬ 
mitted to the analyst as being the product of Martin did not 
contain arsenic which came through Mr. Martin’s system at ail; 
it may be they are right when they suggest that Mr. Davies did 
not wash the bottle properly. It may be Dr. Toogood is right 
when he suggests the arsenic was on the cork. Mr. Davies took 
what he imagined to be a new cork, but it is suggested for the 
defendant that there may have been some arsenic on the cork, 
and it may be due to arsenic in bismuth or peroxide of hydrogen. 

It may be that; but the prosecution say no, those are all sugges¬ 
tions, those are all vague possibilities; Mr. Davies is a man 
of experience, Mr. Davies does not let his new corks roll about 
in arsenic powder, he knows how to wash bottles properly, and 
the arsenic came from Mr. Martin. You will find evidence which 
will show that certainly it might have done so. 

Now I take the evidence of Dr. Toogood. He was the doctor 
called by the defence. Dr. Toogood said this, if you could rely 
on the arsenic having been found in Martin’s urine his symptoms 
undoubtedly indicate arsenical poisoning, supposing the whole 
taking and dealing with the urine to have been rightly done. If 
it was rightly done, and that was not in some way polluted by the 
bottle or the cork or by bismuth or something or another, then, 
says Dr. Toogood, if you can rely upon it being found in the 
urine, that undoubtedly indicated that Martin had had a dose of 
arsenic. There is other evidence to the same effect. Dr. Spils- 
bury said this, £c The evidence of Martin’s symptoms, including 
the result of the analysis of the urine, I/33rd of a grain present 
four days after the beginning of his illness in 17£ ounces of 
urine ”—that being the evidence— c ‘ in my opinion Martin’s ill¬ 
ness was acute arsenical poisoning, arsenic must have been taken 
into the body.” Beyond that there is the evidence of Sir William 
Willcox-—‘ £ I am confident that Martin’s illness was acute arsenical 
poisoning.” That is after he has listened to all the evidence that 
was given as to when Martin began to be ill, what he suffered 
from, what is the result of the analysis, and so on. That agrees 
with Dr. Spilsbury, and it agrees with Dr. Toogood, so that they 
all agree about that. Therefore, you try and come to a conclusion 
as to whether Martin really did suffer from arsenical poisoning. 
If he did, of course that does not prove that the defendant gave 
it to him. But then consider all the circumstances of his going 
to tea and what he had; consider that the defendant had arsenic 
in his possession at that time; according to his own evidence, he 
had white arsenic in his possession at that time. When he was 
arrested he had a little packet of it in his pocket. 

Consider all that, and if you come to the conclusion that 
Martin did get with some food or another arsenic and suffered 
from arsenical poisoning, then ask yourselves, how did he get 

327 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Mr Justice Darling 

it? Did some one give it to him ? IF so, who—and where did he 
get it? Then it is important to consider when all these symptoms 
developed and how they developed to some extent before he had 
any other meal than that which he had taken with, the defendant. 
He went home, he began to Feel ill, and did not want ins dinner. 
His wife persuaded him to have some, and ho ale some. He was 
persuaded to eat, and ho did oat, and he tried (hen to do some 
work with his clerk, but he could not work. Ho was taken ill, 
and you have heard about lhe diarrhma and vomiting, and so 
on. In fact, the doctors agree that the symptoms were those of 
arsenical poisoning. If you come to that conclusion, then ask 
yourselves before you go any find her with (lie case whether you 
are satisfied (.hat the defendant did give that poison to Martin. 
It is quite time he is not being fried for that as a substantive 
crime. You will not be asked by (be clerk of assize to 
say, was he guilty of trying to [mison Mai*tin? You will only 
have to make up your minds on if as a pari, of this case, as 
helping you to come to a conclusion whether Armstrong poisoned 
his wife or not, and if you come to the conclusion that he did try 
to poison Martin, then you can start with something which wiil 
bo a guide to you, a help to yon, as to what the man would do 
with the poison he had got, whether he would use if against a 
human being or not if he had, what was considered a sufficient 
motive. If you do not make up your minds that he did administer 
poison to Martin, then that is out of flic case as absolutely as 
if the name had never boon mentioned in (.he, course of these 
proceedings. 

(Adjourned for a short time.) 

Mr. Justice Dablinu — (hmtlemen of the jury, when we 
adjourned I had finished what I, thought necessary to say to you 
about the case of Martin, and it all comes to tin's, (hat if yon come 
to the conclusion that the defendant, did try to poison Mr. Martin, 
and if that is your conclusion on the whole of the evidence, then 
it has a great bearing upon his conduct with regard to his wife, 
Mrs. Armstrong, although what is alleged with regard to his 
wife commenced months before the lea he gave to Mr. Martin; 
and, as I have said, if you come to the conclusion that there 
was no administration by him of arsenic to Mnrtin, then the 
Martin case may go out altogether and you will think no more 
about it, and I do not want, if I can help it, to allude to that 
matter again. 

Now I come to the question of Mrs. Armstrong’s illness. It 
would appear that the defendant and his wife lived, on affectionate 
terms apparently till her death, but cert.a inly till the year 1920. 
She seems to have been an invalid, and one would think a tiresome 
Invalid too. She suffered from melancholia, and was given to 
328 



Charge to the Jury. 

Mr Justice Darling 

what was called introspection: always worrying, and thinking 
she had not clone her part in that or this direction, so that one 
can imagine she would be somewhat tiresome to anybody who had 
to live with her. But that she was very fond of her husband and 
children every one agrees, and her worrying was greatly caused 
by a fear that she had not done her duty to them in various 
directions. She suffered from what is called neuritis for a long 
time, and she found it difficult at times to play the piano, because 
the neuritis affected her fingers. How the neuritis was produced 
is a matter of opinion, but that in August, 1920, she was in 
ill-health there is no doubt. She was so ill that not long after¬ 
wards she was taken to the asylum at Barnwood, because she was 
suffering from various symptoms showing she was not then in her 
right mind. She had delusions of various kinds, and the doctors 
who were called in by the defendant certified that it was a case 
in which she required to be kept in an asylum, which she was told 
was a rest home, in order that she might get better, and she did 
get better and came out. At that time, when she was taken to 
the asylum, there is considerable contest amongst the doctors as 
to what was really the matter with her, whether it was peripheral 
neuritis, or something else, or rheumatoid arthritis or something 
different, and I do not know if we shall ever get to know exactly 
what it was, and perhaps you will be unable to arrive, with 
any certainly, at what she was suffering from at that time, but 
the doctors for the prosecution and the defence all agree that she 
..was suffering from poison. The doctors for the defence called it 
auto-toxsemia—that is to say, a poison. Some of the doctors 
called it auto-intoxication—that does not mean it is a poison which 
acts for a time on the brain like beer or gin and passes off and the 
person becomes sober again. Auto-intoxication does not. mean 
that the person is drunk. What they mean is that a poison is 
working in the system which has arisen not from something ori¬ 
ginating outside, but that it has grown up within the system., 
that some organ has gone wrong— the kidneys or what not—and 
that some organ does not perform its proper functions, and has 
thus created in the body a poison which produces this, that, or the 
other disease; and the doctors say that is the result of auto¬ 
intoxication. But it is said by the prosecution this was not 
auto-intoxication at all; it was toxaemia, that is quite true; it was 
a poison, and they say that it was due to the introduction of 
a poison in the system from outside,.. and the suggestion is that 
that, poison was arsenic. You heard the doctors on both sides 
describe the symptoms, and the doctors for the prosecution. Dr. 
SpIMrary, Sir William Willcox, and Dr. Hincks, are all of opinion 
that the condition before she went to the asylum was due to her 
having been poisoned with arsenic. Dr. Toogood and Dr. Ainslie 
and Dr. Speed came to the conclusion, they tell us, that it was auto¬ 
toxin:— that it was poison, but poison produced within the body 

■ ■ 329 ' 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

O ' 

Mr Justice Darling 

of Mrs. Armstrong herself. Now I do not think 1 should, do an? 
good, for you have been addressed on these matters at consider¬ 
able length by counsel for the defendant and counsel for the 
prosecution, by reading over to you the evidence of those doctors 
and indulging in a kind of discussion as (o whether the symptoms 
were due to poison with auto-toxin; for if you como to the con¬ 
clusion that the defendant had adminislered arsenical poison it 
may help you. If you como to the conclusion that he could not 
have done it, you will say it must have been auto-toxin and not 
arsenical poisoning. The symptoms were very peculiar, and her 
recovery in the asylum and her taking a, tonic, in the asylum make 
it somewhat obscure; but if you doubt that the defendant did 
attempt to poison his wife before she. went into the asylum, and 
have a reasonable doubt about it, (him you must como to a con¬ 
sideration of the events of 1921 with a mind that; is free from 
suspicion that he attempted to poison his wife towards the end 
of 1920. 

Now, if we come to 1921 she returned homo, and on the 22nd 
January-—exactly a .month to a day before her death—she was 
pretty well, and for some little time she word; about tier ordinary 
duties, taught the children, dined downstairs, and took all her 
meals downstairs for a considerable time, and then she got ill, 

I .shall find it necessary to read to you the account of her last 
illness, for it is very important that you should have in your 
minds exactly the course of things after she came home. She 
ultimately died on the 22nd February, after getting worse and 
worse. There is no evidence that she was downstairs again after 
the 14th February. 

Sir H. Curtis Bennett —There is I he evidence of the prisoner ,: 
that she was downstairs on the Kilh teaching her boy. 

Mr. Justice Barline —Yes, but not out of doors. The evi¬ 
dence about being out of doors was that there was one day 
when she sat out in the porch in an eiderdown and, with a hot- 
water bottle to her feet. To do that she must have been very ill 
It is only an invalid who would have to sit in that way in the 
verandah in front of the house; and Nurse Allen, whose notes 
are all gone and destroyed somehow, is of opinion that was on the 
13th February. 

Sir H. Curtis Bennett— The 11th or 12th. 

Mr. Justice Darling— Well, put it at the latest date. She 
thought, 1 think, it was the 13th. A witness was called, Mrs. 
Price, and it was not suggested that you should not trust her, 
and she says she remembers the occasion and can fix the date as 
14th February, and no one contends that after that day she was 
ever outside the front door.. That was eight days before her. 
death, and the prosecution accept it. 1 understand that it was 
the 14th and not the 15th, but it does not make any difference. 

330 



Mr Justice Darlin* 


Charge to the Jury. 

I am afraid it may be a little tiresome, but I will now read 
to you the evidence on this. Eight days after she died, and the 
defence say she might have lived—they say she died undoubtedly 
of a dose of arsenic, that she had arsenic after she was last down¬ 
stairs. They fix the 16th. They say a dose of arsenic was taken 
probably on the 16th February, and that she took it herself pur¬ 
posely, intending to kill herself. They have given evidence about 
it, and the doctors called our attention to her condition. They 
cross-examined Dr. Hincks and the nurse, and so on. That is 
the affirmative case put for the defence. They put two cases, the 
affirmative and negative. They say first of all, We will prove 
it affirmatively to you—we shall satisfy you that she committed 
suicide. We will call evidence that she must have taken such a 
dose about the 16th as killed her. 57 On the other hand they say, 

“ Suppose you are not satisfied that she committed suicide, then 
there is the negative case. 55 There is the case that you may be in 
doubt as to who gave her the dose of poison that killed her, because 
they do- not dispute that she did die on the 22nd February at 
ten o’clock in the morning of arsenical poisoning; and they say- 
first, We will prove she took it herself; but if we fail to do that 
it does not follow that you should find the defendant guilty, but 
you may he still satisfied that she died by a dose, or many doses, 
not administered to her by the defendant. 55 It is for that reason 
that I must read to you the evidence of her last days—the evidence 
of those who saw her and had to do with her during those days, 
and not the evidence of those who theorise either on the one side 
or the other. 

Mr. Vachell —Nurse Kinsey is the one the Attorney-General 
called attention to first. 

Mr. Justice Darling— Yes. I was going to begin earlier 
than that, because you will remember that I said to you the sug~. 
gestion of the defence is running through all this time. I am 
going to deal with the suggestion that she committed suicide, .and 
we shall see now what there is to show that. If you look at the 
evidence of Miss Pearce she says this, “ After the deceased returned 
from the asylum one day she went up to the attic. She came 
down and asked whether if any one threw themselves out of that 
window they would break their back. She told me then at the 
asylum she had tried to get out of the window, but it was fastened. 55 
.Now that is a general question.. She went up to the attic, and 
came down again. She did not throw herself out of the window. 
She asked the nurse whether if she threw herself out of the window 
it would break her back, and said that when she tried to get 
out of the window at the asylum it was fastened. What would 
happen to a person in an asylum who wanted to escape ? Would 
not they try to get out of the window, and if the window were 
fastened would not they give it up? In an asylum is not that 
exactly what you would expect? People in an asylum do not 

SSI 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Mr Justice Darling ^ 

mwoKHfti-ily want (,o slay them. Tim people w | 1() kem ,, 
asylums wan! I<> keep their patioulx in, and is not ft t L.!f° Se 
nal.ural il she wauled l,n g,.|. away from the asylum Uuit shel„°u 
attempt logo.. „„l of II,o window'I Bui she found il 
and I here is no suggestion Hint she aUempled hi]] herself St’ 
iua<h> ihal, observation, a,sordine- In Miss IVame, about what'would 
happen d any one were In gel „ u l. of Ihe window. would 

r I’he next mention of it appears in Ihe, evidenee ol' Mr p|, mr(lK 
am Mr. Clmvalier said this I In was staying in 11)20 at Mayfield 
and he said I thought I,ho deeeased was in an excited stlK 
nund, and I warned the defendant that she might attempt suicidJ 
and saul she was sullormg I'roni delusions.'’ It is true that a r ,l ’ 
wiu unlit,ring from delusions may attempt suicide. He doesMt 
say he had any definite lae.t lo lead him lo suppose she would—not 
that she would hut might. “ 1 said she was clearly suffering from 
(lelusions, ami she said she was a, winked woman ami likely to 
>m,g her larmly min trouble.” That seems to have been one o 
hei deIus,ons._ ‘ I advised him to take his razors from the room 
II . put ihen, in my room. I warn,.,I Idly Candy to keep watch on 

:, I™' 1 : , ThlU ' '»*>, and the suggestion is she com' 

nut.lul suicide somewhere about the Kith of February, 1921 
Hint is a long tune In pass, hut she had eumo hank, and she was 
going about the house and teaching (lie children for several days, 
i here is no evidenee Unit she ever made during Unit time any 
attempt whatever to take her life. ^ 

1 now eorno to, and I will read to you, the evidenee of Nurse 
Kinsey. On ihe 2.ini January, I DJI, she went to Mayliold on a 
k ephone message iron, the defendant. - lie said Mrs. 'Armstrong 
had just come Iron, a mental home.” She went to her morning and 
overling and she was rather weak ami not able to look after her- 
solt, and she was able to slay with her during the day a groat deal. 

.. .ount mi physical condition good- her mental condition weak, 
and went bet,ween nine and ten in the morning and seven and 
eight m the evening, in the morning slio was usually in bed. I 
dressed her, and usually took her to the drawing, mom.' Hho walked 
quite well up and down Ihe stairs, and up and down l.lio house. 
I undressed her for hod. I went on doing I,Ids I,ill tlm 27l;h January. 
- JrJmso Allen came. Dr. Hi neks mime once while I was there 
m the evening of the 2«U, January. On the 10th February (twelve 
days before her death) 1 saw her. The deep discoloration of her 
skin surprised me, and she was very weak. She complained of 
severe pains in the stomach. She was lying on the sofa in the 
drawing-room. The .defendant was wilh'her, and she was some- 
.mies alone. Ihat is on the 10th 'February, and t.boro is no sug¬ 
gestion that she took poison to kill herself (.'ill the Kith. Then she 
co 11 <! ^ waa fdiere the deceased told me sho had taken two 
ii. khe used to take Dr. Andrew Clarke’s digestive pills, and 
all the family did. Tim defendant told me so, ami said sl.e took 
332 



Charge to the Jury. 

Mr Justice Darling 

them ior indigestion, as she sometimes did. She told me she 
vomited during the night, and after taking the pills.” The 
■witness called again after she left. “ This I ^vas told was on the 
27th January. The day I left the place was on the 28th January. 

I had left her in bed that day at eight to 8.30 in the evening. 
TV liile I attended her I never saw her vomit. 1 was only told she 
did. The defendant sometimes slept in her room and sometimes in 
a room opposite. On the 10th February her skin looted jaundiced, 
and she was very pale round the mouth. She told me she was very 
sick and suffering great pain.” That is very important—that is 
on the 10th February when she said she was very sick and suffering 
great pain, and there is no suggestion that she made an attempt to 
poison herself then. The witness is cross-examined, and she said,. 
“ The defendant and Mrs. Armstrong seemed a very affectionate 
couple. He was very attentive to her. At first he said he thought 
he and Miss Pearce would be able to look after Mrs. Armstrong. 
On the 27th I had supper with Mrs. Armstrong. She told me that 
she thought she had an attack of indigestion, and had taken two 
pills for safety, and had been sick during the night. She told 
me that nothing would persuade her to take medicine again, as 
she thought she had been poisoned by medicine in the asylum, and 
in future she would only take her homoeopathic medicines. 1 
have had no experience of mental cases.” 

Then Nurse Allen is called, and she said, “ On the 27th 
January, 1921, I arrived at Mayfield in the evening, and took 
charge of the deceased until her death. At first the deceased was 
very frail, but had a very good appetite, and took her meals in 
the dining-room with the family. On the 13th February she 
lunched with us, and then started vomiting. On Wednesday, the 
16th February, Dr. Hincks was sent for, and I thought the deceased 
was worse; her colour was very pale. She took food and vomited. 
There were two bottles of homoeopathic medicine—mix vomica was 
one of them.” I may get rid. of a great deal of this homoeopathic 
stuff. It has been stated by the defence that no reliance is placed 
on her. having injured herself by her taking homoeopathic medi¬ 
cine. It is taken in such small quantities that if it does not do good 
it does no harm. I gave the deceased some of the homoeopathic 
stuff with the doctor's consent. Until 22nd February I believe Dr. 
Hincks came every day. During the last four days of her life I 
used to feed the deceased.” That is very important— the. 18th, 
19th, 20th, and 21st. ” She was in bed and so ill that-she could 

not. feed herself.. She did not to my knowledge get out of bed 
after the 13th February.” She was wrong about that,' if you 
take .it .that Mrs. Price saw her on the verandah on the 14th, but 
Nurse Allen's opinion, is that she did. not get out of bed after 
the 13th. £< The deceased could not move her legs about much— 

they seemed .paralysed rather. The deceased was conscious on the 
22nd February, and died at 10 a.m. " About 4 a.m. that day she 

■ 333 '" 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Mr Justice Darliwr 

said, ‘ I am not going to dio, nurso, am I, because I have every¬ 
thing to live for—my children ami my husband.’ ” Those are the 
exact words she used, hut (ho suggestion is (hat she took a dose 
of arsenic on the 16t,h February moaning In kill herself. The 
deceased was conscious until K a.in. on I,ho 22nd February, the ^ 
day she died, and at about *1 a.in. that day-—six hours before her 
death—she said, “I am nut going to dio, nurse, am I, because I 
have everything to live for—my children and my husband,” and if 
you believe she'said that (and it is not questioned that she said it) 
_do you believe that woman had already, with intent to kill her¬ 
self, taken a fatal dose of arsenic? Let alone, the question of 
whether she could have got it if she wished, or put it into her mouth 
if she wished—do you think the use of those words six hours before 
her death reconcilable with the theory that she committed suicide! 
(The learned judge continued to read nol.es of Nurse Allen’s evi¬ 
dence.) “ I have been relieved by the defendant, and have found 
him alone with the deceased on my return. 1 had been away 
twenty minutes or half an hour.” That is important as bearing 
on the question of whether he had Ihe opportunity of giving her 
arsenic or trying to do so. ‘‘ Ai. (he loot ol (ho deceased’s 

bed on the wall over the (ireplace, (here was a medicine chest” 

_but I need not rend anything about (his, because it is not 

suggested that she could got out of hod and help herself from 
it. 

Sir H. Curtis Bknnbtt —The only importance ol it is that no 
search was made. It is not. suggested that she took any dose from 
there after the 16th. The point .1 cross examined about was that 
nobody ever searched that medicine cupboard during Mrs. Arm¬ 
strong’s lifetime. 

Mr. Justice Darling— Then I will read it. “ On Saturday, 
the 19th, the medicine cupboard was standing on the floor at the 
foot of the bed. If you held on to the boil you could, touch the 
medicine cupboard. I never examined the contents ot the cup¬ 
board.” There is no suggestion that arsenic was in that cup¬ 
board, and that she got it out. There is evidence to which I will 
call your attention that there was arsenic in the cupboard down¬ 
stairs. 

Sir H. Curtis Bennett —No, my lord, in the bureau.. 

Mr. Justice Darling —But arsenic was (hero at the time the 
defendant was arrested. It was arsenic coloured .with charcoal in 
the cupboard and the bureau, but thoro is no evidence that there 
was arsenic in that cupboard in the bedroom. “ Alter Sunday, 
the 27th January, the deceased could not got out of bed for natural 
purposes. She was vory weak, and if she had tried to got out of 
bed she could not have done it.” Then the depositions were put to 
the witness and she said, “ She could not got out of bod for natural 
purposes. On Sunday, 20th of February, the deceased had 
diarrhoea, and it continued till her death on the 22nd February. 

334 





Charge to the Jury. 

Mr Justice Darims 

On the 22nd February, at 8 a.m., the deceased was quite con¬ 
scious. The defendant came in and kissed her. Thev had some 
conversation which I did not hear.” That was about - 'four hours 
alter she said to the nurse, “ You do not think I am dying do 
y° U ! / everything to live for—my children and my hus- 

band. Dr. Hmcks arrived at 9.30 in the morning, and the 
defendant came with him to the bedside, and the deceased died 
exactly at ten in the morning. “ I next saw the defendant about 
1 p.m. I was m the deceased’s room after her death till about 
1 p.m. I did not see the defendant before 1 p.m. At 9.30 a.m. 
the deceased was unconscious.” 

Then she is re-examined and she says, <c After Sunday, 13th 
February, the deceased never came downstairs, but took all her 
meals m the bedroom and had nothing solid but the calfs-foot 
jelly. The deceased used to take kettle broth and Benger’s 
food the last four days, because she was very anxious to get 
better/’ That would be the 18th, !l9th, 20th,* and 21st. The 
the defence is that she took a fatal dose of poison 
before that on the 16th about ; and her© is that woman, who they 
suggest committed suicide, taking Benger’s food and soda and milk 
during the last four days, because she was very anxious to get 
better. The.prosecution on that say it is incredible that a woman 

who was anxious to get better was bent on suicide and two days 
before took a fatal dose of arsenic. <e On Monday the deceased 
sat up in bed to vomit. During the last four days of her life she 
could not get out of bed.” And then the witness said to me, 
ct During the last four days she did not to my knowledge get out 
of bed at all. I do not think she could have done it. I gave her 
the utensil in bed. She was very ill. I do not think it possible 
that after the 13th February the deceased could have got out of 
bed and have got anything out of the cupboard over the fireplace; 
and during the last four days she was weaker.” 

Now I come to Nurse Lloyd. (Reads evidence.) Now in 
pursuance of what I said I will read the evidence of Dr. Hincks. 
(Reads notes of evidence.) 

“ After she came back from the asylum I saw no return of 
the delusions, and her great anxiety always was to get better.” 
Yet it is suggested that it was at that time that she made up her 
mind to commit suicide, and carried it into effect in a manner 
which we have simply been left to guess at. ct I was never spoken 
to about her tendency to suicide. I did not from anything said 
to me by her or any one or from anything I observed suspect her 
of a desire to take her life. On the 17th February I saw the 
deceased; she was in great pain. I gave her an injection of 
morphia for the abdominal pain and for sleeplessness. She fre¬ 
quently vomited. On the 18th she was worse, and losing flesh 
tremendously. Her tongue got brown and dry, and sordes were 
present ; that is, the skin over the tongue which has come off and 

335 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Mr Justice Darling 

accumulated round the longue and throat. That mmia any 
case of serious illness shortly l-eloro doath. On tho 1-th February 
n w-mordairied a great deal of llutulenco. 1. gave her tabloids, 

I think she did not Uk« thorn. They wore heta naphthol 
and charcoal. I told the nurse to give her an ©noma, she was m 

“i«nt aUtau.nJ ... 9* *, ■m.wmm ™»1« *»1 

, ..ul li.d til. .... t,.'d- .■r.li'.'.‘d 1... mi,® mtnmrat 

su, nos lories.” He described how they were given lor those who 
cannot retain food. “ Nurse kept a proper repor , wluch I saw 
dally. About Friday, lho mh to hi Lb« delond.vut there was 

T.otViin<r to be done and she would dm. On (lie Jlst Ihe sup- 

positoiues were probably given. On 

innrrrni (T vSho was unconscious. -Uh, uciciuiani was m 

1 ™ fe .*«d „l... ...d I -W -l- ...Hid •» «* «. 

scions loss but she might last the .lay, you could nut toll Later 
t^llhe rniruin^ 1 received a message that, she was dead. 1 gave a 
certificate of death. 1 doubt whether deceased ever left her bed 
on Ihe lCth'February. After the INtli she certain y never didj 
Fmoan for any purpose whatever. I do not, think she could move 
her lens at all. On the Kith or FOli she could not, hold up a 
cup to°her lips, and eould uol use her arms, and could not gnp 

anything hrmly.^_ umu Tho defenceU* saying on the 

16th s e helped liersoU to a ratal .lose of arsenic six days before 
her delth In order to show Ihe. importance oi tins, you heard 
Hted from a Lk Urn case of the Due do Min, who is said to, 
have taken arsenie, in 1M« and to have .illHiiic.de 

have lived six days after he look Ihe arsenic. (.alcul.d ng back 
from her death, which was on ihe, 22nd, six days, you got to Ihe 
fih This is Dr. Ilineks. This is not theory; tins is no 
eminent doctors to say. “ 1 have hoard the evidence am I 
have 'road Witthaus’s book.” This is the .looter who leally 
attended her, and everybody, the doctors, hones ly sai.l, yes he 
is a nerfectlv competent doctor, as good as the .thorn, a local 
doctor- of course, tho others arc specialists, they know as much 
about arsenie as anybo.lv can possibly know at present; but Dr. 
Hineks as everybody agrees, is a perfectly competent doctor, and 
lie ir.mke.rthC aud what he says about her on the day when 
she is supposed to have got not 

V':,i •* il r “ ssa 

eould not grip anything perfectly. Certainly she could no. hav^ 

fed herself at all during the last lour .lays oi hot lue. 

this condition paresis. She couldn’t lilt herKoli up *“ b ■ » 

think the deceased had heart disease from about J 

'About nenhritis he says it is inflammation ot Ihe lu.lney, nn„m 

dise2e P ‘‘ At the time of her death I had formed the opinion 

336 



Charge to the Jury. 

Mr Justice Darling 

.that the gastritis was due to toxaemia, that is, a collection of 
poisons in the system due to inefficient action of the kidneys. 
Kidney disease was secondary to the heart disease, which I then 
considered was rheumatic in origin. Toxaemia is poison in the 
blood. Knowing that arsenic was found in her body, my opinion 
now is that her illness before she went into the asylum, was caused 
by arsenical poisoning. . There she had a remission of. her 
symptoms; and her last illness after her return was caused by a 
fresh dose of arsenic, not all taken on one day.” That is the 
opinion of the doctor who has attended her for more than a year, 
the doctor who was with her to the . last. He did not put in his 
certificate that she died of arsenical poisoning; but he did put 
in all these things—nephritis and all the rest, which meant she 
died of a poison, toxaemia, and at that time he was of opinion 
that, the poison was caused by the disease. But when she was 
exhumed, and when, as is indisputable, it is proved her body was 
full of arsenic, and when everybody agrees that she really did 
die of arsenical poisoning, there is nothing inconsistent in all that 
with what he noticed before death; only he did not know that some 
on© had introduced into her stomach arsenic. When he once 
knows that, knowing that arsenic was found in her body, he says, 
e£ My opinion is that her illness before she went into the asylum 
was caused by arsenical poisoning; there she had a remission 
because no one could give her a dose in the asylum, and her last 
illness after her return home was caused by a fresh dose of arsenic, 
not all taken on one day.” That is as important evidence as can 
be given in this case, because it is not merely the evidence of an 
expert, of a theorist, it is the evidence of a competent doctor; and 
it is the evidence of the one doctor who attended her before she 
died and up to her death. He says, £< I think the paralytic 
symptoms were due to arsenical poisoning, to the taking of a large 
■"■dose'of arsenic about the 3rd February. That is my opinion, but 
it is a guess. The later symptoms of acute gastritis were due to 
continued large doses of arsenic, such as a grain administered 
from time to time; and the fatal termination was due to an 
absolutely poisonous dose, anything over 2 grains. The deceased 
was an absolute teetotaller, she took homoeopathic medicines.” I 
will not go into that, no point was made of it, but if anybody 
wishes it I will go into it. Then Friday comes, and his examina¬ 
tion continues. He went into the case of Mr. Martin, with which 
I have dealt sufficiently. Then Dr. Hincks was cross-examined, 
and he says he has been in practice since 1898, c 4 I never before 
in my private practice had a known case of arsenical poisoning 
come before me. About August, 11901, I had in hospital a case 
where it had been accidentally taken in beer; I was house surgeon. 
I believe the patient recovered; he was under my care three 
months; no arsenic was given during the three months. During 
the course of my attendance on Mrs. Armstrong up to her death 
I noticed nothing inconsistent with natural causes.” Up to her 
z ■ ■ . "337 ■■ ' 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Mr Justice Darling 

<leaUi lie nol.iml nothin}' inconsislxinl, with nal.nral causes- ail j 
t.hat, aooonla wiUi Urn c.ci-l idealo l.hal, lie m -o. Then lh u 
was put in ‘‘ II' ilie .liwiwo were due to a |„ Ilg cou rse ■? 
rhcuinal.isin, I lit ink Uiere was suOieiiMil history of rhouinttHomt 

aero util for that.” Then he went, in. . qiLion ot noStf 

iJugtTs disease, and pint ritis, as cnnucnlcd with his certificata- 
he told how he at.t.einleil her in 1020, and came t.o August lflW 
“ 1 went, to see tier 0,1 the 2 IhI.. Del'endim!, and Mrs.Vmstrone 
wete |iresenl.. Mrs. Armstninj' had delusions on the 22nd she 
was taken to the asylum, she did not then seem to he snilerino- from 
neuritis, she had no symptoms of it. The deceased was always 
pallid, a pale woman. There worn no symptoms imams intent with 
natural illness - the symptoms worn Hum melancholia. Indigestion 
may cause poisoning, hut dial, cannot cause arsenical poisoning. 
Jn my opinion (here most be some!hiug beyond indigestion to 
cause multiple neuritis; but all cases of multiple neuritis that I 
have ever semi have been (ho result of Homo definite disease . ,f 

llien there is a letter from (.he asylum; and then he goes 
into tiie question of Ins vixils on llie (>th ami 11th February, 1921. 
On the I I th she eomplained to him of failing in the UvV and 
arms and loot; she had not that on the 2()ih January or on the 
(ith February. “ in my opinion all the symptoms of multiple 
neuritis had vanished when the deceased returned from the asylum 
on the l ltli February; on (he 21st (hey had returned, the high* 
steppage was a symptom of if; the numbness of (he skin was not 
present. On the I Ifh February I did not no! ice blue lips. On 
the 15th I was telephoned lor. There was irn urgent message 
from the defendant. r l he deceased was pall id, had been retching 
and vomiting; that would not account ior (he intense agony she 
was In over the abdomen on (lie I7(h February. I do not recollect 
Nurse Kinsey saying anything about suicide ; ’l had no fear of that. 
On the 18th February nothing particular; I do not remember any 
improvement in the condition between the KWh and her death. 
She could not have led hersell during the last, four days of her 
life. Op the 22nd February in the morning (he deceased was 
unconscious when I arrived, and (hero was nothing to be done.” 
Then he was re-examined. I will come to January, 1921. He 
aays this, “ On the 25th I Jirst saw (lie doc.oa.sod after her return 
fjom the asylum ; she was per let 1 ,fly able (o walk ; she was physically 
pretty tit, mentally much improved. On, fbe 11 fh February the 
high-stepping hud returned, she was (lien suffering from multiple 
neuritis, of which she had no symptoms on (he 25fh January. On 
the l()th February the deceased had very intense pain in the 
abdomen. If is absurd to suggest, (hat it was the result of 
vomiting. After her return Irom the asylum I never had a sus¬ 
picion of suicide. She did not believe in doctors; she was verv 
anxious to get well; but I always felt that she did not think I 
knew what was the matter with her.” She had some sort of feel- 
338 



Charge to the Jury. 

Mr Justice Darling 

lag that Dr. Hineks did not understand her. We now know that 
he did not suspect arsenical poisoning ; and if she thought that 
he did not understand what was the matter with her she was 
quite right—he aid not. 

That, gentlemen, concludes the evidence of those who actually 
saw Mrs. Armstrong after she came back from the asylum, except 
the evidence .of the defendant himself. Perhaps I had better, 
read what the defendant himself said. 1 am not going to read 
the early part of it, I am dealing with the last illness! (Reads 
evidence.) 

That is the evidence of those who were about with her during 
the last days of her illness. There is the evidence of her state of 
mind; there is the evidence of her wishing to live; there is the 
evidence of what she was able to do. The importance of all this 
is, that you must ask yourselves (it is one of the points raised), 
are you satisfied that she committed suicide? When I read the 
rest of the doctors’ evidence .for the other part of the case, there 
may come in statements which will have a bearing upon that. 
Rut if you come to the conclusion that she did commit suicide, 
then there is. nothing upon which you can possibly convict the 
prisoner; he is as innocent as you or I. But if you do not come 
to the conclusion that he is, you must consider the 
rest of the case, and you must now ask yourselves, on 
that evidence that I have just read to you, do you honestly believe, 
is it credible, that that woman, being in the condition in which 
she was, got up with the intention of taking a fatal dose of 
arsenic, and that she went and got it? What evidence is there 
that at that time she intended to commit suicide, or ever wished 
to do it; what evidence is there that she got up and went to any 
place where there was arsenic? Where was it? If it is suggested 
that she took arsenic and committed suicide, where did she get it 
from? The defendant had had arsenic about the house for years 
for making weed-killer; and he says that she knew there was 
arsenic in the cupboard in the study. Rut if she did, the arsenic 
in the cupboard in the study was the grey arsenic, so far as we 
know, the arsenic with charcoal — there is no harm in the 
charcoal. 

Sir H. Curtis Bennett— The evidence is that at that time 
white and coloured were both in the cupboard. 

Mr. Justice Darling—A t that time? 

Sir H. Curtis Bennett —Yes, from the 11th January. 

Mr. Justice Darling— A month and five days before the 16th 
February. We now have the evidence given by the defendant, 
that there was white arsenic in the bureau. 

Sir H. Curtis Bennett- —It was not in the bureau till May; 
in the cupboard. 

Mr. Justice Darling— In the cupboard in the study in which 
the bureau was. In the cupboard, if I am right, there was grey 

339 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Mr Justice Darling 

arsenic and white arsenic. If it is suggested that she committed 
suicide by taking either the one or the other, either the grey 
or the white, which did she take, where did she take it from, 
when did she take it? At all events it was dcnfhstairs. There is 
no evidence that there was any of it upstairs; and if you were 
asked to find a verdict as to whether that woman committed 
suicide or not, on what evidence could you find that she did 
go and get a dose of arsenic, either grey or white, and take it 
in order to commit suicide? That is one part of the defence. 
They set up that before you as an affirmative, and they ask you 
to com© to that conclusion, and if they can make out that, if,, 
you come to that conclusion, it is perfectly plain, as I said just , 
now, the defendant is no more guilty than you or I. 

But suppose you do not come to that conclusion, the prosecu- 
tion have still to satisfy you that it was the defendant who 
poisoned his wife. If you come to the conclusion that she did not 
do it herself, that does not prove that he did it; somebody else . 
may have done it. Let us see what is the evidence as to that. 

It depends on this. The doctors for the defence say that at the. ; 
last -there was taken a great dose of arsenic. Up to the time 
when that was taken there was a poisoning not duo to arsenic, 
but to toxaemia, as going to show you that she died of a dose 
of arsenic which could riot have been given, as the prosecution ; 
suggest, in small doses by the defendant, but given ^ in one large 
dose by herself. Since the defence agree that she died of a dose 
of arsenic, they say that she died of a large dose taken about the : 
16th, and that she was not suffering from arsenical poisoning 
before that date. 

Now we come to the contest between Dr. Spilsbury and Sir . 
William Willcox on the one hand, and Dr.- Toogood and Dr, / 
Ainslie and Dr. Steed on the other. First of all, look at the. 
evidence of Dr. Spilsbury, because he really saw more of this case, 
than any other doctor except Dr. Hi neks. Dr. Spilsbury never.: 
saw her alive; he was called in for the post-mortem, and Dr. Ainslie 
was present representing the defendant, and saw what was done, 
eo he saw then the condition of things just as Dr. Spilsbury did, 
although Dr. Spilsbury conducted the post-mortem, took out the 
parts and sent them to Mr. Webster. He said he made the post¬ 
mortem on the 2nd January; he described the condition of the 
liver, and so on, and he said, “ I could find no natural disease 
to account for the condition of the liver and kidneys. I attri¬ 
bute the condition of the liver and kidneys to the presence of 
arsenic in poisonous doses.” That the defence do not dispute. 
He said, “ In life I should expect albumen in the urine as the 
result of this condition. The intestines were almost empty, dark 
in colour, rather dry; there were some fluid contents in the part 
of the small intestine called the jejunum, the small intestine 
nearest the stomach.” Then he described how the intestines are 

■■■■■' MU 



Charge to the Jury. 

Mr Justice Darling 

arranged, and so on; I do not think I need go into this minutely, 
because the^ defence agree that she died of arsenical poisoning. 
But there is some point as to where the arsenic was, because 
the different doctors attach importance to that. He said, “ 1 
am familiar with cases of arsenical poisoning. After swallowing 
food with arsenic in it, the time till evacuation of the food would 
vary, but it would be within twenty-four hours or a little longer. 
The arsenic hastens evacuation; with fluid it passes quicker. 
The irritant action of arsenic leads to the more rapid passage. 
The irritant action is first in the stomach, causing' first of all 
pain and nausea, and later vomiting. It sometimes produces 
bleeding into the stomach cavity. The blood would colour the 
vomit a dark brown, or a dirty colour. After getting into the 
blood, the arsenic would affect the heart, and bring about dilata¬ 
tion and quickened action, and dilatation would be likely to be 
accompanied by a murmur.” He describes the kidneys and says, 

“ I am certain that the condition of her kidneys, heart, and 
liver was due to arsenical poisoning.” That is very important, 
because he said there was damage to the liver, damage to the 
heart, and damage to the kidneys; and he says, “I am certain 
that the condition of the kidneys, heart, and liver was due to 
arsenical poisoning.” The suggestion for the defence is that 
the arsenic was taken only six days before her death. As to 
the intestines, it was impossible to say whether the inflammation 
was there at the time of death, owing to post-mortem changes. 
Then he goes into the question of the time before she went to 
the asylum, and, unless it is desired, I will not return to that 
part of the case. 

Sir H. Curtis Bennett— There is one matter. In cross- 
examination Dr. Spilsbury said the condition of the liver and the 
kidneys that he found was consistent with one dose of arsenic six 
days before. 

Mr. Justice Darling — I shall come to the cross-examination; 
will you remind me of that then in case I do not remember it? 
He described how he sent considerable portions of the inside of 
Mr®. Armstrong to Mr. Webster, and everybody has said that he 
is a most competent analyst. Dr. Spilsbury said, “ I know the 
result of Mr. Webster's examination and analysis; from the amount 
of arsenic present in the large and small intestines, it is clear that 
a large dose, possibly a fatal dose, must have been taken within 
twenty-four hours of death.” That is most important. If he is 
right about that, the whole theory of the defence is impossible as 
to her taking arsenic and killing herself, because for more than 
twenty-four hours before her death, for a good long time she could 
not move hand or foot, she was lying at the point of death. Dr. 
Spilsbury says, t( From the amount of arsenic present in the large 
and small intestines, it is clear that a large dose, a possible fatal 
dose, must have been taken within twenty-four hours of her death, 

341 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Mr Justice Darling 

and from the amount of arsenic found in the liver, over 2 grains, 
and from the disease of the liver as I found it, it is clear that 
arsenic must have been given in a number of large doses extend¬ 
ing over a period of several days, probably a week immediately be¬ 
fore death.” That is the opinion of Dr. Spilsbury. If that is 
true, if he is right in that, it .is perfectly impossible, perfectly 
impossible that a dose can have been taken by her, one large dose, 
on or about the 16th February. According to him, there must 
have been several doses, they must have been extended over a period 
of several days immediately preceding death. 

Let us consider who these doctors arc. It is for you, you 
have been told you are the judges of ibis ease, not I. Do you 
remember Dr. Spilsbury, do you remember how ho stood and the 
way in which he gave evidence? Do you remember or do you not 
remember how, if there was any qualification to be made which 
told in favour of the defence, ho always gave it without being 
asked for it? Did you ever see a witness who more thoroughly 
satisfied you that he was absolutely impartial, absolutely fair, 
absolutely indifferent as to whether his evidence told ^for the one 
side or the other, when he was giving evidenco-in-chief or when 
he was being cross-examined? You should recollect and consider 
the demeanour of every witness in every ease that you try; it is 
most important ; and when you consider Dr. Spilsbury, when you 
have to say whether you trust ihe opinion that ho gave, you are 
entitled then to remember his demeanour, and to form your own 
opinion as to what it was, and to act accordingly. As to what he 
said, you will judge whether you agree with it, whether you think 
it well founded or do not. He was asked about Mr. Martin’s 
case, and he gave his opinion about that. I think 1 read that 
before I read the evidence of Dr. Toogood. Then he was cross- 
examined. He said as to the post-mortem examination, a l 
worked downwards from the stomach, opening the small intes¬ 
tines; no fluid flowed down, it was more of a deposit; the caecum is. 
the beginning of the large intestine, more fluid was there; as to 
arsenic passing through the body, the time varies very much jn 
different cases. It is affected by whether it was taken with 
or without food, and whether taken liquid or solid. There 
are occasionally cases of arsenic taken as long as seven days 
before death remaining in the body. If a, large dose were so 
taken, you might find arsenic absorbed in the liver and, traces 
in the caecum. Then I should expect to find fatty degeneration of 
the kidneys. I should expect to find a dilatation of the heart. If 
a dose were taken six or seven days before death, I should expect 
a gradual diminution of the vomiting, constant vomiting at first, 
getting less before death. The diarrhoea would have diminished, 
and might cease from exhaustion before death. It is more than a 
possibility that a person might take a large dose of arsenic and 
live seven days. Cases are quoted. I should not expect an 

342 



Charge to the Jury. 

Mr Justice Darling 

easing up of the vomiting and a recommencement of it; in that 
case I should expect to find another disease. I remember a case 
in which a cyst of arsenic was formed in the stomach, and, as far 
as my recollection goes, the patient died rapidly. 1 can’t agree to 
two days’ sickness after a single dose, then a remission due to 
encysting in the mucus, and then a renewal of the vomiting/’ 
You were told what a cyst was. Cyst was introduced by the de¬ 
fendant to account for arsenic given in a large dose, a remission 
of the symptoms, and then the symptoms coming on again. The 
theory is, arsenic gets covered with something, becomes enclosed 
in a kind of. capsule, and gets loose afterwards and starts the 
symptoms again. “ Under certain conditions of disease vomiting 
from arsenic might continue for one or two days and then diminish 
or cease, and then recur a day or two later. In such a condition 
as Bright’s disease, chronic disease of the kidneys, I would not 
say there might not be this. Assuming deceased was not suffering 
from arsenical poisoning in August, 1920, there were symptoms of 
kidney damage, the disappearance of albumenuria within a week 
of entering the asylum excludes Bright’s disease. A person may 
take a dose of arsenic, and gradually sink, and die seven days 
later without any disease. If there was vomiting at first, and then 
cessation, then recurrence, then death, I should expect the presence 
of Bright’s disease.” That was not so with her, according to 
him. (C I dare say it is conceivable that under special conditions 
a person might live fourteen days after a fatal dose.” 

Mr. Vachell — cc It is conceivable and may have been re¬ 
corded ”—I took that down. 

Sir H. Curtis Bennett —My note does not agree with that; I 
am content with your lordship’s. 

Mr. Justice Darling- —It doesn’t seem to me to matter. ee The 
symptoms would change in character; five to eight days are quite 
possible and not very infrequent. I draw a distinction between, 
suppression of urine and retention of urine; in deceased’s case, 
it was either complete suppression or very great reduction of urine. 
It would be very unusual to retain urine for twenty-four hours. 
It would be almost impossible in most cases. ISlew surroundings, 
&e., might lead to retention of urine. She may have .suffered from 
retention with reduced secretion. Vomiting would account for 
reduced secretion. The longest case I know of myself where arsenic 
has been found in urine after a possible fatal dose I have not 
got exactly what it was. 

Mr. Bosanquet— £ ‘ Ten days ”—I have got a note of it—“ but 
three weeks is a possibility.” 

Mr. Justice Darling — f£ If a person is suffering from arsenical 
poisoning, I think 1/7th of a grain a day would, not aggravate the 
symptoms, but it would retard recovery; in this case the arsenic 
tonic tended to make the deceased better. About I/5th of what 

343 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Mr Justice Darling 

Mrs. Armstrong took daily was found in Mr. Martin’s urine” 
Thon _ there wore questions I need not go into about the gW* 
containing arsenic and bismuth containing arsenic; they applied 
to Mr. Martin’s case., Thon ho was re-examined, lie says “The 
twenty-four-hour period applies only to that portion of the’arsenir 
which passes away by the rectum, not. at all to what is absorbed 
by the other organs ; that may remain three weeks. I do not 
think (ho ease put. tor (lie defenco explains the stale of things 
oxisting in Mrs. Armstrong, in whom there was no pro-existing 
disease. Mr. .Webster found over 2 grains of arsenic in Mrs' 
Armstrong s liver. That shows (.hat the arsenic she took was not 
encysted.” Kucysted means enclosed, as in a box. “ There must 
have boon very rapid absorption from the stomach and intestines- 
no encysted arsenic was found in the stomach or in the intestines ” 
That is dealing with the theory put forward by the defence to 
account for someth mg—that the arsenic, got; boxed up. “ J n jyj rg< 
Armstrong’s case the post-mortem examination shows (hat a large 
dose, possibly fatal, was taken within twenty four hours of her 
death and other poisonous doses bail been taken certainly for some 
days be I ore. There tore, this ease does not come within the sup¬ 
posititious cases put by Sir Henry Curtis Bennett. In those cases 
t i© post-WKHtem conditions would have been dilloront from those 
found in this case-—quito different, I have no doubt. about it, the 
arsenic would have disappeared. The symtoms of the post-mortem 
examination point to a number of poisonous doses of arsenic given 
between the 16th and the 22nd February, 1921.” Then he went 
into the case ot Mr. Martin. Ho was cross*examined again. What 
was suggested was, that what ho found in one pari/ might have 
been in another and migrated. lie says as to migration of arsenic 
after death (a passage from Witthaus was read), u I. do not agree 
with those passages. If a body putrikes so as to become liquid, 
then there may be migration,” He said this body was parti¬ 
cularly well preserved,, because it had such a lot of arsenic in it. 
Then re-examined again he said, te No migration of arsenic from 
the body could take place to any appreciable extent after death, 
ihe arsenic 1 found in the liver could not possibly have migrated 
from somewhere else.” 

... ,J £ en ® ame . * r - Webster., He is) an analyst. lie dealt first 
with Mr. Martin s urine, which I am not going to deal with. He 
said he had examined many article* stmt to him. Exhibit No. 32 
is a packet, found on the defendant, and contains .'S to .‘It grains 
of white arsenic. No. 53 packet contains nearly 2 ounces. 'That 
was the packet in the bureau. 

. Then th6 y cal1 Sir William Willcox. and ho said ho had had 
sixteen years’ experience, and so on. TTo goes into the question 
of early rheumatism. I need not (.rouble' about, that. ’ I will 
begin with January, 1921. Sir William Willcox, it is almost 
344 




Mr Justice Darling: 


Charge to the Jury. 

unnecessary to say—and it is said by the doctors for the defence— 
is a man who has made a study of this matter, and is as well 
qualified as anybody in the United Kingdom to give an authori¬ 
tative opinion. He has written about it and studied it, and no 
on© pretends he is not a man to be thoroughly trusted. Be says, 

“ On the 23rd January, judging from the evidence on the return 
of Mrs. Armstrong from the asylum, 1 have no doubt the neuritis 
was then peripheral. It is very difficult to diagnose arsenical 
poisoning during life. On 21st February there was the high- 
steppage. That is a most important symptom in peripheral 
neuritis. Mrs. Armstrong complained that she had springs under 
her feet, and it is common. On the 15th February there was 
vomiting. Those symptoms were undoubtedly due to poisoning, 
and having regard to the peripheral neuritis undoubtedly due to 
arsenical poisoning.' 5 Then he explained all that, and said, ce The 
arsenic was shown to be taken a lew days before 11th February 
to produce those symptoms. As to the 16th February, the symp¬ 
toms of that are those of arsenic taken a few hours before. . I 
consider the vomiting and diarrhoea indicate further the taking 
of a large dose of arsenic within a few hours of the onset of the 
symptoms of the 16th.” He conies to the post-mortem,examina¬ 
tion now. c ‘ From the distribution of arsenic in the alimentary 
canal I have no doubt that 2 grains or more of arsenic—possibly 
a fatal dose—was taken within twenty-four hours of death. I 
have no 'doubt about it at all.” If he is right—if 2 grains or 
more of arsenic were taken twenty-four hours before death, then 
the theory that Mrs. Armstrong took it herself is impossible. “ I 
agree that arsenic taken through the mouth would take ten hours 
to twelve hours for liquid to get to the caecum. I have no doubt 
as to a large dose having been taken within twenty-four hours of 
death. . The arsenic in the liver indicates that a good deal of 
arsenic had been appropriated during life, and that the kidneys 
must have been damaged by the poison. On the symptoms of 
20th and 21st August it would he very unsafe to form any con¬ 
clusion against the defendant, as the deceased was given arsenic 
medicinally.”. Then he explained how it got into the hair and 
nail® and then growls out. ££ During the last few days of .Mrs. 
Armstrong's life, seeing that she had peripheral neuritis, on the 
11th February, her legs must have been getting weaker and prac¬ 
tically paralysed. The certificate of Dr. Hincks shows death to 
be due to natural causes. That is all one could give. In this 
' case, the murmur and condition of the heart undoubtedly were due 
to arsenical, poisoning. . As to large doses being taken—or several 
doses taken—some in August , and some in February—there must 
have been several taken from 16th February to 22nd February. I 
think this puts the theory of suicide out of Court.” That is the 
deliberate opinion of Sir William Willcox. ct I .have no doubt 
she had a large dose of arsenic within twenty-four hours of her 

345 . 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Mr Justice Darling ^ 


<1uaUi. 1 nay the deceased could not herself have taken such » a 
withm (lie last lour or live days.” hut “ a dose 

Then he goes into Mr. Martin's evidence, and it wa , „ 

<■<> ,ho r,.,,.,,.,,,, ..j„, v , i u.h.u, k, "1, 

with loot] was <]u 1 l;o tasteless. " nic 

Tlien ho is cross-examined, a.ud he says, “ One-twelfth nf 
gram a day may he In,ken il' you work up to i|, ai , ( i „ j * 
35 R'-ama might he lakcn without causing death' if von,if™ ! 
<moe ensued. There is more danger in repealed smal e S that 
!>1 one largo dose He Ihon goes on In aulo-iuloxieation Auto 
intoxication might set up rhoumal ism, hut rheumatism could noi 
set up aulo-intoxication. Mrs. Armstrong had chronic rheumf 
tism winch may have, heen caused by aulo-inloxication. ‘‘t!’ 
not think Iho rlieumal ism from which Mrs. Armstrong suffered was 
duo to arson.e ,,, August. _ Up _lo August the.ro is no evidence 
that have l.ea.d ol arsenical poisoning". If arsenic wore given 
! n ar ^° .doses you generally gel vomiliug, hut not always. There 
in no evidence of vomiling before Ihe 22ml August, 1920. The 
worst case of peripheral neurilis I know of came oil in one to three 
weeks. It m rather .meerlain aflor one dose, and more often 
loJlows several doses. On (he 22ml January, 1921, and after¬ 
wards she might have I alien a. large dose some days before the 11th 
•obruary. Arsenic might, have I .con taken before'the 22ml August 
1J2(),_ in doses rnsulheienl; lo cause vomiling. I suggest some 
arsenic had boon taken before Ihe lllh FVhrnary, 1921—probably 
Ill small doses. I base (lull on Dr. Ilineks’s evidence as to her 
state on that day. Ot, l.lm Kill, FVbrmirv, 1921 (here was very 
severe vomit mg. I agree II,a,I a person may take a largo dose of 
arsenic and have sickness, a.nd gradually sink and die. A person 
might, I. agree, on Ihe I fill, February lake arsenic, or on the 17th 
and die on the 22nd. 1 should ex-peel, h, |i„d none in the alimen¬ 

tary canal. 1 should expect to find most of if had heen absorbed 
in the liver and I he stomach; Ihe liver would he practically empty. 
J say there must have heen a dose within l.wenly-fonr hours before 
death, because of Ihe finding of arsenic in the small intestine and 
ascending colon, and I ho vomiling and diarrhoea within the last 
twenty-four hours.” And he referred to I,ho evidence of Nurse 
’Allen. 


says, during (bo Iasi Ihirf v six liours she was 
witti the deceased lor ten liours between Ion o Thick at night and 
eight in the morning of Sunday, 201h hVbruary. During that 
time there was one motion and two vomitings, (art nothing after 
2 a.m. on 21 at February uni j] 8 a.m. My opinion is based on 
the evidence of Nurse Allen that, there was vomiting and diarrhoea 
during the last twenty-dour hours, though she draws no distinction 
between the last two days.” Sir William Will cox says she had 
aisemc in (he colon, and such arsonio might be encysted. u The 
s ^££^8tion that she look it herself is extremely unlikely, but I 
cannot deny the possibility.” Then he is re-examined. I need 
m '" : A; 



Charge to the Jury. 

Mr Justice Darling 

not go into that except the theory of her having a large dose on the 
16th February—“ Having regard to the symptoms and the evi¬ 
dence of Dr. Hincks, I say death cannot have taken place as sug¬ 
gested. The symptoms of diarrhoea and vomiting were increasingly 
severe until the end. If they had continued very large doses five or 
six days before, I should have expected the patient to be in a state 
of exhaustion in the last few days without diarrhoea and vomiting 
such as occurred here. With regard to the evidence of Nurses Lloyd 
and Allen, that there was no motion and vomiting as described by 
Nurse Lloyd was not remarkable. The recurrence^! the symptoms 
after that time was probably due to further closes of arsenic after 
Nurse Lloyd left. That would he within twenty-four hours of 
death. I attach importance to the quantity of arsenic found in 
the intestines. I saw not the slightest evidence of heart disease 
due to rheumatism.’' Then he said the hypothesis put by Sir 
Henry Curtis Bennett was, having regard, to all the evidence in this 
case, quite impossible to account for Mrs. Armstrong’s death in, 
the way put forward by the defence. 

Now I come to the evidence of Dr,. Toogood. He told us his 
qualifications, and he said he had made 7000 post-mortem examina¬ 
tions, and had had much experience of various cases of arsenical 
poisoning. As to the period from the 15th to the 20th he said, 
<£ In my opinion Mrs. Armstrong was suffering from auto-intoxica¬ 
tion accompanied by chronic indigestion and accompanied by gall¬ 
stones; and there was evidence of a dilated heart with a murmur. 
These are frequent accompaniments of auto-intoxication. In 
October she was suffering from physical disturbances which would 
be likely to point to albumen. Before removal to the asylum there 
were symptoms consistent with arsenical poisoning. and other 
causes also. It Is an ordinary practice to give a bowl to the 
parties taking patients to an asylum, in case of sickness. Her 
depression was a very grave matter. The loss of power in her 
arms and legs in the asylum was I believe functional weakness. 
Arsenic in October would increase any definite neuritis symptoms. 
The deceased in the asylum had not peripheral neuritis. The 
evidence of Nurse Kinsey shows that the deceased was ■still, suffering 
from functional weakness at the asylum. On the 11th February, 
from the report of Dr. Hincks, the deceased . was then suffering 
from high-steppage neuritis. Up to the 16th February, 1921, 
there is no evidence of anything like arsenical poisoning only. 
Having heard the whole of the evidence, I say death was caused by 
arsenic taken on the 16th February, and none before. I say it- 
was a large dose. In my view the arsenic became Impacted. It 
is impossible to tell the state at the time of death In which she was 
on the 16th February from the post-mortem examination and the 
symptoms during life.” 

- : . 'Then he Is. cross-examined, and he says he would place Sir 
William Willcox as the highest authority, and with him. Dr. 

■ Spilsbury and Mr. Webster, the analyst. “As to neuritis, when 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong- 

Mr Justice Darling O * 

the dcwiisod was in (Jr. asylum, it. may have boon (W ,,,-w 
administered to the deceased ns medicine. That would tal ^ ^ 

and r ay ' • Tho a l'I ,0,lranTO <)f o n Se B- 

August, and ids passing a, way on the 2Sth ( .am • ( . 1 

arsonu-al poisoning before tho'l.Xl.h August ’ The , ? , ? :ci v Lt w *4 

I . hv' ,U1,! «1|.f iuil.)-inl..toatif B 

V °l"’non the arsenic of which Mrs 

died was given m on,, big d,w,..” Annstrong 

Hr. Ainslie is calh'd, and ho said he was eresent m- . 

mortem oxamination. The. joints were not opened 1 'tl 
then (he question of neuritis. ][,. says “ Mrs Ariosi-,, 1 ® 18 

at the asylum, was suffering fro,,, aub, 

dueed (In, whole of (he symptoms at lhal lime. ltavin-r heLdall 
tin, evidence. 1 am perfectly sal islied dial the deceased died o 
arsonical poisoning about the Kith February, 1921 Tcanno 

S,t n Z r' W I y ,I,H il!W - v Aideneo of the nur 

And In, . llu t-U. In my opniion 1 hat. is 11m first dose of arsenl 

Thia’ifa v‘ a< l '* n V i tl ! al ' -"' Vt ' n l,H ' !,s - vh " n ’ ami Uu> last one” 
Huh . very confident; opinion, by one who never saw the deceased 

lift} 10 *" H1 ' l> ’ il,K aKa ' ,l,s1, * >r - l*»neks, who had seen hor during 

Sir .11. Cuutis JRknnktt-- i only wish to say, my lord there 
wa* a disagreement bel ween Nurso Allen and Dr. llincks.’ Dr 

’ in( M R , S! V < . „‘,'. Wa r, 1 10 1<>lh uml N,,rs0 A,1<m sai<l >t was the 17th. 
i , .V* : l " s | n<!1 ' : J>Atu,iN((--At. the post-mortem examination it was 
A hat, had (.here been any marked signs of rheumatoid 
arthritis undoubtedly the, joints would have Imon opened “1 
bave had no eases m my experience lliat I had known to be of 
aiRCineal poison mg. I know Dr. Hindis very well; ho is well 
worthy of confidence. t am sal islied lhal. (lie deceased died of a 
dose of arsenic taken on tho Kith February or early on the 17th ” 

is h tlmV?r <,U ° D ‘i IllTU ‘ kK ftK lu ‘ r ^'"I'tmiiK described by him 
ill V 1 Tr n ' < n ° fco , ttrw,,i,,nl IH.woninjr. “ SIio must have 
Had a dose hall an hour bolero seeing Dr. Hindis. 1 did not find 
any encysted arsenic. I have known of eases of encysting” The 
easos were mentioned in Hlytho’s book on poisons. Wit,Uinus was 
ic.eiru ,o in Martin s ease. Then Dr. Ainslie is re-examined, 
and ho reierred to Blylho on Poisons at page r>GC,, and bo said he 
meant the case of the Due do i'raslin, who died on the sixth day 
arter taking poison. That was in 1840. What tho exact con- 
cntioim of the Due do Prashn wore wo do not; know, except fiat 
fie took a r bo rue and died six <1 ays later ; hut Sir William Will- 

aT ! <I i^ )V : S I )iLsbin 7 my you may live more than six days 
after t aking a dose o( arsonio; so that we come to this, that Mrs. 
Armstrong might have died on the 22nd February after a dose 
a en on the 16th. That is all. Dr. Speed was called, and said 
1 © had read the report of the trial, and if she was suffering from 
arsenical poisoning, if she was taken to tho asylum, it would 
348 ■/ 



Charge to the Jury. 


Mr Jastice Darling 

increase the symptoms. As to Mr. Martin, he agreed T ith Drs. 
Toogood and Amslie. He said he did not hear Sir William Will¬ 
ing i^difficfit r k Urmg h ! e tlle dia g n °sis of arsenical poison- 
m & is difficult. During the symptoms on the 16th February 

tenderness across the course of the nerves is a sine qua non where 

neuritis is due to arsenical poisoning.’ 5 

y + T ®5V here the evident of those doctors who were 
called f 01 the defence, who, however the arsenic was taken, are 
confident that it was taken on the 16th or early on the :17th Feb- 
ruary; that it was one large dose, and that she never had any 
other; mat that was the first and last dose that she had. There 
is Dr Hincks, who describes the symptoms, and the nurse, who 
describes the vomiting and diarrhoea on the 16th. What do you 
thn i k * There is the evidence of Dr. Spilsbury, who actually 
made the post-mortem examination; and he tells von what he 
found, and he says he. is certain from what he saw" himself that 
.arsenic was taken within twenty-four hours of death. He is not 
merely theorising ; that is from what he saw. There is Sir William 
Willcox, who is admitted to be as great an authority as any on 
the subject, and he says he is satisfied there must have been this 
dose within twenty-four hours of death; and he used the remarkable 
expi ession that what was .found (and he described if in his opinion 
as an expert on arsenical poisoning) put the theory of suicide out 
of court. Those were his words. Now, as I have said to you, 

. i* tk® theory of suicide is absolutely upset, that does not of itself 
prove the defendant to be guilty; but if you consider that theory 
is demolished, it being certain that she died of arsenical poisoning, 
who gave it to her % I have said there is no evidence of anybody 
that she ever did take any arsenic herself, knowing what it was. 
A great deal of evidence has been given to show she could not have, 
got at it if she had wished; and if you come to the conclusion that 

she did not take it— that this woman did not destroy herself_then 

you must look and see who did give her this stuff of which ■ she 
undoubtedly died. It is suggested that the defendant did so. Is 
there any evidence as to any one in this case having any arsenic 
anywhere except the defendant? None. He had had arsenic for 
weed-killing, and he had mixed weed-killer for, many years, for 
use. On the 11th January he bought of Mr. Davies white arsenic, 
and it has been .produced, and I will read you what he says .about 
it. This is his own evidence. <4: On the 11th January I bought 
a, quarter of a pound of arsenic of Mr. Davies. Hird served me. 
I did not use the arsenic. It was wrapped in white paper and 
labelled. On reaching, home I, having some of" the 1919 purchase 
unused, I . forgot, and put my new purchase on the top of the 
'caustic soda tin in the cupboard. My -wife, died . and I went 
abroad, and on the 28th April I returned. In May I went up 
to the cupboard after the 13th May. There I saw the packet of 
white arsenic. There was no string round it. It appeared as 

34ft.' '; 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Mr Justice Darling 

if it had been opened. I did not weigh it. I opened it for 
the first time and realised it; was white. Any one going to the 
cupboard eouhl sec it readily. My wiTo knew I was in the habit 
of using arsenic For the garden. She saw me mix it in 1919. 

I put (ho coloured arsonie at the botloin of the clipboard. In May 
I put the packet containing the white arsenic in a small drawer 
at the bottom of the centre cupboard of the bureau. On 21st 
Juno I intended to burn the arsenic, which was then wrapped in 
the two original papers in Davies’s shop. I divided (he packet 
roughly into two parts, and then divided one in the outside piece 
of paper, leaving the other inside. 1 wrapped the [jacket in a 
piece of blue draft and put if back in the same little drawer I 
had taken .it- from. I never took if out again. 1 saw the packet 
produced. 1 saw tbo little <1 rawer. All 1 remember when I saw 
it is, J pulled the drawer open between the two pillars. The pillars 
were evidently not. firm, and if any one asked me if it could be 
pulled right out, it was very dillieulf to get if out unless you held 
the pillars in place. 7 ’ If seems the drawer did catch and did not 
run smoothly. .He says, “ 1 put, if there, and never took it out 
again.” And them, during (ho adjournment, the defendant 
placed the packet in the drawer of the bureau as he put it in in 
May, and the jury and counsel and myself then inspected the 
packet. Is that the same drawer where the old luggage labels and 
foreign postage stamps were 'J As to the other half, we know now 
it was put; in the cupboard, and remained there fill taken out by 
Mr. Matthews. “ As to the other half packet, 1 made it up into 
small [jackets, about, twenty of them about, (he size of exhibit No. 
32. The arsenic was to be mixed with caustic soda,. As to tbe 
small packet, 1 had the catalogue produced containing advertise¬ 
ments of * kill weed. 7 It gave me (he idea I,hat, if I put poison 
to the roots of the dandelions if would have a good effect; and I 
pul the little [jacket of arsenic 1 made up to the roots of the 
dandelions, and it had a good effect,. I put the small packet of 
arsenic, and it killed them and spared the surrounding grass, 
1 believe I used up all the packet, and 1 used that, coal, (produced). 
I used it when in the garden, and was wearing it, when arrested 
in my otliee in Hay. That was on Saturday. Letters were in 
that jacket pocket. The night before J fumed them out of the 
pocket of the jacket 1 was wearing and pul, them into the, jacket 
in which I was arrested, together with (ho letters I received that 
morning. The police were with me till four in the afternoon, 
I rnado^a statement early, and what I said about the arsenic was 
obviously incorrect;. 1 mixed up the 1919 purchase of arsenic 
with, the 1921—the white purchase. When J said that was the 
only arsenic I had I had quite forgotten the arsenic in the 
cv bureau..” 

Now let us see what be really says. He made this statement. 
He signed it, and he put at the bottom “ I make this statement 

350 



Charge to the Jury. 

Mr Justice Darling 

quite voluntarily and without being questioned.” As magistrates’ 
elerk he would necessarily know all about'making a statement to 

nnoi P °T llCe ^ aild J? thl ? is what he sa N s he stated - “ In January, 
ll92 |> I made a further purchase of a quarter of a pound of arsenic 
at Mr Davies s shop. A small amount of this was used as a 
weed-killer after being boiled with caustic soda bv mvself It 
was not a success, which explains why I have soie left at mv 
house. When I purchased this arsenic it w r as mixed with char¬ 
coal. I am keeping this to make a further trial later on. 
When I spoke of it being the only arsenic I had, I had quite 
forgotten the arsenic in the bureau that relates to this.* 5 After 
the statement he said this, “The cupboard where I kept the 
arsenic at my house (not in the bureau) contains boot-cleaning 
materials, and is unlocked. Nobody in the house, as far as I 
know, is aware of the presence of arsenic in the house. This 
arsenic I speak of is the only poison in my possession anywhere, 
excepting, of course, any contained in medicine. I have a medi¬ 
cine chest in my bedroom.” 

A day or two ago there was produced about 2 ounces of arsenic 
which was in the bureau. He had given no account whatever of 
white arsenic to the police—not a bit. We must think presently 
why that arsenic never was mentioned. I will go on. He said, 

“ The next day—the 1st January this year—I saw my solicitor, 
Mr. Matthews, and made a communication to him. In my office 
the police took my coat and put the letters from my pocket in a 
brown paper parcel. I was not then aware that there was arsenic 
in my pocket. Manuscripts and letters I took from my pocket, 
and there were two purely business letters and telegrams. I 
wished to look at the business letters then in my pocket, and I did 
so. For the first time since June, when I turned over the letters 
I saw that small packet (exhibit No. 32). It lay apart in the 
flap of the envelope. There was a recipe for making weed-killer.” 
That is exhibit No. 64. “ I told Mr. Crutchett where to find 

exhibit No. 64 immediately after making the statement.” 

Now he dealt, of course, with the whole case—his wife's will 
and so on, and that I am not going Into; but with regard to 
the history of arsenic he says, “ In June, 1921, Miss Pearce 
was with me in my study at Mayfield. I then had a 4-ounee 
packet of white arsenic. I think there was a string round it.” 
The jury saw it in the drawer of the bureau yesterday. “ I had 
taken it from the cupboard In the study about the middle of 
May, 1921; and then I put it into the bureau and divided it 
into two portions, and of one I made about twenty little packets 
in the study at Mayfield. I divided it with my penknife, and 
used all of that except the one found on me.” I do not know 
if you believe that. He took it out and on the same evening 
he used them all. If you want to poison dandelions, do you want 
twenty little packets ? He says he thought he had poisoned the 

351 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Mr Justice Darling 

whole twenty dandelions. As a matter of fact, he had He used 
the whole of it and made separate holes to poison those dandelions, 
and says it was more convenient to do that. This was done in 
June—-the last of that 2-ounce packet-and he mixed it with 
hoilino- water and caustic soda. So one packet of 2 ounces had 
been consumed, and the other packet of 2 ounces remained in 
the bureau You have seen the little packet (exhibit No. 32), 
and yon saw the little packet in the bureau m the waiting-room. 

“ I had made my statement one hour before that. It is as 
accurate as possible, and was given tc.the_ police for then 
assistance ” And the statement was read to the defendant—the 
rf lTad to y ”» i- no*. Wh.t I .aid-a,, 1 „a 
the arsenic I thought in 1921—is wrong I had mixed it up with* 
the other I made the statement voluntarily. Then I was 
arrested,'and later on I saw the little packet and remeinhered 
what 1 had stated—that it was wrong, and I decided to say 
nothing further till 1 had seen my solicitor Before the police 
left my office I remembered I should have told them where to 
find the arsenic at Mayfield. I realised it would require explana¬ 
tion. That packet in the bureau was never referred to. I knew 
before leaving my office after arrest that the statement I had made 
about the arsenic was inaccurate, and decided to leave the matter 
where it was.” Then he was re-examined and said, U» toe 
31st December, 1921, I had no idea the police were coming. 1 
volunteered to make a statement. I believed it to be true when 1 
made it. The arrest was a great shock. Then he speaks about 
his business letters and. .says, “ Some were m a brown paper 
bundle and I understood I had leave to look it through. Amongst 
them I saw the little packet (exhibit No. 32). The police did not 
tfill me they were going to Mayfield to search until jus - ie oie 

1 was taken to th ® ^ Mr! MatthewT press 

1921, and never touched ^it again until May, 192 . q 

° f \h?qtestion m i S , 7 what light do you think this throws upon 
this case ^ You have now the two sides before yon. <3n the one 

side the prosecution say Mrs. Armstrong dle ot ar ““J f"“i 
; n p* * the defence say, <c True, she died on the 22nd Februaiy. 
The prosecution say‘that was the result of several doses taken alter 
she returned from the asylum in January, and they say the couise 
of the illness shows it-diarrhmavomiting _ ori the Hays. when 
it is spoken to by the nurse and by Dr. Hmcks. The delen. 

* ‘ Confused it with.’ 

352 



Mr Justice Karlin® 


Charge to the Jury. 


say she never had a single dose of arsenic until the 16th February, 
and she never had another, and she died oi that; and she too£ 
it herself intending to kill herself. If you believe that she did 
take it herself, intending to kill herself or not, why, obviously. 

Vie did not give it to her, and he is not guilty. But the prose- 
ration say that won’t hold water, it will not do; there is the 
evidence of Dr. Hincks and the nurse. It doesn't agree witn the 
takinsr of only one dose. The defence argue that it does: the 
prosecution argue that it does not. The defence say it could 
all have been taken in the one dose on the 16th. It is for you 
to consider whether she could possibly have gone to get it, even 
if she had known where it was, and supposing then, according 
to this evidence of Mr. Matthews, the white arsenic to have been 
in the cupboard in the study. Well, now, you make up your 
minds if you can, whether she did take it herseli or whether 
she did not. If she did, the prisoner is absolutely innocent. 

But now, suppose you come to the conclusion that she did 
pot take it herself, where are you left? Who, according to any 
evidence here, had arsenic? No one but the prisoner. Did 

anybody know that there was any in the house but himself 
He says no. At the time he made that statement he said nobody 
knew there was any in the house. He_ said it himself .When 
be made that statement there was some m the bureau, why did 
not he mention it? There were 2 ounces of it m the bureau— 
you have seen it—white arsenic. When he made that statement 
to the police he never mentioned white arsenic; he made a states 
ment which he himself says mixed up the !91Si arsenic,the grey, 
with the white. Why did not he mention the ^hiiel At the 
time he made that statement the little parcel m his pocket had 
not been found. At the time he made that statement he had no 
reason to suppose that the police would know ^mg about 
the white arsenic; but before he went out of that office he realised 
that he had got the white arsenic m his pocket; and he says not 
till that moment did he ever remember that he had 
arsenic of Davies and had put it m the cupboard, and then in 
the 1 bureau He had forgotten that. After what I have read 

to you do you believe that? If you do not if you think that in 
the witness-box he has told you a deliberate falsehood about that, 
what do you ^ , of .f ^ “u^ denial ** h6 
^toto wife t Do you believe he could have forgotten 

thing if he had to state to the police, “ Not only 18 

grey* stuff in the cupboard, hut in the bureau m my study^m a 

1A 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Mr Justice Darling 

little drawer 33 (you know the drawer that pulls out with such 
difficulty) “ in that bureau if you look you will find 2 ounces 
of white arsenic.” Well, he says he forgot it. But what had 
he done with that white arsenic?. Had he done anything . with 
any of the arsenic calculated to impress the position of it on 
his mind as to the use he had made of the white arsenic? He 
had had 4 ounces of it, had divided it into two packets, had 
used up one packet of it in a most interesting experiment with 
a glass and for some reason or another it had not been exactly 
what he desired, and he poured it all down the lavatory. Do 
you think he forgot that when he was saying to the police, “ I 
will explain everything to you, I will make a voluntary state¬ 
ment ”? Do you think he forgot that? Then there is the rest. 
There are still 2 ounces left, and he remembered afterwards so 
precisely the month and everything, the bit of string and every¬ 
thin* about it; how he took it from the cupboard and put it 
in the bureau and left it; how he made up some arsenic. 

He was able to tell you in detail what he had done with all the 
white arsenic; he had taken another portion of it and had made 
up twenty little packets just like exhibit No. 32 (exhibit No. 32 
brought it all back to his mind, according to him), and had then 
o-one'out all at once on the same evening and had taken an old file 
and had pierced a hole at the root of twenty dandelions, as he 
thought, and had given them those doses; and he had clean for¬ 
gotten it—according to him. That is his statement. Do you be¬ 
lieve that he had forgotten the white arsenic that he bought at 
Davies’s ? Do you believe that he had forgotten what he did with 
some of it? Do you believe that he had forgotten what he did 
with the rest of it? Do you believe that he had forgotten that he 
had made up the twenty little packets, and do you believe that it 
never came into his mind until he saw the little packet which had 
been tumbled out of his pocket among the envelopes ? That is his 
case: until he saw the little packet, that he had clean forgotten 
all about that white arsenic. The case of the prosecution is 
that he made that statement, which is only, half the. truth, with 
the intent to deceive the police. At that time he did not know 
whether the police would find white arsenic or whether they^ would 
not He realised, the moment he saw the little packet, that it 
was a very awkward thing. So, knowing that his statement was 
false, because it was not all the truth and omitted a most im¬ 
portant matter—knowing that his statement was false, what did 
he do? He made up his mind that he would not tell ^police 
any more about it. That is what he said. He was asked, .Hoes 
it occur to you that if you had confessed to the police that you 
had white arsenic in your possession it would have been a very 
bad point against you, it was one which would have to be explained ; 
you see that ?— A. Yes, I quite see the point, Q. Now when yo 
saw the little packet and realised that you had got white arsem 

354 



Charge to the Jury. 

Mr Jaslsce Daxlsaag! 

in your pocket, did you realise that that was just a fatal dose of 
arsenic, not for a dandelion, but for a human being as well 1— A. 

I did not realise it at all. Q. But if every one of the little packets 
you made up was the same as the one found in your pocket, every 
one of them contained a fatal dose of arsenic for a human be in 2 ; 
you realise that from the evidence!— A. Yes, 1 do now, but 1 did 
not at the time. Q. The suggestion has been made, you know, 
that the moment you knew it was among the letters which were 
taken from you, you tried to get it back 1 !— A. 1 could not get it. 

Q. Superintendent Crutchett said to you, £ Leave those things 
alone 7 1— A. Yes. Q. Why did you, if you were simply dosing 
dandelions, make up an ounce of arsenic into twenty little packets, 
such as the one found on you'?— A. Because of the convenience of 
putting it in the ground. Q. Did you dose them all at the same 
time?— A. Yes. Q. Why go to the trouble of making up twenty 
little packets, one for each dandelion, instead of taking out the 
ounce of arsenic you had got, making holes, and giving each 
dandelion something out of the ounce?— A. It seemed the most con¬ 
venient way. I cannot give any other explanation. 0. Before 
the police had left your office I suppose you had realised that you 
had got 2 ounces of arsenic in your bureau?— A. Yes. Q. And if 
they believed your statement, the police would know nothing of 
it?—A. No. Q. When did you know that the police were, going 
to search Mayfield?— A. They told me they were going up. then. 
Q. Did you think they would find the arsenic?— A. Yes, I did. Q. 
Did it not occur to you, seeing that you thought they would find it, 
that it would be better to make a clean breast of the thing and tell 
them, * I forgot when I made this statement, I remember since, 
as you are going there, you will find in the bureau 2. ounces of 
white arsenic 7 ? Did it not occur to you, if you thought., they 
were going to find it, it would be the best thing to do?— A. I 
thought I had better keep my mouth shut until I had seen my. 
solicitor. 77 Then he says this about what happened afterwards. 
“ Q m So .far as you know, was it purposely, concealed from the police 
until last Thursday ?-™A. Yes, so far as I am aware. 77 . ^ 

Now we know what was the cause. We know that, having 
made that statement, which did not contain, the whole of the 
truth, being well aware that it did not contain the whole of the 
truth, being well aware that.there was in the bureau 2 ounces of 
white .arsenic, the same sort of stuff as was in that little packet, he 
made up his mind that he had better keep his mouth shut. What 
did he do ? We know now that he sent for Mr. Matthews, the 
solicitor, and told Mr. Matthews that there was a little packet in 
the drawer of the bureau, and.Mr. Matthews, defending, him^ did 
what was perfectly right ; he went to Mayfield and put his hand 
in the drawer, and he did not find it. We cannot doubt that he 
told the defendant, so. The police had not found it; they never 
produced it; we know they never found it. The defence badly 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Mr Justice Darling 

wanted to know whether the police had found it. It would have 
been a splendid thing if they had never found it. It put Mr 
Matthews in a very great difficulty; and so Mr. Matthews* con¬ 
sulted Mr. Eosanquet on the 1st January, because this had 
put Mr. Matthews in a very great difficulty as a professional man 
of honour. He had been told, the defendant must have informed 
him, that this statement (of the prisoner) was untrue; the moment 
the statement was seen it would be known it was not true. Mr. 
Matthews wanted to know what was his position ; because if a per¬ 
son has committed a felony, and you know that he has committed 
a felony, and you afterwards do certain things to help him to 
escape from justice, you are an accessory after the fact. To any 
lawyer it would very soon occur—“ Well, how far am I justified in 
going in this matter; what am I to do ? ” There are certain things 
you may do, and there are certain things you may not. Mr. 
Matthews, more by accident than anything else, afterwards did 
find that there was arsenic in the drawer, and he put it hack. 
He did perfectly right. He got Dr. Ainsley to come and to see 
that he found it in the drawer where the defendant told him it 
would be. Then he got it; then he knew that the defendant was 
possessed of white arsenic, of which he had never told the police ; 
and the question was, what was to be done ? Mr. Matthews, and 
any lawyer, would know that he might not destroy evidence; he 
must keep it. He is perfectly justified, if he can, in concealing it 
from the prosecution; and they did conceal it from the prosecution 
until last Thursday. That is a matter of tactics, whether they 
should conceal it or produce it. It was a matter of tactics whether 
they should conceal it always or produce it here at the Assizes. 
You have heard the comments of Sir Henry Curtis Bennett, who 
says what a good thing it was to produce it. You have heard the 
comments of the Attorney-General as to what sort of bearing it has 
upon the whole of this case, upon the conduct of the man who 
is charged, who said he had forgotten the existence of the 2 ounces 
of arsenic and the dealing with the dandelions, and all the rest 
of it, until the little packet was discovered; and the Attorney- 
General asks you to say whether you believe him, whether you think 
the man could have forgotten something so important as that. And 
then, when he remembered it, what was his conduct ? He thought 
the best thing he could do, in his own language, was to ■“ keep 
his mouth shut,” and then take legal advice as to what should 
be done if he got possession of the thing. He did get possession 
of it; and when he got ppssession of it they came to the com 
elusion that the best thing was not to let the prosecution know 
anything about it when the case was before the magistrate, keep 
them in the dark as long as ever they could, and produce it here 
at the Assizes, when it was an embarrassment to the prosecution, 
with an explanation, which (as Sir Henry Curtis Bennett has said) 
did great credit to the defendant. It is for you to judge. 

356 



Charge to the Jury. 

Mr Joatice Dar ling 

Practically there is the case. He is charged with murder 
by administering ^arsenic to his wife. She had an administration 
oi arsenic; and if yon are satisfied beyond doubt that he o*av- 

it to her intending to kill her, he is guilty. He had uuTopyor* 

tunity to give it jto her, you can see on the evidence. The question 
is whether he did give it. When I say he had the ooportunitv. 
there is evidence that he was alone with her again and asr&iu. 
You can think fop yourself how little it means to put some arsenic 
which you have got into an invalid’s food, how easv it is to do 
it, .especially if you have it all ready in a little packet like exhibit 
No. 32, which you can carry without anybody suspecting it. and 
which^ you can drop if anybody is not there so easily. 

Ii you come to the conclusion he did that, and that she died 

of that, then he is guilty. The question of motive the Attornev- 

General has dealt with, and so has Sir Henry Curtis Bennett. It 
is usual to look for a motive in any crime; but you will never 
find, in such a crime as this, a motive which you or I, I hope, 
would think an adequate motive. That does not prove that it is not 
a perfectly sufficient motive for another person, a person with a 
criminal mind. 

You have heard the defence; and I have said to you, if von 
have any reasonable doubt, it is your duty to acquit the prisoner. 
The defence is twofold. It has not been satisfied with saying 
to the prosecution, {e Prove your case and let the prisoner escape 
if there he a reasonable doubt.” They have gone further and have 
said, “ We will satisfy you”—and they have called doctors to 
satisfy you—“ we will satisfy you how that woman died : she com¬ 
mitted suicide.” If they have satisfied you of that, of course, you 
will say “ not guilty.” But suppose they fail to satisfy you that*she 
committed suicide, where are they? She died of arsenical poison¬ 
ing undoubtedly. When was it given to her! Who gave it to her I 
If she did not die of suicide, but died of a dose of arsenical poison¬ 
ing administered at some short time before her death, who had 
arsenic? Only the defendant, so far as the evidence goes. . Who 
could have given it to her, if she did not take it herself with, a view 
to commit suicide? Take the whole case into your consideration 
and say what you find. 

(The jury retired at 5.8, and returned into Court at 5.56.) 

The Deputy-Clerk of Assize —Gentlemen of the jury, have you 
all agreed upon your verdict? 

The Foreman of the Jury —Yes. 

The Deputy-Clerk of Assize—Do you find the prisoner at the 
bar, Herbert Bowse Armstrong, guiliy or not guilty of the wilful 
murder of Katherine Mary Armstrong? 

' The Foreman of the Jury —Guilty. 

. 357 . 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Mr Justice Darling 

The Deputy-Clerk of Assize —You say he is guilty, and that 
is the verdict of you all? 

The Foreman of the Jury —Yes. 

The Deputy-Clerk of Assize —Herbert Rowes Armstrong, y OU 
stand convicted of the wilful murder of Katherine Mary Armstrong 
What have you to say why the Court should not now give you judg¬ 
ment of death according to law? S 

The Prisoner —Nothing. (Silence was then proclaimed.) 


Sentence. 

Mr. Justice Darling —Herbert Rowse Armstrong, the jury, 
after a long and careful investigation of the case, and after a 
defence characterised by every quality which could induce a jury to 
take a favourable view of your case, have come to the conclusion 
that you are guilty of the awful crime with which you are charged; 
and ! feel bound to say that in that verdict of theirs I concur, and 
consider that it was the only one which men who had any regard 
to their oaths could have returned on the evidence which has been 
given._ The suggestion that your wife committed suicide was, to 
my mind, absurd, and was supported by no evidence which could 
render it not only probable, but possible. I say no more on that. 
You have had a fair trial; you have been brilliantly defended; and 
a jury of your countrymen have carefully considered their verdict. 
It is my duty now merely to pronounce the sentence of the Court. 
It is that you be taken hence to the place from whence you came; 
that you be taken thence to a place of lawful execution ; and that you 
be there hanged by the neck until you be dead; that, your body be 
buried within the precincts of the prison in which you shall last be 
confined; and may the Lord have mercy on your soul. 

(The prisoner was removed.) 

Mr. Justice Darling— Gentlemen of the jury, you have had 
a most trying time and a most painful duty to perform, and you 
have discharged it courageously. I wish personally that whenever 
a jury is empanelled in Hereford you might serve upon it, because 
of the intelligence you have brought to bear on the matter which 
has been submitted to your investigation. But that would not he 
just; and you are entitled to be excused, in consequence of the 
labours you have had, which must have cost you a great deal, 
and I shall excuse you all for twelve years from further service on 
juries. 

The Attorney-General— Your lordship is aware that it is 
possible there may be an appeal in this case. Your lordship indi- 

358 



Sentence. 


Mr JBailee Brnrlsai* 

cated it in the course of your summing-up. That may have an 
effect one way or the other, but it is proper for me to remind your 
lordship that there is now upon the He a true bill found upon 
another indictment against the prisoner. I should ask your lord- 
ship to allow that to be a remanei in case it becomes necessary to 
deal with it. 

Mr. Justice Darling — That is the indictment charging Mm 
with attempting to murder Mr. Martini 

The Attorney-General —Yes. 

Mr. Justice Darling — The proper course would be to adjourn, 
that until the next Assizes. By that time- 

The Attorney-General — The matter will have been dealt with. 
I may respectfully remind your lordship that there is that indict¬ 
ment. I assume your lordship would make it a remanei from this 
Assize till the Summer Assize. 

Mr. Justice Darling —Yes. 




APPENDICES. 




APPENDIX A 

COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL. 

( Thursday , VLth May, 1922.) 

Gbottnbs of Appeal. 

(1) That Mr. Justice Darling wrongly permitted evidence to be given 
which tended to show that the prisoner had administered poison to one 
Oswald Norman Martin with intent to murder him. 

(2) The learned judge misdirected the jury on the effect of such 
evidence and on the way in which it should be'"applied. 

(3) The .learned judge misdirected the jury about the grounds on 
which the .said evidence was admissible (if admissible in fact)." 

(4) The learned judge misdirected the jury on the whole case. In 
particular he misdirected them on the following points :— 

(a) By directing them that it was for the defence to prove to their 

satisfaction that the deceased committed suicide. 

(b) By failing to bring to their notice points in the evidence which 

told in favour of the prisoner. 

(c) By failing to put to the jury adequately the case made for the 

defence. 

.(d) By unduly emphasising a number.of points put forward on behalf 
of the prosecution without calling the attention of the jury to 
the answers put forward by the defence. 

(e) By suggesting to the jury theories as to what might have occurred 

with which the defence had had no opportunity of dealing. 

(f) By suggesting to the jury that the prisoner had been guilty of 

concealing evidence from the prosecution at a time when he was 
in fact under arrest and was represented by a solicitor. 

(g) By misdirecting the jury generally as to the weight and attention 

to be attached to the evidence ..given by the witnesses for the 
prosecution and defence respectively. 

(5) The learned judge misconstrued certain of the evidence and in 
consequence misdirected the jury. 

The following were put forward as instances of misdirection:—(a) 
The learned judge stated that if Nurse Allen was mistaken in saying that 
Mrs. Armstrong took to her. bed on 13th February, 1921, it made a difference 
of one day only. There was, in fact, no evidence of any other witness 
that Mrs. Armstrong took to her bed before 16th February, (b) The 
learned judge ■ stated that there was no evidence that anybody besides 
the prisoner knew that there was arsenic in the house. There was, in 
fact, evidence, that Mrs. Armstrong knew of it. 

Sir Henry Curtis Bennett, K.C., Mr. S. B. G. Bosanquei, and Mr. 
E. A. Godson .appeared . for the appellant • and the Attorney-General 
(Sir Ernest Pollock, K.C.), Mr. C. F. Vacheil, K.C., and Mr. St. John G. 
Mieklethwait. for the Crown. 

Sir Henei Oubtis Bennett, in opening the case for Armstrong, said 
that, that was. an appeal against conviction at the Hereford Assizes on 
13th April. last.. The appellant was a solicitor practising at Hay,_ in 
Herefordshire. He was- fifty-three years of age, and in 1907 he married. 
In' 1912 Ms wife and he went, to live at Mayfield, Hay. . The house .had 
considerable grounds' and 800 square yards of paths. In 1914 the appellant, 
who had been for some time a Territorial, was called up on the outbreak 
of war. He left his family and served in this country and also for a 




Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

time in France up to 23rd May, 1919. During the absence of the atmell^ 
on war service, after a short time Mayfield was let and Mrs aS. 
with the children went to Teignmouth, where some of her lamlTfe 
While she was there Mrs. Armstrong suffered from almost chronic 
tion. She suffered from rheumatism, neuritis, and loss of power frfe 
ba f ds - i, Sh ® j 1 * 30 su ®f ed from loss of power in her feet. On 17th Jam™™- 
1917, she made a will. In it she left her property ultimately to be diviiiJri 
among her children, and she left an annuity of £50, subsequently £l(ffl 
to her husband, besides making a bequest to the housekeeper of 
appellant There was clear evidence on the notes that not uMatLb! 
during all that time-1917-1918-while the appellant was seS 
especially when he was m France, his wife was very anxious On 2Zrl 
fe ?? 19 ’™ he a PP ellant ., wa s demobilised and returned to his homea‘ 
Mayfield. There was evidence that early in that year Mrs Arw! * 
was still suffering from indigestion and from neuriti/and loss 'oAoweMn 

5rlctl a easrs d olicitor. 1919 ’ the appellant took »P iS 

During 1919 Mrs. Armstrong expressed to her sister in October a 

+n S f \ t0 n“ a v e 5 new 7 lU ; te lm S ller tllat sile was not satisfied now 
that her husband was back, that she had left him enough The first 

m ° nth ’ as * be oase , for the P rose °ution tas pub “ 
^ be °? use ’ according to the Attorney-General in opening IS 

case to the jury there, on 1st iugust Mrs. Armstrong was “ qMte well ” 
On 8th July, 1920—three weeks before the date takin by the Attorney. 
General—the second will was made. That will played an important ^ 
m the trial, because there was some suggestion that the making of that 
will was carried through by the appellant, and it was put fofward by 

to ffet B rid of “ mor .. sll SS e s tlon tha * it was a motive for the appellant 
nd of wife. _ There was some suggestion that the will was not 
executed ; yet m the same > breath the prosecution was saying not 
only that Mrs. Armstrong was quite well up to August, 1920, but that 
she was a keen, clear-headed business woman, and there was this document 

S1 f ned ^’ her * i N V Ugg ?? ti0n was made at the trial ^bat the 
atare y. as anything else than Mrs. Armstrong's real signature: but 
suggestion was ma ^e that the will was not properly executed, and 
the Attorney-General, m opening the case to the jury, suggested that so 
great was the hurry of Armstrong to see that it was executed that he did 
not wait until it could be properly executed. Yet the will was signed in 
the presence of Miss Pearce, the housekeeper. ® 

The Loup CH3EP Justice—T he will was in the appellant’s handwriting 
w . S: ‘p Henby CtI S n f Bennett—T he body of it was. The evidence of 
Miss Pearce was that, as far as she could remember, Major and Mrs 
£ the d ra wing-room, and that she was called in, and 

safd +Tw b “ I- tha I .^"“steong, putting her hand on the paper, 

said to her Sign here. Miss Pearce further went on to say that she 
had a recollection of Mrs. Armstrong saying “ There is Lily Candy: she 
and IS’ I nd she Y as cahed into the room. Lily Candy was called, 

a ? d „ I, *,4 he remembered only signing one document for Major Arm- 

!tSIf’«^ d +i, <il * d n ?* W°- W t } lat jt was a will >' that she signed it in the 
study, and that only Major Armstrong was present. 

i Counsel went on to say that that was made on© of the suggestions 
° : “ 0 f [1 5 tlVe + * n the , , case; although it was held out as one of the sug- 

f£f? d _ ves > tl \ Q were saying that when this keen, clear- 

neaded woman made the will she was quite well. 

On 4th August, 1920, there was a purchase of some weed-killer. There 
weed killer 6 dlSpute whether consisted of three or four packets of 

Mr. Justice Avory— When you say “ weed-killer,” what do you mean? 

rlo./I-vf , HllNaT Cijbtis Bennett—I t was powdered weed-killer, and was 
described as weed-killer. 

364 



Appendix A. 

Mr. Justice Ayory—W hat is it r-istde of? 

Sir Henry Curtis Bennett—O ne of the things in it is arsenic. When 

you go into a shop and ask for weed-killer, vou are suurr^d f- 

Continuing, counsel said that cn 15th" Aaur' 
undoubtedly ill. Dr. Hincfes was sent for, and during'the*nen: Aa or 
three days she showed most decided sicxs of delu= : cvs f>n 2f*v 
Major Armstrong sent for two people—Mr. Chevalier, *a" sc iidtcrVcf'Liter- 
pool, who was the best friend of both Major and Mrs. Artts-wr 'jr r* r £ 
the family for many years, and the sister of Mrs. ArmstrmjTMiss Fr ^nd” 
They arrived on 20th and 21st August. A ccnsuksti :n = ic~ > "V ^r-g"Tr 
the evening of 21st August between Dr. Hincks and another"dwbh 
the result that it was determined, at the doctors’ surresticm a-vrj^Vc^ 
by the others, that Mrs. Armstrong should at the eariie-t .cssime rumen* 
he removed to Barn wood Asylum, near Gloucester. On 22n T" An jus fc ”*s L * 
was taken to that asylum, and the ease for the prosecution, zs opened bv 
the Attorney-General, was this, for he drew particular attention to 
dates in these terms— 

August 1, 1920.—Mrs. Armstrong quite well. 

August 4, 1920.—Weed-killer purchased. 

■ August 15, 1920.—She was taken ill. 

August 22, 1920.—She was taken to Barnwocd Asvlum, and at that 
time was suffering from the effects of arsenical poise-nine. 

The case for the defence as to those dates and that"month was—Mrs. 
Armstrong for four or five years was^ suffering from indigestion, neuritis, 
and loss of power. August 4.—Purchase of weed-killer—nothing to do 
with the appellant. It was clear that, the weed-killer was purchased 
by the gardener, Jay, who swore that he used the whole of it except a 
small half-tin which was left in the garden shed, and that, so far as he 
knew, Armstrong never touched it. 

The Loud Chief Justice— Mow much is half a tin? 

Sir Henry Curtis Bennett—I think they were pound tins. 

Mr. Justice Shearman —A tin, I understand, could kill fif ty people, 
but the amount is immaterial here. 

Sir Henry Curtis Bennett said that this small half-tin was found 
by Jay after the arrest, and he said that he used all except what remained, 
in the garden shed. He (counsel) did not agree that Mrs. Armstrong was 
quite well on 1st August. On 4th August came the purchase by Jay, and 
then the illness. Directly Mrs. Armstrong became unwell Major "Armstrong 
sent for the best friend, the sister, and the doctor, and the case for the 
defence was that Major Armstrong was doing all that he had ever done 
before—showing that he was a devoted husband, taking every sort of 
care of his wife. She was taken to Bamwood on 22nd August; and on 
that date, -and not before, according to experts for the Crown, Mrs. 
Armstrong did show symptoms which were those of arsenical poisoning, 
although they were also symptomatic of other things. The case for the 
defence was that she was undoubtedly suffering from toxinism, the result 
of auto-intoxication; that gradually she was poisoning herself as the 
result of her illness. In Bamwood Asylum Mrs. Armstrong progressed 
slowly, but from 3rd October until 3rd November—for thirty-one days—she 
received in the asylum a special tonic, and in that tonic there was each 
day l/7th of a grain of arsenic., 

-Mr. Justice Avory —Of what? 

Sir Henry Curtis Bennett —Arsenic. _ He did not say that that had 
anything to do with her death. The point was that I)r. Spilsbury in 
cross-examination admitted to him that if in fact a person were suffering 
from arsenical poisoning on 22nd August, on. entering the asylum I/7th 
of a grain thus administered would, to put it at the lowest, retard the 
progress of the patient, and might make her worse. He admitted that 
it would retard her progress, and yet the evidence in the case showed that 

m 




Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

during the time she was in the asylum she made steady process a 
that during the time she was taking the tonic, that tonic ‘contain^ 
arsenic did her good and improved her health. That was a matter S § 
of course, was dealt with. In October, 1920, when she was given arsS 
the evidence of an expert called for the Crown was that if she had h 
suffering from arsenical poisoning in August, 1920, one would have exneotS 
the arsenic to have retarded her progress, whereas the evidence was th* 
other way and she was getting better. The evidence was that at the time 
his wife was at the asylum Major Armstrong, who went to see her frnm 
time to time, was showing the greatest consideration towards her arS 
displaying to the doctor there the desire to know whether she could coZ 
home. ® 

Counsel read correspondence between Major Armstrong and Dr Tow™ 
end. He said that on 22nd January, 1921, Mrs. Armstrong was* fetchM 
from the asylum and taken home. A point of that was made by the CroZ 
m opening the case. It was said that the desire of the appellant to get 
his wife home was a desire that he could get her home to poison her. He 
submitted that the letters showed that the point of view taken bv the 
appellant was consistent with the view which would be taken by a husband 
who was desirous, properly because of affection, to get his wife back horn? 
Mrs. Armstrong returned on 22nd January. 

On 25th January she was seen by Dr. Hincks, not because she was 
not well, but because there was something the matter with the children 
Un 6th February she was not so well as when she returned, and the alleea- 
tion was that Armstrong, who was said to be giving her poison, sent for 
the doctor and said, “My wife is not so well. I want you to keen an 
eye on her.’’ On 11th February Dr. Hincks examined her, and found 
her m a bad state of health. He had no sort of suspicion that there was 
anything wrong at all, and on Sunday, 13th February, after the mid-dav 
meal, Mrs. Armstrong was sick. On 23rd January, the very dav after 
she returned home from the. asylum, it was thought right by Maior Arm¬ 
strong to employ Nurse Kinsey, and she remained there till the 27th 
She_ held the view, however, that, that being a mental case, there ought 
to be a whole-time nurse, and, as a result, on 27th January Nurse AEen 
was engaged. 

Between 23rd and 27th January there was a very important conversa- 
^ ail . s ® Nurse Kinsey said that Mrs. Armstrong had told her that 
she had tried to throw herself out of a window at the asylum or that she 
had gone t0 J he ™? dow and f ° und & locked; also that she had been 
up to the attic window at Mayfield, and, she asked, supposing anybody 
threw herself out of that window would it break her back. That evidence 
wa | sa PP orted \ ^ lss Pearce, who spoke as to the incident at the aeylum 
and also as to being asked by Mrs. Armstrong whether it would break 
her hack. At the end of January, within a very short time after her return 
from Barnwood Asylum, Mrs. Armstrong had suicide in her mind-some 
attempt or idea of committing suicide both at the asylum and after her 
return ; otherwise, why those questions ? J 

. There was not one scrap of evidence that Major Armstrong ever gave 
his wife arsenic, or that he ever gave her any food or drink, not one scrap 
of evidence of how or when he administered arsenic. ■ 

J ™ r When you say that there is no evidence 
that he gave his wife arsenic, I suppose you mean that there is no evidence 
that he gave it m the presence of other persons? 

Sir Henry Curtis Bennett—Y es, I mean that. 

tunity. L ° BD jTJSIICE ~ There « evidence that he had the oppor- 

oni)ort™Wv Na TI 1 A^ E?IS BEN f E y-Yes, everybody in the house had the 
?P p ,y u " lty - There is opportunity to administer it if there is weed-killer 

USe ’ but m thls case one is al ways left with the fact that the 

366 



Appendix A. 


glTH- 


proseeution were unable to say at any time, “ Did Major Arr— of- 
his wife a drink or food in which there mi chi have been a^erbc 1 ’* 

put 2^ “»»»•> that! Look‘it he o«r.i« 

TTor» ™? El,Er Cubiis Ben'neh said that the whole thins was assumption 
Her^was a nurse who was m charge who would sav tskt sh»^onlvweni 

givVher h drSi ° PP0rtnile mon:ent to Ieave teT P^ent. Any person might 

left SstrtrbSLlt tL^on^ N ° rSe ^ ^ °* S “ 

in hfs r waeTrooS raiIS BenNEIT ~ I a * ree t5lat he *-«» and 

Mr. Justice Shearman— A husband must be frequently left like that. 

- f . Sl ^? E ?P lY ? TJETIS . Bennett— If a man is accused of murdericT ha 
wife, and there is poison in the house, if he does not go into the room 
people say that he is keeping away to divert suspicion, and if he does 
go id, then that act in itself is put against him. 

The Lobb Chief Justice—T here is ample evidence of opportunity 

alone ttiere 15 evi ® ence of OCC3S10ns ^en the husband was in the bedroom 

Sir Hexbt Ccetis _ Ben-neti—I accept that. There was opoortnnitv 

but it was consistent with his innocence that, lie went to the room. 

Miss Pearce also said that Mrs. Armstrong did not take to bed 
regularly until 16th February, on which day Mrs. Armstrong; told her that 
she thought that she had taken a chill. That was the"* only evidence 
except the appellant’s as to 16th February. 

The ATTOENEY-GENEBAL—Dr. Hincks referred to it. Nurse Allen 
spoke of tiie patient’s sitting in the verandah with a hot-water bottle at 
the end of the previous week. 

Sir H. Curtis Bennett said that the fact remained that she was wrong, 
and that the defence had corroborated the iact that she was down on 

16th February. In her statement to the police on 3rd February_ long 

before she was treated as a hostile witness—Miss Pearce said that Mrs. 
Armstrong sat in the garden on 14th February. He admitted that there 
was some vomiting on 13th February, but not that it became continuous 
then. He drew a sharp distinction between anything Mrs. Armstrong 
was suffering from before 16th February and what happened after. Up 
to that date everything she suffered was consistent with her medical 
history. 

The prosecution said that arsenic was being administered from 3rd 
February. Yet on the 6th the man who was suggested to be poisoning 
Ms wife called Dr. Hincks’s attention to her condition. 

Wherever Nurse Allen’s evidence could be tested it was wrong. The 
second instance was that she said it was on 17th February that Dr. 
Hincks was sent for. That was wrong. Dr. Hincks said that it was on 
16th February. It might not be a great matter, but when her evidence 
was made a basis, on which expert medical evidence was founded, it 
became important. According to Nurse Allen, from 16th February tfrip 
poor woman was suffering from very nearly continuous vomiting] and 
was becoming weaker and weaker. But it was again possible to test her 
evidence. Airs. Armstrong ■ ■ died at 10 a.m. on 22nd February; during 
the last two days, said Nurse Allen—he., from 10 a.m. on 20£2i February 
—Mrs. Armstrong suffered from almost continuous vomiting and diarrhoea. 
On the night of that Sunday, 20th February, Nurse Allen wait off duty 
at 10 p.m., just thirty-six hours before Mrs. Armstrong died. Her place 
was taken for ten hours by Nurse Iloyd, 

The remaining material dates could be stated briefly. On Sad February 
Major Armstrong was told at 8 a.m. that his wife was m eztremm 

m 




Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 


He went in, kissed her, and waited till Dr. Hincks came. Dr. Hincka 
said that she might last through the day, but she died at 10 a.m. The 
funeral took place on 25th February. Armstrong was very upset, and 
went abroad, with the concurrence of Dr. Hincks. He returned to Hay in 
May and resumed his duties as justices’ clerk till 31st December. During 
that period—except for possible single days—he was not away from Hay 6 
On 31st December he was interviewed by Inspector Crutchett, and made 
a statement, and was arrested on another charge. 

Counsel then gave a list of the purchases of arsenic by Armstrong. 
In 1912 and 1914 there were purchases of weed-killer which were not 
material. On 7th June, 1919, a fortnight after Armstrong’s return from 
the Army, he bought 4 lb. of arsenic properly coloured, with other 
ingredients for weed-killer; it was bought from Mr. Davies, the local 
chemist at Hay. There was evidence of Armstrong and Jay, the gardener, 
that some of this was used. On 4th August, 1920, there was the purchase 
by Jay of three or four 1-lb. tins of weed-killer containing arsenic in large 
quantities. This was used except half a tin, which was found after 
Armstrong’s arrest. On 11th January, 1921, Armstrong bought i lb. of 
arsenic from Mr. Davies. The evidence given by the assistant was that 
this also was coloured. According to the appellant this was purchased 
for use on the paths and drive, where Jay said there were numerous weeds, 
and that January was a good time of year to deal with them. Armstrong, 
in other words, was identifying himself in the most direct way with the 
purchase of arsenic from the local chemist, who had known him for years. 

The point had been made—why had he not used this arsenic? His ex¬ 
planation was that a few days later his wife returned and was ill, so he did 
not use it till he returned in May. His diary showed that on the only Satur¬ 
day between 11th January and his wife’s return Armstrong himself was 
ill in bed. 

The Lord Chief Justice —On 14th January he was writing asking for 


his wife’s return. 

Sir Henry Curtis Bennett, continuing, said that Dr. Hincks’s death 
certificate was — heart disease, one year; nephritis, six months; acute 
gastritis, twenty-one days. Two motives for this crime were alleged—first, 
the alleged will leaving all his wife’s property to the appellant, hut the 
difference in effect of the two was not very great. 

The Lord Chief Justice— Did he not receive everything under the 
second ? 

Sir Henry Curtis Bennett admitted this, but he said that dealing 
with it as a question of motive, or part of the motive, it was notable 
that not one penny piece had been used by the appellant up to the time 
of his arrest. . 

The Lord Chief Justice —It would have been highly inartistic to 


dispose of it at once. 

Sir Henry Curtis Bennett— But this was nearly a year. 

The other alleged motive was even less formidable, namely, that there 
was some other lady—a lady of mature years and perfect respectability, 
all of whose family were known to the appellant; a lady who knew of 
Mrs. Armstrong, and of Armstrong’s affection for her and for his children. 
Neither side did nor could make the slightest reflection on this lady or 
Armstrong’s relations with her. 

There was another motive never suggested at the trial until the 
learned judge suggested it himself in the summing-up—a motive with 
which he (counsel) had, of course, no opportunity of dealing, and which 
was never suggested by the prosecution. 

He would summarise the facts down to the date of Mrs. Armstrong’s 
death—a devoted husband—not disputed; living on terms of affection with 
his wife—not disputed; in August, 1920, when he is supposed to be 
poisoning his wife, sends for Mr. Chevalier and Miss Friend. She is five 


368 



Appendix A. 

months at Barnwood, making gradual improvement, though taking 1 - 7th 
of a grain of arsenic daily from 3rd October to 3rd Xcvember. 

The Lore Chief Justice —Yon have omitted the purchase of arsenic 
on 4th August and the symptoms of arsenical poisoning. That is, cf 
course, very material on the question of suicide. 

Sir H. Curtis Bennett said that he had always taken the view that 
he had to deal seriously with this matter, but when he cross-examined Dr. 
Hincks upon it, Mm Justice Barling had told him that he was netting 
very far from the point. 

Mr. Justice Shearman —But when you explained ycur object, he did 
not interrupt you again. 

Sir H. Curtis Bennett—No, hut in Ms summing up he told the jury 
that they need not concern themselves much with" August, 1920. He 
{counsel) had always regarded it as important to show whether Mrs. 
Armstrong's condition in August, 1920, was due to arsenic or to toxemia. 

The most important ground of appeal was the admission cf evidence 
on a charge which was the subject-matter of another indictment. In 
Hay there was another young man—young in comparison with Major 
Armstrong—a solicitor named Martin. Martin and Armstrong had many 
litigious matters going on. between their two offices, and there was one 
estate sale .in which Martin was pressing for completion which 
Armstrong was delaying. Their personal relations were good, but their 
professional relations had become strained. There was a * suggestion 
that Martin had annoyed Mrs. Armstrong on one occasion by his costume, 
and had not. been invited to Mayfield again in her lifetime" 

On 26th October the business relations of Martin and Armstrong 
were strained—ultimately, there was a writ issued. On that day and on 
several previous days Martin received an invitation to Armstrong* s to tea. 
Both offices were very busy, and every time Martin went home—which 
he always did by car—he had to pass Mayfield. 

On that afternoon Jay and MacGeorge were working there. An 
arrangement had been made that Armstrong would come back early to 
see MacGeorge about a temporary building which he was having erected. 
About 4.15 Armstrong was seen by MacGeorge to come up the drive, pass 
through the front door, and come straight out to the back garden, where 
he remained in conversation with MacGeorge til! Martin arrived, when 
they went into the house together, where tea was ready for them. The 
suggestion of the prosecution was that poison had been put upon a scone 
which Armstrong handed to Martin in Ms fingers with the remark, 
“ Excuse fingers.” That had been left to the jury in a much wider 
sense. There was no suggestion by Martin that in his presence anything 
suspicious was done, except the handing of the seone._ Martin left, having 
had something to eat and to drink. Even opportunity was cut down to 
the minimum in this case. The food was brought* straight from the 
kitchen, to the drawing-room by a maid named Price. JTrmstrong was 
never, in the kitchen that day, and there was no evidence whatever that 
he had any arsenic on his person on that date. 

Martin went away. There was some evidence that he was feeling 
unwell. He ate his dinner, and three and a half hours after this tea was 
taken ill with symptoms consistent with arsenic, and also consistent with 
gastritis, for which Ms complaint was taken by Dr. Hincks. Kot till the 
fourth day was a sample taken—under not very satisfactory conditions, 
in an. ordinary chemist’s bottle, and l/33rd grain of arsenic found. 

•. Armstrong and Martin continued meeting, and there were invitations 
from Armstrong to tea at his office down to 12th December. On 31st 
December, the next material date, there was actually a pending dinner 
party at Armstrong’s, to which Martin and his wife were invited. 

On 31st December Inspector Crutchett interviewed Armstrong. It was 
a Saturday; that was important, for according to the appellant he was 

Is 3*59 




Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 


wearing a Norfolk jacket—which was not his usual office costume- 
jacket which he wore when he worked in the garden and sometimes on ** 
Saturday morning when he intended to spend the afternoon in the earck 1 
He had not worn it since June till that day. When he was first snokk’ 
to by Inspector Crutchett he was asked to give an explanation in relation 
to Martin’s illness. [Counsel read a long statement made by Armstrong 
to the inspector.] That statement was made in difficult circumstanced 
when he was being questioned about a very serious matter—his alleged 
attempt to poison a brother solicitor. He was arrested at his office Hs 
asked permission to deal with his business letters, and, while search was 
being made, was seated at a table with a police officer opposite to watch 
him. He not only went through the business letters to the office but 
as he thought he was entitled to do, though the police had not intended 
it, also through letters in his pockets—this with a police officer iust 
opposite. Caught in the fold of an envelope he saw a little white packet 
Which brought back to his mind the way he had used a considerable mrt 
of the arsenic bought on 11th January, 1921. ^ 

A great . deal was made by the prosecution of the fact that when he 
found this little packet h© did not then and there say to the police “ My 
statement was incorrect; I now recollect that I have some other arsenic ” 
The appellant’s answer was that, being under arrest, he thought it wiser 
not to say anything further until he had taken advice. 

. _ TJ 16 counsel, dealing with the finding of the small packet of arsenic 
said that comment had been made on the fact that arsenic had been found 1 
and that nothing was said about it at the time. The appellant, however' 
was under arrest. He (Armstrong) did not, in fact, make any further 
statement^ to the police after that little packet had been found. Whether 
he was right or not in failing to do so, he (counsel) would not sav but 
later the appellant instructed Mr. Matthews and told him that in a drawer 
m the bureau m his study the solicitor would find about 2 ounces of arsenic 
and that it had been put into some blue paper. J 

The Lord Chief Justice —That was the arsenic which, according to 
the evidence of the chemist’s assistant, was covered, as it ought to be 
With charcoal ?—Yes. ’ 

Henry Curtis Bennett said that he placed great reliance on the 
finding of that arsenic in the bureau, although, as their lordships would see 
it was left to the jury as if the finding of the arsenic subsequently by 
Mr. Matthews was a matter which put him in great difficulty, and that 
it was only through his honesty and integrity that the fact became known. 
It was left to the jury that, instead of the finding of the arsenic being 
of greaV importance m Major Armstrong’s favour, it was a strong point 
against him. The learned judge did not put the defence to the jury 
at all upon that point. ■ ; 

The Lord Chief Justice—I suppose that in your address to the jury 
you laid great stress on it? J J 


. ... Sir Henry Curtis Bennett replied that he did. He said that when 
me jury cam© to the summing up they only had from the learned judge 
the point of view of the prosecution with regard to it. 

, Attorney-General said that he had to attach great importance 

to the tact that there had been another packet of arsenic which had not 
b t?* n -u re * err • i° * n ^ ie P^oner^s statement. It was not only arsenic 

which was m the cupboard in 1920, but also the white arsenic purchased 

by the prisoner m 1921. 

, . , r ^i} e Lord Chief Justice —It was at a comparatively late stage of the 
trial that the discovery of the packet was first mentioned. 
i Lurtis Bennett said that it was the first opportunity 

he had had of cross-examining on the subject. He put it to the first 
witness for the prosecution to whom he could put it. Mr. 

Matthews knew when he went to Mayfield that the police had been 

370 F 



Appendix A. 

there and made a thorough search. The solicitor went to the bur era, 
but the long narrow drawer had not been polled right cut, and it appeared 
that there was nothing in it. 

Mr. Justice Avory —How is all this material! 

Sir Henry Curtis Bennett said that it was very material, because the 
case was clearly put to the jury malting the insinuation that the appellant 
was anxious right through that this matter should nti he disci:sal 

The Lord Chief Justice —Your case is that this racket of white 
arsenic was concealed at the back of this drawer! 

Sir Henry Curtis Bennett —Innocently; by accident. 

The Lord Chief Justice —And it was in fact discovered in the circum¬ 
stances to which Mr. Matthews deposed? The fact comes to this, that 
the arsenic was found in the drawer, and if the search made iy the 
police had been a little more fortunate they would have discovered it. 
Would you then say that, if the poliee had discovered it, i: would hue 
been in the appellant’s favour? 

Sir Henry Curtis Bennett— The discovery was not so favourable to 
the appellant as if the police had found it. "Directly it was discovered, 
it was _ in favour of the appellant that it should be found that he was in 
possession of white arsenic bought from Davies. 

Mr. Justice Shearman —Assuming if had been discovered it would have 
shown at once that it was bought from Davies? 

Sir Henry Curtis Bennett—Y es. 

The Lord Chief Justice— There could he no doubt that the sc Heitor 
having found it caused a perplexed situation. 

Mr. Justice Ayory —It only shows that the manner in which it was 
discovered was most immaterial. 

Sir Henry Curtis Bennett —Yes, the manner in which it was dis¬ 
covered; it was the fact of its discovery which was material. 

Counsel said that that brought him to the last matter cf fact to which 
lie desired to draw attention. The first real ground of appeal there was the 
point which, in his' submission, was of the greatest importance. The 
appellant was upon his trial on an indictment for the murder of his wife on 
22nd February, 1921, and he (counsel) had ventured to point out to the 
Court during his survey of the facts of the case that the case for the 
prosecution against him was that for some time he had been poisoning his 
wife, that he was in possession of arsenic which might poison his wife, 
and there was the question of the.will as being motive. There was no 
act proved by the appellant in regard to which he might set up the 
defence that the act. was done either by mistake or by accident. The 
only thing the prosecution had to prove was, “ You are in possession of 
poison, you had the opportunity of administering that poison to your wife, 
and we "say that you. had some motive for doing so.” The death of the 
wife took place on 22nd February, and during the course of the trial 
upon that indictment, at a very early stage, before any defence was before 
the Court at all, submission "was made by the Attorney-General to the 
learned judge that he should be allowed to open the facts of the indictment 
in the Martin case. 

Before he (counsel) came to deal with the way in which the submission 
was made and the law upon the subject, it was of importance to remember 
that this case was being opened in considerable detail and this evidence 
was sought to be put to the jury, not at some subsequent time, but then, 
and there in the very first opening statement of counsel, before any defence 
of any sort had been. made. 

Mr. Justice SHEARMAN—Was it before the opening by the Attorney- 
General? . ■ ■ 

Sir Henry Curtis Bennett—No. 

The Lord Chief Justice — Did not you say with reference to that argu¬ 
ment that it was a part of the case for the defence that Mrs. Armstrong 
did in fact die of arsenical poisoning? 


371 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Sir Henry Ctjrtis Bennett—C ertainly. 

The Lord Chief Justice —Then the case was open to three defences— 
accident, suicide, or poisoning by some other person? 

Sir Henry Curtis Bennett agreed. He said that there had been an 
opening by the Attorney-General dealing with the murder charge, and 
then there was this submission to the learned judge. He proceeded to 
read the shorthand note of the Attorney-General’s submission, and said 
he contended that such evidence as was given there in relation to the 
Martin charge would only have been admissible on three grounds. 

The Lord Chief Justice —Intent, system, accident? 

Sir Henry Curtis Bennett —Yes. 

Mr. Justice Avory —Is there a system of poisoning everybody? 

Sir Henry Curtis Bennett—I hope not, my lord. 

Counsel said that what he understood was that if there was evidence 
connecting different separate crimes showing they were all done with one 
end in view, it might be that evidence of subsequent acts could be 
admissible. 

Mr. Justice Shearman —In Stephen’s “ Evidence ” it deals with a 
course of business. 

Sir Henry Curtis Bennett —Yes. 

The Lord Chief Justice— It might be a baby-farming case. 

Mr. Justice Shearman—A nd in insurance cases where they burn down 
houses. 

Sir Henry Curtis Bennett said that his submission was that at the 
time this was put before the jury it was put in a mass of prejudice at 
the very outset and at a time when there was nothing before the Court 
to justify its admission at all. At that time there was no defence which 
could possibly justify its being brought before the Court. They had first 
to prove some definite act in relation to the charge they were trying, 
and in this case no such act had been ever proved at" all. Assuming there 
was any ground, and he did not admit it, in which such evidence could 
be put before the jury, the jury were misdirected over and over again 
by the learned judge in his summing up as to the use the jury might 
make of it. It had been left in a way that all the cases had decided it 
should not he left. 

The Lord Chief Justice —The charge of attempting to poison Martin 
cam© first, and there were three dates—the moment of arrest with white 
powder in his pocket, 26th October, and February, 1921. 

Sir Henry Curtis Bennett cited Reg. v. Gearing, 18 L.J. 215. 

The Lord Chief Justice said that there the husband died in 1848, and 
evidence was given of sons who died in the following year. 

In reply to his lordship, counsel said that he took no point that the 
alleged offence against Martin took place subsequently. 

Mr. Justice Shearman referred to the case of Neill Cream, where 
the man was in the habit of administering strychnine to women of a 
certain class. 

Sir Henry Curtis Bennett said that the present case was quite dif¬ 
ferent from the other cases. Here accident was not the defence. In 
Gearing's case, within six months four members of the same family suffered, 
three died from the same poison, and the prisoner was the person who 
served them with their victuals. 

The test is, at the time the evidence was put before the jury, was it 
relevant to the case made ? 

He referred to Reg. v. Winslow, 8 Cox, 397, to show that, as compared 
with Reg. v. Gearing, upon almost identical facts, two entirely different 
views were taken. 

The Lord Chief Justice — Reg. v. Winslow has been held to be wrong. 

Sir H. Curtis Bennett —-The view that it is wrong has been expressed 
several times, but I am not citing any of these cases to show the law as 

372 



Appendix A. 

it now is. It seemed fairer to go back and deal cureu ol o cically with the 
relevant cases against, as well as for. me. Reg. v. Garner, [1864] 4 F. 
and F., was a case of system. 

Mr. Justice Avory —How is it more a system to exterminate a family 
than to exterminate every one who is objectionable to yon? 

Sir H. Cubits Bennett —There may be a common aim. as. if all the 
family stand in the way of an inheritance. 

Prima facie, continned counsel, juries were not entitled to have evidence 
of prior or subsequent charges, unless the p: cseetr ion she wen tho: h.ey 
came within definite exceptions. It was not enough to say. We prove 
you had opportunity—which every one else in the house had—ana. Im¬ 
prove that you took advantage of that opportunity, we zive evidence that 
on another occasion you did such-and-such an act.*’ You must prove an 
act and a similar act on another occasion. 

Mr. Justice Shearman —If the Attorney-General is right, they could 
have prosecuted to conviction for the attempted murder, and then p::v_ 1 
all those facts against him again on the murder charge. 

Mr. Justice Avoby— "Why not! Suppose a burglar is caught with * 
jemmy in his pocket, which fits a mark on another door previously brewer. 
Cannot evidence be given against him of the finding of the jemmy and 
the subsequent burglary! 

Sir Henry Curtis Bennett thought not. 

The XiObd Chief Justice —Must we not distinguish between admissi 
hility and the value of the evidence when admitted ? 

Mr. Justice Shearman —Your argument is, such evidence is inadmis¬ 
sible per se, but a particular defence may make it admissible. 

Sir H. Curtis Bennett —Precisely. It is only when the Crown have 
brought themselves within particular exceptions—which they never did in 
this case—that it can be admissible. If this evidence was admissible, the 
exceptions had eaten up the law that on one indictment evidence could 
not be given of the facts relating to another indictment. 

The Lord Chief Justice —What is the distinction between saying, 
“ We saw you offer the cup, and will show that you offered it on another 
occasion/’ and saying, “ we show that you had opportunity and motive, 
and poison in your possession, and that on another occasion you actually 
administered it *’? 

Sir H. Curtis Bennett —The distinction is this, you must not say, 
<c We suspect you, but, having no direct evidence, are doing to give evidence 
to show that you are likely to poison some one.” You must have proof 
of an act which is in itself consistent equally with guilt or innocence, 
then similar acts may be evidence to show guilt on that occasion. The 
Martin evidence could only be admitted to show that some particular act 
in February was a guilty act. 

Counsel cited Meg. v. Cotton. [18731 12 Cox, 400; Reg . v. 

[1878] 14 Cox, 40; and Reg. v. Flanagan and Biggins^ 15 Cox, 403, and 
had not concluded his argument when the Court adjourned. 


FRIDAY, mb MAY » 1923. 

Sir Henry Curtis Bennett, in.-.continuing Ms argument, said that i! 
a man charged with murder said, “-I did not do it,” then in his submission 
it: did not matter, whether the deceased person had committed suicide or 
whether somebody else had committed the murder; what was material was 
the mind of the person charged. Let them take the case suggested by 
Mr. Justice Shearman. A person was found on the ^ ground shot, and 
a man was. found somewhere in the neighbourhood with a gun. If his 
defence was “ I never fired the gun,” then it would be improper and 

m 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

illegal for the prosecution to say, “ We will show that you did fire th 
gun by proving that six months ago you fired at somebody else” it 
on the other hand, the man with the gun said that he killed the man 
by accident, then they would be entitled to have the evidence that sir 
months ago he had the misfortune to fire a gun and shoot somebodv 
else. As the defence m the present case was, “ I had nothing to rfh 
with poisoning my wife,” it was illegal and improper for the prosecution 
to say, We will show that you did, by interring it from the facts of 
another distinct case.”. There was no difference between the gun and 
the poison. If the evidence were for the purpose of proving that the 
man had arsenic in his possession, then there was a distinction to that 
extent from the gun, but, as far as the principle of law was concerned 
there was no difference. } 

The learned counsel cited 1 v. Thomas Ball, [1887] 5 New Zealand 
L.R. 93, where, on trial for the murder of A by administering antimony 
evidence that the prisoner six months before had administered antimony 
to R was tendered and admitted. On appeal, it was held that, as there 
was no sufficient proof that the two poisonings formed part of the same 
transaction, or were effected in pursuance of a common design, the con¬ 
viction must he quashed. In that case antimony was found’ upon the 
prisoner, and all the facts bore a very strong resemblance to the facts 
of the present case. 

The Loud Chief Justice— At the time of the arrest there was poison 
and that kind of poison, then found on the prisoner. * 

Sir Henry Curtis Bennett— Yes; and that is of very great import¬ 
ance when one comes to consider the present and other cases—the very 
poison was found upon him. J 

Counsel read the judgment of the Court in Bairs case, in which it 

Was stated that the general rule was that a crime distinct from the 

one . Wlt h which the prisoner was charged could not be given in evidence 
against him. If the act which was proved, either by direct or circum¬ 
stantial evidence, was an act which might be a guilty act, then there 
was no difference whether the evidence which proved it were direct or 
circumstantial, hut when, as in the present case, there was no evidence 
of the administering of food or drink by Armstrong, then such evidence 
as was sought to be adduced was not admissible. 

• j ^ rc e T ^ i0R, ' D Chief Justice —Then it would be one case if a witness 
said, i saw the prisoner give his wife food on various occasions,” and 
another if a witness said, “ No, I never saw him give his wife food ”? 

Sir Henry Curtis Bennett— The jury might have found on the evi- 
dence that Armstrong had administered poison to his wife, and if they 
had found that he did, then the evidence in the Martin case could not 
he admissible at all. How, then, could it become admissible except to 

show that on another occasion he had done the same thing? If, on the 

other hand, the jury had found—although he submitted that the evidence 
was all the other way—some fact consistent either with innocence or guilt, 
then it might have been that the prosecution were entitled to say, “ We 
p rove a similar act which will go to show that the act 

which has been already proved was intentional.” The prosecu¬ 

tion . were not. entitled to say, “ We will make certainty more 
certain by showing that he did something similar at another time.” The 
giving of food was m itself quite an innocent act. The case of E. v. 
Gkenng [1848] 18 L.J. 215, was decided on quit© a different reason. In 
those days medical knowledge in detecting the presence of poison in 

? 0t + u dvanced J and t t ! ierefore there was a multiplication of 
evidence as.to the symptoms which pointed to death from a particular 

there was the distinct defence of accident 
system irTthat^^ase 1 * 112 ^ k ave ^ een question whether there was some 

374 



Appendix A. 

Mr. Justice Ayory said that he saw nothing in the ispor: t: the 
case about the defence or accident. 

Sir Henry Curtis Bennett said that it was m the hela-itAe. 

Mr. Justice Avqry —Yes, to anticipate that defence. 

Sir Henry Curtis Bennett said that in the present ease the prosecu¬ 
tion was told at the earliest moment that Armstrong LM n tlung to to 
with, the matter at all; therefore, accident was never before the jury. 
He clearly stated that the defence of accident was net tc he raised. 

The Lord Chief Justice said that he would like to see hew far 
counsel’s criticism of the case of R . v. Gee ring went. Chief Baron Pollock 
held, first, that the evidence went to show that the death was due to 

poison, and then there was evidence to show cr to confirm that the death, 

was due to the same poison. There they Poked to the death cf the three 

sons to see whether it was by accident that the hush mi die! .: onenkii 

poisoning. 

Mr. Justice Shearman —To prove that the admlnistratiiru if made, 
was intentional. 

Sir Henry Curtis Bennett —By somebody; but the evidence went tc 
show that. it was the prisoner who administered it. It depends upon 
whether there is system involved, cr intent, when cute they got the act 
before the jury. 

The learned counsel said that if the defence was. I did not do it,” 
then the prosecution was not entitled to say, i4 Well, we are going to 
show that you are likely to have dene it by showing what you did in 
some other case. 55 Although the Xem Zealand case was not binding cn 
that Court, he did rely on it, because the facts were so similar. 

The Attorney-General asked their lordships to remember mat the 
case was differed from in this country. 

Sir Henry Curtis Bennett continued reading from the judgment^in 
that case a statement that the admission of tendered evidence depended 
upon previous proof of the doing of the thing charged against the prisoner. 
He said that he relied on the "judgment in that case very much, because 
it was the case which was nearest to the present case. 

Mr. Justice Shearman —Has it been considered here! If it has been 
approved of you would be in a much stronger position. 

Sir Henry Curtis Bennett said that he did net think that it had 
been dissented from. There had been a tendency in the later cases to 
restrict the admissibility of evidence. He referred to the case of Shafner 
v. The Commonwealth , Id Australian Reports, where evidence was held to be 
inadmissible. That case was on the same lines^ as R. v. Thomas HdlL 
.and was quite as strong. The prisoner was indicted ftr the murder of 
his wife by poisoning her, and there was evidence of his criminal intimacy 
with the wife of S. It was held that evidence that S. ^had died with 
the same symptoms as those of the prisoner’s wife, who had been attended 
by the prisoner,, was inadmissible. 

The learned counsel also cited the case of 3fa!:m v. The Aftomty- 
General for New South Wales, [1894] A.C. 57, There a man and 
his wife, who were baby farmers, were tried for the murder of an infant, 
whose body had been buried in a garden. When found, the body was in 
a state of" decomposition. Evidence was received that other mothers had 
given their babies, to the prisoners, and that small premiums had been 
paid, after which the babies 'had never been seen alive; also that the bodies 
of other infants had been discovered buried; and it was held in that case 
that before such evidence could he admitted there .must be some evidence 
connecting the prisoner with the death under investigation. . 

The Lord Chief Justice having referred counsel to a passage m the 

report, . , . 

Sir Henry Curtis Bennett said that they could only admit the ten¬ 
dered evidence for three purposes, namely, to prove intent, or to prove 
that there was a system, or to rebut the defence of accident. 


375 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

defeJ^of'accident^ JUSTICB What TOS meant by toting the 

on , Slr Sbney Cubtis Bennett said that it must mean that +1 

<f defence before the Court. The prosecution was ™t irtiV 88 

being raised. 1 ” S ° mg *° PUt “ the 6vidence <™ ** toe of the 
Lord^ChSrcellor'said— *“ case > •* P- where the 

decisio? ofae SX d^tho^ ^ «* 

prosecution to°^ducf^dence* tending 0 

been guilty of criminal acts, other than those covered bv tb/ 0 ^ 8 ^ bas 
for the purpose of leading to the conclusion that the accused is 
likely from his criminal conduct or character to have committed the « 
for which he is being tried. On the other w>d c °r mitted ™ offence 
the evidence adduced tends to show the commission of athT* - faCt that 
not render it inadmissible if it berelevantto Te isL hlrTT - d ° es 
and it may be so relevant if it bears unon the 0 , tbe l ur y, 

acts alleged to constitute the crime charged in the' indictment 1 wT™* d** tb J 
or accidental, or to rebut a defence which would otW^tJ £ desi S ned 

^ohvTou^that^t matTflenletry SuL TV*™ t f * 

».'*■«» . p. rt L..r P > 7 r JitZ\\„ ir Z It *&S\8 

wS”..s 

m. &mS2! mast l. m„ <ta e „ i„ ^ 

Sir Henry Curtis Bennett—A person designs fn hii u 

Systemati ^ oomiMl 

on 2 T 4th FTbruar^nr^r^T^^^^ th ® P - is ° ne , r had been toed 
of arsenic, would you say that the P os . s ® sslon tbe * this 3| grains 

q- IT rw y -rt say tftat tde Martin evidence was inadmissihlft? 

ThW 1 m f b b6 a m ton 
Reg. v. Qeering’ ° make them P arts of transaction, as in 

Arm^Ionf hlTopportMitr 1 ^? 01 ^ y ? Hr °^ Se ' there is evidence that 

defence is ^ *? ■ P 0 ? 01 *-* h “ wife - A s P ecial 

and may have done so The do-fWm °PPQrtumty to take it herself 
not for them to moya it” Thf d °,. not say that she did; it is 
show that you (tfe prisoner^ hnd P ^ CU ? tIl6 V ay ’ “ Well > we wiu 
and that you had' arsenic in your possession ”V mMl wh ° g0t iU 

from. Ce, ^ n ^ ^^ s ^ a ^^ led ' <: ®s I| an^uttmrityl'and^i?ep'?^v? , V^So'io S is^fhss^M 

an exception. ad ^ted. But the prosecution must bring it within 

suggested that S§losophy SI: s3enca ^ e £' v ' Mr. Justice Johnston 

on one side and the law* of’eriK o^the'e™ m%ht ** ra “ 8#d 

376 . * 



Appendix A. 

Sir H. Curtis Bennett— In Reg. v. Rhjdts. 31353' 1 Q.B. 77, at 
p. 83, the necessity of a nexm or connection is a .rain referred to. and in 
Lord^ Russell of Killowen’s view evidence of isolated transactions cannot 
be given. 

Mr. Justice Atget referred to the judgment c! Mr. Justice Wills 
at p. 84— tC Very often the only nexus between such tr ails icticns is their 
proximity in point of time. 

Sir Henry Cubtis Bennett —1 draw a distinction between the offence 
charged in that case and a case of murder. In that case I am not saying 
that if there was a space of nine months between the two acts there 

might not be a nexus. 

Rex v. Bond, [1906] 2 K.B., 589, was a case of using instruments 
to procure abortion. A defence was raised that the instruments were 
used for a lawful purpose. The commission of the act was never in 
dispute. In his judgment in that case Mr. Justice Kennedy sa:c;— 
and counsel relied very strongly on that judgment, which was the leading 
judgment in favour of admissibility of the evidence in that rise— J t 
p. 397 of the report— 

ts It is, therefore, a general rule that the facts proved must be 
strictly relevant to the particular charge and have no reference to any 
conduct of the prisoner unconnected with such charge; therefore it is not 
allowable to show on the trial of an indictment that the prisoner ha? a 
general. disposition to commit the same kind of offence as that for which 
he stands indicted. . . . Thus it was resolved by all the judges^ nearly 

one hundred years ago that- in a prosecution for an infant us crime ^ an 
admission by the prisoner that he had committed such an offence, at another 
time and with another person, and that he had % tendency to such practices, 
ought not to be received in evidence. The law of evidence, said Iv.rd 
Campbell, does not allow one crime to be proved gin order to raise a 
presumption that another crime has been committed by the perpetrator 
of the first. . . . Nothing can so certainly be counted upon to make 

a prejudice against an accused upon his trial as the disclosure to the jury 
of other misconduct of a kind similar to that which is the subject. of 
the indictment, and indeed when the crime alleged .is one of a revolting 
character, such as the charge against Bond, in the present ease, and 
the hearer is a person who has not been trained to think judicially, the 
prejudice must sometimes be almost insurmountable.. Therefore if. as. is 
plain, we have to recognise the existence of certain circumstances in which 
justice cannot be .attained at the trial without a disclosure of prior offences, 
the utmost vigilance at least should be maintained in restricting the 
number of such cases, and in seeing that the general rule of the criminal 
law of England, which (to the credit, in my opinion, ot _English justice! 
excludes evidence of prior offences, is not broken or frittered away by 
the creation of novel and anomalous exceptions.” ^ 

Mr. Justice Sheabman —What was Mr. Justice Kennedy’s reason for 
holding the evidence eventually admissible in Bond's case! 

Sir H. Cubtis Bennett — He was showing ^ the great care necessary 
in putting evidence before a jury; but he points out that though you 
must he careful not to argue from one isolated act, yet, where a long 
course of conduct is proved, it may be admissible. 

The Loud Chief Justice — Bond's case had to do with a particular 
kind of surgical instrument. That is a somewhat rarer thing than a 
gun, which was mentioned in an example. The present case has to do 
with poison. To pass from a gun to a surgical instrument is to # pass 
from .the common to the rather uncommon, but in passing to arsenic we 
are .going to something much, more uncommon. 

Sir H. Cubtis Bennett —Is weed-killer more uncommon than the 
instrument in Bond's case? . ■■ 

The. Lord Chief Justice —To find a packet of 3§ grains of white 
arsenic in a solicitor’s pocket is surely rare. 


377 




Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Sir H. Curtis Bennett —Weed-killer is common enough. A pound 
contains approximately 7000 grains, which costs about 2s. 6d. For that 
sum you could poison 3000 people. It might easily be divided up into small 
packets for separate weeds. 

Mr. Justice Avory —Is 3£ grains just the fatal dose for a dandelion? 

. Sir H. Curtis Bennett— I don’t know; it may be 1£ grains, but 
seeing that even at 3-£ you could kill sixty-six for one penny, a man is 
not likely to take particular care whether he uses 1^ or 5£, more or less 

Counsel proceeded to cite R. v. Bull , [1911] A.C. 47, at p. 71, “ Courts 
ought to be very careful to preserve the time-honoured law of England 
that you cannot convict a man of one crime by proving that he had 
committed some other crime; that, and all other safeguards of our criminal 
law, will be jealously guarded.” 

The Lord Chief Justice— To revert to Makin’s case. Suppose that 
only one other baby had been found. Do you say that evidence would 
not have been admissible. 

Sir H. Curtis Bennett— I do. Evidence of the finding of twelve 
was admissible to prove system; of one, only to rebut a special defence 
of accident. Not if the defence was simply “ I did not do it.” 

The Lord Chief Justice— At an early stage of this case you inti¬ 
mated that . it was part of the defence that Mrs. Armstrong died of 
arsenical poisoning. That leaves open three defences—accident, suicide 
and administration by some one other than the prisoner. 3 

Sir H. Curtis Bennett— The evidence would not be admissible if 
the defence _ was that some one other than the accused poisoned the 
deceased accidentally, but only if the defence was that the accused did 
it, but did it accidentally. It is clearly not admissible on the question, 
“Did he do it?” hut only on the question, “ With what intent? ” or 
on the question, “Was it accident or design? ” To what act of Major 
Armstrong that was proved was this directed ? 

Mr. Justice Avory —The act of administering arsenic. 

Sir H. Curtis Bennett— Then it was not admissible. 

Mr. Justice Avory —The prosecution’s case was that arsenic was 
found in the body, and the prisoner was the only person who could have 
administered it. 

Sir H. Curtis Bennett —Can it possibly be said that the case for 
the prosecution went nearly as far,as that? Of course, he did not intend 
to refer to any individual, hut suppose that a nurse who had the opportunity 
had administered the arsenic, whether by accident or design ? 

The Attorney-General — I pointed out at the trial that the prisoner 
was the only person who was at Mayfield both in August, 1920, and 
February, 1921. 

Sir Curtis Bennett —The cases are reviewed in B. v. Rodney, 
[1913] 3 K.B., 398. That case points out that a single prior act of a 
like criminal nature would in general not be admissible, ’ but that evidence 
is admissible to rebut a defence realty in issue. The Court declined to 
apply the proviso to section 4 of the Criminal Appeal Act. 

The Attorney-General said that he assumed the case would be 
resumed on Monday at 10,30. 

The Lord Chief Justice replied in the affirmative. 

Proceeding with his argument, Sir Henry Curtis Bennett cited R. 
v. Barron, 30 T.L.R. 187; 24 C.O.A. 83, where it was held that evidence 
of previous happenings could not be made use of to rebut the defence 
of innocent association. He also referred to the case of R. v. Boyle and 
Merchant, 30 T.L.R. 521; 1924, 3 K.B. 339. 

In reply to the Lord Chief Justice, counsel said that he did not 
the evidence was admitted in Malcin's case merely to show intent. 
The prosecution had to prove one thing, and the evidence was to deal 
with the defence set up and already before the Court. 

378 



Appendix A. 


The Loan Chief Justice said that it could set be said that tue words 
employed by Lord Reading in the case of, S. v. B-jy.t a— Te ' e 

meant to be exhaustive of the purposes or tne evidence 

Sir Henry Curtis Bennett agreea. He er.eo_ -.;e c«- o. 
v Jefery, [1915] 31 T.L.R. 444; 2 K.B. (02, wniec. came ae.-.e toe 
Divisional Court. The respondent was charged under sec r . •* 

Vagrancy Act, 1824, with having exposed hiosen r .en- ; c 

a certain female. In her evidence tne prosecutrix -a— -“ 1 t *“? Ti .;^ 
the man two months before. The respondent wnen arres.eu^iu. 
have made a mistake; they nave apt tne wrong m t,=i4- “X'tof c*en«>° 
evidence on his own behalf, he denied havm 5 been *_ V__ J A ’ 

and hi cross-examination he said “ I dp not rememoer seem? ne. cn the 
fesfc or second week in May/’ He deraeu th.t 

on the former occasion. The justices i— ed j^ e - r -- re 

have been pat, as it was not relevant to tne issue toe, Ev^e?ce 

and was contrary to the provisions or section x C. to. ^ “ - 

Act, 1898. It was held by the Divisional Com. ton-— 
the evidence tendered were admissible _ and .elev-m ^ - 

Drosecntrix was not mistaken in her luenuScation. tna- ..ha- *--- 

rc V*t 

wS not 8 admissible, unless and, until the defence of s “‘ d f “^ r a | 

or an absence of intention to insult, was definitely’ P-t__ 
appeared that, the other occasions on wmch it was sa’-d ---t -he 
had exposed himself were sufficiently proximate to the a-.e^d ofienee as 
to show a systematic course of condacw. 7 v*v r/ to the 

Counsel said that the judgment m P«r,.in* w .< - 

Tfstice Ayory—I n Ptritins v„ Je^enj the defence put forward 
was a mistake of identity, but in B. t Boyic and MerUiuM tne.e 

question of the identity of the indijidict. ether it was 

4 Sir Henry Curtis Bennett—No; the question wa* wetter u vu 

a bona-fide or a blackmailing newspaper. , ^ same 

Mr. Justice Avgry— Here it was a dispute whether 
individual who had on another occasion ccmmit.ed a ^ ofien “ * 
His whole defence was that he was not the person. 

Sir Henry Curtis Bennett— These cases were ntrf a ce^ta , - V 

hnt verv near at hand. Quite clearly there was laid ‘ n botn 

of those cases the same rule that there a iV *; cn £f e ^d^xreni in 

Perfcfais ^ttin g =So^ *£ effect of the jud g . 

mere clear what toe 

lawlhh^l 

^ --ft & 

r^- G dXt $ 4 -f defence was 

to a*5 KV 3 *; 

Juctics 1 — S 'The Attorlev-M ^Sipated your 
defence by®aving that the arsenic of which Mrs. Armstrong died was 

n 3:sS^ ■*» « s 

trying to poison Mr. Martin. Yon are no y g 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

Sir Henry Curtis Bennett —I was dealing with what had been 
opened by the Attorney-General, and I had to accept the ruling of the 
learned judge. The jury were very surprised when they heard for the 
first time that they were not trying the Martin case. 

Counsel went on to consider the case of Bex v. Smith, 1 Cr. Apn 
Rep. 311, better known as the “ brides in the bath case,” in which the 
prisoner was accused of murdering his wife, by drowning her in a bath 
and evidence was admitted that two other wives of the prisoner had 
died in baths. In that case there was proof in each case that the prisoner 
had had something definite to do with the bath, and in each case the 
relationship of the deceased to the accused was identical. 

In Bex v. Thompson, [1918] A.C. 221, it is said, at p. 232, by Lord 
Sumner— 

“ Before an issue can be said to be raised, which would permit the 
introduction of such evidence so obviously prejudicial to the accused 
it must have been raised in substance if not in so many words, and the 
issue so raised must be one to which the prejudicial evidence is relevant. 
The mere theory that a plea of not guilty puts everything in issue is 
not enough for this purpose. The prosecution cannot credit the accused 
with fancy defences in order to rebut them at the outset with some 
damning piece of prejudice.” 

The Lord Chief Justice —But must not the prosecution take the 
obvious defences? 

Sir H. Curtis Bennett —Yes, unless they are told that they will not 
be raised. I cannot prevent the prosecution from proving what by the 
common law they are entitled to prove. I am entitled to prevent them 
from assuming that they are within an exception when they are not. 

Mr. Justice Shearman —There is a difference between rebutting acci¬ 
dent and proving design. 

The Lord Chief Justice —If the evidence is in fact admissible, does 
it make any difference that the ground on which it is apparently admitted 
is the wrong ground ? 

Sir H. Curtis Bennett —It may, for when the judge comes to direct 
the jury it is very important that they should be correctly told what 
use they may make of it. When once ‘it is admitted, the effect on the 
case for the prisoner is achieved. Can it be said that if a defence is 
afterwards raised which might have made it admissible, that cures a 
wrong admission? 

Mr. Justice Avory —Then do you mean that if the defence is not 
raised until after the prosecution is closed, the prosecution cannot put 
in evidence without which the defence might submit there was no case? 

Sir H. Curtis Bennett —It may be so ; the law favours the accused. 

Mr. Justice Avory— It also favours justice. 

Sir H. Curtis Bennett —Evidence might he called in rebuttal. 

Mr. Justice Avory —Not if no evidence was called. 

Sir Henry Curtis Bennett went on to criticise the summing up, and 
read a long extract containing the following passages :— 

I came to the conclusion that Martin’s case has a bearing upon 
this. . What is the bearing? The bearing is this, that it is of value as 
showing that the defendant had arsenic in his possession and that he 
would use it to poison a human being. ... If you come to the con¬ 
clusion that he did give it, why, then, it has a hearing as showing what 
he had got in the way of poison, and what he was prepared to do with 
it, as showing that he was prepared not merely to use it on dandelions 
and things of that kind, but that he was prepared to use it on a human 
; feeing,. . ■ ■ ■ 

“ It is quite true he is not being tried for that as a substantive 
crime. You ^ will not be asked by the Clerk of Assize to say, was he 
guilty of poisoning Martin? You will only have to make up your minds 

380 



Appendix A. 

on it as part of this case, as helping yon to^ come to a conclusion whether 
Armstrong poisoned Ms wife or not, and if you come 10 tne^ conmufimn. 
that he did try to poison Martin, then yon can start with somethin 
will he a guide to yon, a help to you, as to what the man would, no wit** 
the poison he had got, whether he would use it against^ a maman being 
or not, if he had what was considered a sufficient motive.” 

The Attorney-General— All through, the prisoner's case was tnat ue 
had the arsenic for a legitimate motive. 

Before the Court adjourned, Sir H. Grans Bennett ret erred to an 
application for leave to call five witnesses as to the use ^ ot packets ot 
arsenic for dandelions, which was ridiculed by the prosecution^ 

The Loan Chief Justice— What was ridiculed was^ not. that arsenic 
would kill dandelions, but the idea that any one would weigh it out in 

individual doses. . , . . , v , 

Sir H. Curtis Bennett —It is precisely as to tnat I wish to can toe 

evidence. # . „ , 

The Court intimated that.the witnesses need net remain, and adjourn;a 
until Monday, 15th May, 1922. 


SATURDAY, 13th MAY, 192-2. 

Sir Henry Curtis Bennett, continuing his arguments on behalf of 
Major Armstrong, said that when the Court rose on Friday he had finished 
dealing with Ms submission about the admissibility oi _ the evidence m 
relation to Mr. Martin.. He submitted that there was misdirection m tae 
.summing up as to the way in which, even if this evidence were admissible, 
it had been stated that it ought to be applied. , 

Counsel next drew the attention of the Court to answers made by 
the appellant about the packets of arsenic which he had ,o kill d; andehon^. 
In cross-examination by the Attorney-General, Armstrong said, I simply 
took a small quantity on a penknife. I did not weigh them. The whole 
thing wl? approximatelv.^ It was dear from those answers that. there 
was S no question there of the appellant’s taking the arsenic and weighing 
out the amounts in the packets. In the particular instance of the arsenic 
£ „ j n _ gra ins —there was no doubt that this would poison. 

™ ifeing^de^ of the three doctors for the defence was 
on the lines of the cross-examination of Dr. Spiikburv and Sir Wwam 
Willcox The case for the defence was that there had been a large dcae 
on 16th February For the prosecution the case was that there haa been 
con&inous smaF doses to the end, especially withm the last. twenty-four 
how? When he (connsel) asked. “ Would the smug of a gran, ot arsemc 
ner dav for thirty-one days aggravate the patient s symptoms or no,. _ 
kthat being the amount'medically administered to Mrs. Armstrong in 
the asylum-Ahe doctor said that he thought that it would retara recovery 
What \aunened was consistent with the case for the derer.ee that th. 
SL ™ not suffering from arsenical poisoning, hut was snEermg from 
to“mia caused by what might be called aato-mtoxication. Dr. 

^TnSinT^the^ridence of Sir William Willcox, , Sir Henry Curtis 

E^^farge^ose^of’^r^mi^'an^dieT^th? 1 ?!.^ of or ?£ 

FK T . h * ( ':s*a“i‘5ss 

¥? b t ?ithX ''t^inTof oSTLge dose of arsenic on 16th February-. 

sistent with the taking * , 4^ with several matters m Mr. 

Sir Henry ^ *v e ; utY He complained of on® passage 

Justice ^yj-rdTaid^" One would think she (Mrs. Armstrong) 
?ar f«e S L“d!” That was the first time durmg the ^course 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

of the case when any suggestion had been made that possibly Armstrong 
might be desirous of getting rid of his wife because she was a tiresome 
invalid The evidence was that he was an attentive and devoted husband, 
and it'was at his invitation that Dr. Hincks came to keep an eye on 
her Another motive was here being put before the jury to show that 
Armstrong might desire to get rid of Ins wife and it was put forward 
at such a time that counsel for the defence could not deal with it. 

The Lord Chief Justice—W ere there not other motives. 

Six Henry Curtis Bennett— Your lordship means the will and the 

lady? 

His lordship nodded. ,. . ,, 

Counsel said that he did not read the suggestion m the summing up 
as being that Mrs. Armstrong was tiresome because she was m the way. 

The Lord Chief Justice— Supposing that the learned 3udge had said— 

“ Gentlemen you may think from the evidence that you have here that 
the prisoner'desired to marry another person, and you may wonder why. 
Do you think that he found his wife a tiresome person? Would you 

have any objection as to that? . . ,.»» , 

Sir Henry Curtis Bennett— No; but this was quite a difterent motive. 
It clearly reads as suggesting that Mrs. Armstrong was tiresome because 
of her illnesses, and the delusions from which she was undoubtedly 

suffering^ ccmtinuillg sa id that the judge went on to say that there 
was no evidence that Mrs. Armstrong was downstairs after 14th February, 
and he (counsel) pointed out that she was downstairs on 16th February, 
whereuuon the judge said that she was not out of doors Then his 
lordship, dealing w g ith the suggestion of the defence that she committed 
suicide and her conversation with the nurse about the attic window, 
treated what took place at the asylum as merely an attempt to escape 
and said that it was only natural that she should .attempt to get . out of 
the window, adding that there was no suggestion m what she said that 
she had attempted to kill herself. 

Counsel submitted that the evidence of Miss Vearce and that of Nurse 
Kinsey came to a great deal more than what the judge suggested to the 
wv It was only necessary to look at the evidence to see that what 
Mrs' Armstrong was telling the nurse was that she wanted to go to the 
window to commit suicide. There could be no doubt that. she had the 
7dea of suicide in her mind, and her statement, "I have just been up 
to the attic. Do you think that if any person, threw herself out she would 
break her back’ ” showed that she had the idea of suicide m her mind 
The way in which the judge left that to the jury was that, as regarded 
the attic part of the story, there was the fact that she did not do it. No 
one said that Mrs. Armstrong attempted suicide; what they said was that 
she had the idea of suicide in her mind, both at the. asylum mid also 
when she came home. It was very important that the jury should appre¬ 
ciate if there was evidence that suicide was m Mrs. Armstrong s mind 
that’it did not suddenly arise in her mmd on 16th February, but that 
she had entertained the idea some time before. He complained of the way 
in which the evidence of the suicidal tendency was left to the jury. The 
learned judge wiped it out by saying that there was nothing in the 
asylum part of the story, and that at any rate she had not committed 

6 ™ C Nh. Justice Avoky pointed out that the two statements were not 
made by Mrs. Armstrong at the same time. 

Sir Henry Curtis Bennett —No; they were made at separate times, 
and both were made after she came from Barnwood Asylum. In my 
submission that does show that this woman was not merely telling. some¬ 
thing as history, but that on two separate occasions to that same witness, 
and also to Nurse Kinsey, between the 23rd and the 27th, she was saying 

382 



Appendix A. 


the same thing, showing that, owing to the delusions from which she was 
undoubtedly suffering. Mrs. Armstrong had suicidal tendencies. It was 
Nurse Kinsey who said that as it was a mental case a whole-time nurse 
should be employed. He (counsel) did not put it higher and say mat 
Airs. Armstrong was attempting suicide, but he did say that she had 
it in her mind and the way in which it was lei: to the jury was to minify 
the evidence on that point. 

The- nest matter to which he desired to draw attention was that part 
of the summing up in which his lordship referred to what took p.nee 
on the day of the death. Six hours before Mrs. Armstrong, died she said 
to the nurse. ££ I am not going to die. am I? ” His lordship asked 
whether that showed that Airs. Armstrong had taken a fatal dose of 
arsenic, or was reconcilable with the theory that she committed .suiuiie. 
The suggestion was, apparently, that if in fact this was. said . tv Mrs. 
Armstrong, that was an end of the suicide theory. In his submission, 
however, words of that sort, to the common knowledge oi tiifim uL, .Tore 
words which were very frequently used 'by persons wno. had.attempt*u to 
commit suicide, when they realised that they were faced wilii ceatu. He 
could not give evidence on the point, but he asked their lummips _ to 
gay that the general knowledge of ^them all was to that effect, ami mat 
there was nothing fatal to the defence .of suicide that ^tkis woman hud 
on 16th February taken sufficient arsenic to kill herself some six a ays 
afterwards, and had then, on the morning of 22nd February, made use *:f 


these words. , . . , 

The evidence of Nurse Alien was mat Mrs. Armstrong was cerraimy 
suffering from delusions, but this. was ignored .by ^ the judge wtien. tie 
dealt with the evidence of Dr. Eincks, who saia tint me saw no signs 
of delusions when Mrs. Armstrong returned from the asylum. Nurse 
Allen said that Airs. Armstrong was certainly suffering' from delusions 
after her return from Barnwood House, and yet the judge put if. to the 
iurv that they were simply left to guess^ at the manner is winch tne 
suicide suggested bv the defence was effected. If that was a proper 
comment about the defence, it was a comment which might be made with 
equal force against the prosecution. . 

Air. Justice Sheariian —Is the suggestion that she went downstairs 

and got the arsenic? 

Sir Henry Curtis Bennett— Yes. 

The Lord Chief Justice —Not that she got it out of the cupboard. . 

Sir Henby Curtis Bennett— No ; that she knew where the arsenic 
was and on 16th February she was downstairs teaching the little boy. 

I was also saying that if the prosecution were correct in saying that she 
was not out of the room alter the 13th, she had access to the medicine 

° heS The Lord Chief Justice— Was she teaching the boy in the room in 
which the arsenic was found at the back of the drawer? 

Sir Henby Curtis Bennett — Yes, hut at that time, according uo -he 
evidence, it was in the cupboard. It was not put into the .bureau_um.il 
Alav Both the packets were in the cupboard m the ream m which the 
bov was being taught. The evidence of the. appellant was that m May 
he went to the cupboard and found the packet, in such a condition Jaa* 
it appeared to have been tampered with.. His (counsels. suggestion here 
was that- the learned judge was ridiculing the defence of suicide. His 
lordship left out altogether the fact that there was the evidence of Nurse 
Allen- .that Airs. Armstrong was suffering from delusions at that time. 

Then the learned judge, in referring to the medical evidence, said 
that thev were only left to guess how Mrs. Armstrong too& the arsenic. 
|fe couM no^hoidT a cup to*her lips. But the evidence of Nurse Alien 
was that she had not sent for Dr. Hincks until the 17th. 

The Attorney-General —The evidence was that Dr. Hincks was trie- 
phoned for on the morning of that day. His book was produced, ami his 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

second visit on that day was to Mrs, Armstrong. Dr. Hincks said that 
he found her in bed. 

Sir Henry Curtis Bennett —It only shows that these experts are 
speaking on the materials supplied to them of symptoms. You find here 
again, an absolute dispute between the two persons on whose recollection 
of incidents the opinions of the doctors were formed. The learned judge 
is putting this case for the defence to the jury in a way in which it had 
never been made, and while he was putting it to the jury he was drawing 
attention to the fact that when Dr. Hincks was saying that Mrs. Armstrong 
was not able to be up, another witness said this was not till the second 
visit, and the appellant was saying that his wife was up and that it was 
after dinner that he telephoned for the doctor. 

Mr. Justice Shearman —As to all these days, did the learned judge 
read to the jury the evidence of all the witnesses? 

Sir Henry Curtis Bennett —That is what 1 complain of. He reads 
part of the evidence and comments adversely to the prisoner upon it, 
and later on he omits evidence in favour of the prisoner and deals with 
the case again, but never puts that, according to the appellant, his wife 
was downstairs. His lordship, when he said that the jury had to guess 
how Mrs. Armstrong took the arsenic, never pointed out that that comment 
equally applied to the case which was put for the Crown. 

The Lord Chief Justice— I am not sure about the word “ equally.” 

Sir Henry Curtis Bennett—W ell, it does apply, as far as the taking 
was concerned. 

The Lob-d Chief Justice —The appellant had brought the poison and 
knew where it was, and the evidence showed that he had opportunities 
of administering it. There is no evidence that he was incapable. 

Sir Henry "Curtis Bennett —But there was evidence that up to 16th 
February Mrs. Armstrong had suicidal tendencies, knew where the arsenic 
was kept, and had an opportunity of taking it. 

Counsel said that the j udge dealt with the matter again when, reading 
the appellant’s evidence, his lordship said—“ Do you honestly believe, 
is it credible, that that woman, being in a condition in which she was, 
got up with the intention of taking a fatal dose of arsenic, and went and 
got it? What evidence was there that she intended to commit suicide, 
that she got up and went to any place where there was arsenic; where 
did she get it, if she did? The arsenic in the cupboard was brown arsenic, 
so far as we know. W© now have the evidence that there was white 
arsenic in the bureau.” 

Counsel said that he did object to his lordship’s saying that if it 
was suggested that Mrs. Armstrong committed suicide by taking either 
the grey or the white, which did she take? where did she take it from? 
where did she take it? and that there was no evidence that there was 
any of it upstairs. The judge dealt with the matter as if there was no 
evidence for the defence at all. The evidence of the appellant was only 
read, and the defence was ridiculed. 

The Lord Chief Justice —The suggestion was that on the day and 
in the room when she was with the little boy she took the fatal dose of 
arsenic from the cupboard? 

' Sir Henry Curtis Bennett —Yes. 

Mr. Justice Shearman —If Dr. Hincks was accurate she must have 
got up. 

Sir Henry ^Curtis Bennett said that no one would have commented 
upon the summing up if both sides had been put to the jury; but the 
story for the prosecution was put forward as a consistent story, while 
the evidence for the defence was ridiculed. So far did Ms lordship go 
in ridiculing a very serious defence based upon facts that he said that 
there was no evidence that Mrs. Armstrong desired to commit suicide. 
Counsel pointed out that there was evidence that she had the idea of 

384 



Appendix A. 

suicide in her mind. He said that the Judge was actually saying to the 
jury that the defence had not shown whether it was wiiite or ecbmed 
arsenic that she took; hut neither did the prosecution. 

Counsel also criticised a passage in which Hr. Justice Darting said 
that Dr. Spilsbury “was not theorising” when he said that arsenic had 
been taken within twenty-four hours of death. Of course, he was not 
theorising when he described the finding of arsenic in the body; hut he was 
theorising just as much as the doctors for the defence when he stated how 
long before death the dose was taken. 

Counsel next dealt with the passage in which the judge discussed 
the finding of the arsenic in the bureau. “ It was a matter of tactics 
whether they should conceal it always, or produce It here/’ Frcm the 
point of view of the defence, the finding of the arsenic was extraordinarily 
lucky, for there was till then no evidence that Armstrong had any white 
arsenic. The purchase of 11th January was believed to "be grey arsenic, 
and if this had'not been found, with the label cf Mr. Davies up'.n 
it, there would have been a strong case that, in addition to the % lb 
of grey arsenic in January, Armstrong, from an unknown source, and 
for an unknown purpose, had got white arsenic as well. Mr. Justice 
Darling had expressly said that no reflection rested upon Mr. Matthews 
for the course that he took. 

The. Lord Chief Justice —But. equally, no reflection would have 
rested on the defence if they had disclosed it earlier to the police. 

Sir Henry Curtis Bennett said that he accepted full responsibility 
for the course pursued. 

Mr. Justice Shearman asked whether the discovery of the ^ small 
packet of white arsenic in Armstrong’s possession could ^ possibly be 
evidence in the Mrs. Armstrong case. He could not have it in his posses¬ 
sion for the purpose of murdering a woman who had been dead twelve* 

months. 

Sir Henby Curtis Bennett said that he did not think that if th* 
case of Mrs. Armstrong alone had been before the jury, the finding of 
that little packet- could be admissible. It came within the same rule of 
law as the rest of the Martin evidence. If he had inadvertently appeared 
to admit its admissibility in answer to a question from their lordships, 
he would reconsider any such admission. 

The Lord Chief Justice —Here is a man arrested on 51st December, 
charged with attempting to murder a man with arsenic; owing to similarity 
of symptoms his wife’s body was exhumed, and arsenic was found. Do 
you‘say that evidence of the fact that the very sort of poison is found 
upon him is inadmissible! 

Sir H. Curtis Bennett—I should have thought that it was irt 
admissible. It was eleven months afterwards. 

The Lobd Chief Justice —I thought that you had admitted that the 
question of time did not affect the admissibility of the Martin evidence. 

Sir H. Curtis Bennett —I must draw a distinction between the rest 
of the evidence and the possession of the poison. I do not think that the 
possession of arsenic eleven months after can be evidence. 

The Lobd Chief Justice —Suppose a person was murdered with some 
peculiar and. unusual weapon, and ten months later a person is arrested 
for the murder, and one of these rare weapons is found in his possession. 
Surely it would be admissible? 

Mr. Justice Shearman— There was a defence here set up of legitimate 
use.: Is it not admissible to rebut the case made by Armstrong that he 
got the arsenic as weed-killer? 

The Lord Chief Justice— It may have been the duty of the prosecu¬ 
tion to explore the history of that packet of arsenic. 

Sir Henry Curtis Bennett, drawing his argument to a close, said 
that the strongest ground of appeal was the admission of the Martin 

lc „ 385 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

evidence, which was not legal, as it was only admissible to show design 
rebut accident, or show system. Not one was applicable here. Xhe 
defence set up was, “ I did not do it,” and on the cases the position 
was now, as always, that a man must not be tried on one indictment 
and the jury given the facts on another to prove that he was a man 
likely to commit this act. 

What was the exception to that rule within which the prosecution 
brought themselves before the trial ? Within what exception did they 
bring themselves at any time before the end of the trial ? Even if the 
evidence were admissible at all, the judge wrongly directed the jury, 
and told them to use it for a purpose for which they were not entitled 
to use it. 

The Lord Chief Justice —Have you considered that it is at the very 
time at which the appellant is writing to get his wife from the asylum 
he is getting \ lb. of white arsenic. Was it not very important to show 
with what design he bought it? Of course, any defence must allege an 
innocent purpose. Here you start with a definite act—the purchase of 
arsenic. Is it not material to show with what design, as in Makin's 
case, [1894] A.C. 57, it was material to show how the baby came to be 
buried in the prisoner’s garden? 

Sir Henry Curtis Bennett —Mafem's case proceeded on system, and 
there was a nexus between the cases. 

The Lord Chief Justice —Do you say that in Geering's case, 18 
L.J. M.C. 215, the prosecution had to show that all the murders were 
intended before the first was committed? 

Sir Henry Curtis Bennett —No; it is enough to show, as in Malm's 
case, that No. 1 was killed for the same motive as Nos. 2, 3, and 4. 

Mr. Justice Avory —Suppose Armstrong had benefited financially by 
the death of Martin, would it not have been admissible? 

Sir Henry Curtis Bennett— Then the question of time might have 
been very important. 

The Lord Chief Justice —The coincidences of truth are sometimes 
very remarkable : the coincidences of falsehood may be sometimes no less 
remarkable. On this very 11th January Dr. Hincks is writing to Dr. 
Townsend, of Barnwood, that Armstrong tells him that her delusions seem 
to b© cured. 

In conclusion Sir Henry Curtis Bennett said that, while he did not 
rely upon it, he deplored the conduct of a member of the jury in giving 
an interview for publication as to the deliberations of the jury. 

The Lord Chief Justice —It is a disgraceful and shocking thing. 

Mr. Justice Avory —It may be fairer to the jury to assume that it 
never happened, though that would not exonerate the newspaper. 

Mr. Justice Shearman —I see no reason to assume that it did not 
happen. 

Mr. Justice Avory —I don’t believe everything I see in the press. 

The Lord Chief Justice —This was not a member of the grand jury. 
The grand jury is bound by oath not to divulge their proceedings, and 
a person violating that oath would be liable to severe penalties. 

Sir Henry Curtis Bennett —I cannot make any further use of the 
episode, but the making of such a statement, if it were made, and the 
publication of it has added a great deal to the misery of those connected 
with the prisoner. Misery enough was theirs without its being increased 
in this manner.. 

The Attorney-General’s Argument, 

The Court intimated to the Attorney-General that he might assume 
that each member of the Court was fully aware of all the facts, and that 
they did not desire any argument on the facts. They wished to hear him 

386 



Appendix A. 


ue uetbr 


on the question of the admissibility of the Martin evidence and on the 
passage of Mr. Justice Darling’s summing up, in which he dealt with 
the Martin evidence. [The material sentences are quoted in full in tne 
report of Friday’s hearing.] , „ . 

The Attorney-General —Sir Henry does not deny the existence cf tne 
rule under which the Martin evidence was admitted, but _ he says tr.at 
the admission of this evidence has gone beyond it; he tries to restrict 
the rule. I think I could answer him by the single case uf Mix v. 
Thompson, [1918] A.C. 221, in the House of Lords, but he has been 
good enough to refer to the earlier cases, not only exhaustively, but ver* 
fairly, so I will make a few observations on them. This^is no new point, 
but only the application to particular facts oi a principle alreaav we,i 
known. (He cited the remarks of Lord Sumner to that e^ect in ju 1 x «, 
Thompson.) , , 

This evidence was admitted because it was relevant to tne 
the jury, which was whether the arsenic was legitimately and 
in the prisoner’s possession or not. ^ . 4 _ 

In this particular case the prosecution set out to prove^to.1 ‘-f© ueatu 
of Mrs. Armstrong was caused by arsenic, and by arsenic aoministerei 
bv the prisoner. The legal argument took place at a time ccnvemmi 
to the defence, and the defence did admit that Mrs. Armstrong u.t-d c! 
arsenical poisoning, but did not tie themselves to t~a defence ot 
nor throw awav any defence legitimately open to theim I hey saia 
the prisoner had nothing to do with it. The prosecution had .o P ri ^ e 
that the arsenic was administered by the prisoner. We proved 
prisoner was the onlv person at Mayfield, both Angus., m 

.January and February, 1921. Miss Pearce was away m August, 
that he had purchased arsenic on both occasions. He nad ^ arsemc m u 
possession on Ms arrest. Before his arrest on cist December, w *en 
if he would make a statement, he volunteered to nia.**ie a fuJ and v mpltu.e 
statement. That statement was important. It was ^dictated, bnt corrected 
bv the prisoner himself. It began by saying tnat ne ; wished tumwe 
the statement. He stated there that he was xeemng the arseiu M ll.u 
January to make a further trial of it as weed-Rider la.er on. *--u fdt 
he (Armstrong) knew, no one else knew of the presence of arsenic in 

tbe ^Justice SHEAEM^-What sas the size the small Packet of 

“^eT^c^Ln^T^’my lU It ^described as being 

afraid we can’t take indicial notice of that. 

The packet was produced and handed to Mr. Jost.ee tshearman. 

The ATTOBNEY-GmBEAt—I cannot say whether it was tolded exac.1} 
like that, as it has been handled by several people, but t^a. is the 
cam a Tinner and the same arsenic inside it. 

Cbntinuin* the evidence is admissible ^ on thi s g round : here. is a 
, > _x “ t’ liave arsenic in mv possession.” ^hite arsenic is not 

krr ’ id sxrr a lifts \ 

m ,r4“° I had arsenic in mv possession for a legitimate purpose. 
f ld ’ ItlU to show “ No- von had it for an illegitimate purpose. 
for 3 ! show that on a certaii day yon nsed it to attempt to mnxder 

MaI ^ere is still another point. Armstrong 

By this^videnee 

his possession was coloured. 


387 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 


Continuing 3ns argument on Rex v. Thompson, the Attorney-Genial 
said—The possession of the articles identify the man and negative th* 
idea of innocent possession. We showed that Armstrong was in possessing 
of white _ arsenic, which might have been innocent. By this evidence 
we negatived the idea of innocent possession, and identified him as the 
man who had the means to commit arsenical poisoning. e 

He began to deal with the other cases, and pointed out that the 
principle was older than Reg. v. Geering. There were cases as far back 
as 1817. 

The Lord Chief Justice— Makin's case makes a new start. There is 
no need to go back to the earlier cases which were reviewed there Let 
it be conceded that the possession of arsenic on 31st December may be 
material to show the intent of the purchase in January; but how can it 
be material to the murder of Mrs. Armstrong in February that 
attempted to poison Martin in October ? * ne 

The Attorney-General referred to Rex v. Bond, [1906] 2 K.B 389 
at p. 42. The relevance depends on the issues actually in contest.' ' * 

Shearman said ^at it seemed to him that Rex v. Bond 
[1906] 2 K.B. 389, was the nearest case to the present one. ’ 

The Attorney-General said that he had some difficulty in understanding 
what was meant by “ system.” To say at the outset that, because they 
proved two, three, or four cases, they must necessarily attribute a system 
went beyond the facts. ‘ J ’ 

Mr. Justice Shearman said that he saw that, but those who sat there 
were bound by the dicta of their predecessors. 

The Attorney-General said that he also found a difficulty in the 
word “ nexus. ’ He did not see how it applied as regarded law. 

The Lord Chief Justice —Suppose you say “ link.” 

Mr. Justice Avory— Or “ in connection with.” 

The Attorney-General— Then I should be on safer ground, 
tamia^”’ dtJSTICE Shearman —These words are like the word “ Mesopo- 


The Attorney-General went on to say that they must show intent in 

reference to the acts in which it was in dispute. 

Mr. Justice Shearman said that again it was like the case of Rex v. 
pond, because there was one charge and one other charge brought forward 
rhe defence set up was, “ I am a doctor, and I have a right to possess 
an instrument which is used for legitimate purposes.” It was sought to 
prove that he used it for illegitimate purposes. The case was very like 
the present one. ’ J ' 


The Attorney-General said that the issue of innocence or innocent 
possession found further confirmation in R, v . Ball, [1911] 27 T.L.R. 162- 
which was an incest case. There Lord Loreburn said that 
certain evidence, which was obviously admissible, was given to establish 
mat at all events there was ample opportunity for the offence. 

urther evidence was then tendered to show* that these persons had 
previously carnally known each other and had a child in 1908. 

The law on the subject is stated in the judgment of Lord Chancellor 
Herschell m Makvn v. Attorney-General for New South Wales, [1894] A.C 
r 7 ’ 6 ?; In accordance with the law laid down in that case, and which 
is daily applied m the Divorce Court, I consider that this evidence was 
clearly admissible on the issue that this crime was committed—not to 
prove the mens rea, as Mr Justice Darling considered, but to establish the 
guilty relations between the parties. . . 

a tt-'S 10 Attorney-General also cited R. v. Bodley, [1913] 29 T.L.R. 700; 

—©re th mt Cour L of 5 rin ?H«a Appeal held that the evidence 
rl f dmi ! slble ; Gj Ml u Justice Rankes, giving the judgment of 

W kTW y f g red ^ Ball mi said that the first ground given 

by the Lord Chancellor for the admissibility of the evidence suggested 
. / '. 388. , ■ 



Appendix A. 


an extension of the rales indicated in the cases cited, but the second ground 
came within the nil© that evidence was admissible to rebut a defence 
really in issue. 

R. v. Lovegrove, [1920] 3 K.B. 643, carried the case still further. 
There the appellant was indicted for unlawfully killing, and for feloniously 
nsing certain instruments to procure the miscarriage of, a certain woman. 

At the trial evidence was given for the prosecution by the husband ci 
the woman that, having obtained the appellant’s name and address^ item 
another woman, he went to the appellant’s house and arranged with her 
for Ms wife to go there in order that the appellant might perform an 
operation on her which would procure a miscarriage, and that, ^his wife 
subsequently went to the appellant’s house and afterwards had a miscarriage 
and died of septic abortion. The evidence of the other woman jrus ten¬ 
dered by the prosecution to show that the appellant had performed a 
similar operation on her some months previously. The evidence was objected 
to on the ground that the defence was a denial of the husband’s evidence, 
and that the appellant had never seen the deceased woman. The evidence 
was admitted, and the appellant was convicted. The Court of Criminal 
Appeal held that the evidence was rightly admitted, as it tended to corro¬ 
borate the husband’s evidence, and was therefore relevant to an issue 
before the jury, and that the conviction must be upheld. Lcrd Beading, 
in giving the "judgment of the Court, said that evidence ^ was admissible 
if it tended to prove that the prisoner had committed the act charged. 
The evidence of Mrs. T. was admissible if _ it was relevant to an issue 
before, the jury, and it was none the less admissible, though it might prove 
that the appellant had committed a similar crime cn a previous occasion. 

That, said the Attorney-General, was a remarkable case, because there 
on© of the issues was whether the'husband’s evidence was true, _so that, 
in a sense, a side issue was treated as relevant and before the jury, it 
rebutted the defence set up, and showed that the appellant’s story was 
untrue. All those cases, he claimed, justified him in saying that one ^of 
the issues raised on which evidence was admissible was the question. “ Was 
possession of arsenic in the present case innocent and legitimate, or not ? ’ 
The Lord Chief Justice— Possession at what time? ^ 

Mr. Justice Shearman —Some time before the death of Mrs. Armstrong. 
Mr. Justice Avory— Down to February. 

The Attorney-General— Yes. Was his story tine that he kept it in 
the house to poison weeds? 

The Lord Chief Justice— You say, Yo, you kept it for the purpose, 
inter alia, of poisoning Martin; therefore we cannot believe you: and 
because you kept it for the purpose of poisoning Martin we think that 
vou may have used it to poison your wife.” . 

The Attorney-General —X should put it stronger than that. 1 should 
sa y “Yon are in possession of arsenic; that^needs explanation. Yon give 
an explanation; you suggest and tie yourself to an explanation that vou 
bought it in its ' coloured form only for weeds. We prove that yon got 
whit© arsenic, and that you used it for other purposes, and it was not confined 
to the innocent purpose that you suggest.” ^ . ■ 

'The Lord Chief Justice— Innocent possession would be negatived by 
Martin and its ©Sect upon Mrs, Armstrong. 

The Attorney-General —The question is, does it throw light upon it, 
or tend to prove? It is not the only evidence I rely upon, that because 
vou (Major .Armstrong) intended to poison Martin, I show that yon 
poisoned vonr wife. I show that long before Mrs. Armstrong went to the 
asylum the appellant was poisoning Ms wife. Before she went to the 
asvlum the appellant had secured a sleeping draught for her on 15th August 
and the doctor then, found . traces of arsenical poisoning. It was found 
that while she was living at home, and under her husband’s care, there 
was a trace an indication, of what was consistent with arsenical poisoning,, 

3 ® 




Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

and she became very bad when she was removed to the asylum vet 
she was in the asylum all the symptoms passed away wnen 

. Th ®. Lo »? 9 H T Justice—Y ou put it that the appellant had tried t* 
poison his wife m the previous August ? ea 10 

The Attorney-General— Most certainly. Then the appellant 
reasons against his -wife’s provisional release. The real and conviiS 
points of how she came to die of arsenical poisoning in Pehrnarv wer! 
these—Nurse Ivinsey employed from 23rd to 27th January She 22 
succeeded by Nurse Allen. Dr. Hiuoks visited the patient from tiL tf 
time. On 11th February he found symptoms of arsenical poisoning * * 

The Lord Chief Justice-Wus it ever suggested on the part of the 
defence that Mrs. Armstrong was trying to commit suicide bv eradml 
poisoning ? J & Ad,UUd * 

The Attorney-General replied in the negative. He added that th* 
appellant told him, in cross-examination, that lie had no fear of hk Jtf! 
committing suicide when she came out of the asylum 

The Lord Chief Justice said that they need not trouble the Attorney 
General to proceed further. j 

Sir Henry Curtis Bennett, asked whether he had anything to add 
drew attention to another passage in the summing up 0 f Mr Instil 
Darling, of which he (counsel) complained. H 0 submitted that the faek 
m B. v. Lovegrove had no bearing at all upon the present case 


Judgment. 

The Lord Chief Justice said-In this case the appellant was convicted 
Darling, at the Hereford Assizes, on 13th April last 
of the murder of his wife, and was sentenced to death. He anneals 
against conviction, and the points of substance raised by the notice of appeal 
are (l) that evidence of an attempt to poison one Oswald Norman Martin 
some eight months after the death of the appellant’s wife, ought not to 
have been admitted: and (2) that on that evidence the learned judge mis- 
directed the jury There is no need to repeat the facts in detail It is 
enough to say that, m the opinion of this Court, the evidence was amply 
sufficient to justify the verdict of the jury, even though nothing relating 
to Martin were taken into consideration. That evidence proved, among 
other > things, that the appellant’s wife died on 22nd February, 1921 of 
arsenical poisoning; that a fatal dose of arsenic was administered to*her 
withm twenty-four hours of her death; that she suffered from the same 
kmd of poisoning both m August, 1920, before her removal to an asylum 
and m February, 1921 soon after her return home; that the appellant 
purchased arsenic shortly before each of those occasions; that he was the 
only .P e *‘ S0l J who, on both occasions, had the opportunity of administering 
arsenic to his wife; and that his possession of arsenic, made up in small 
packets of fatal doses, including the packet found upon him at the time 
°± ms arrest, was not consistent with any legitimate purpose 

The evidence further went to show that he had a twofold motive for 
murder, namely the desire to obtain the benefit to be derived under 

“ ade h L hls wif V n Jl ? ly > 1920 > and tho desire t0 contract 
another marriage. The suggestion that his wife committed suicide was 

wJrrl" ?E 0t ° n I y Vi. the -iT ords 7 hich s he llsed on more than one occasion 
fnT »«end of her illness, but also by her physical condition, which, 

t^leave her d bed ble time - before ller deat *b made it impossible for her 

h - th ? f lQ8 \ ion $*e admissibility of the evidence relating to 
r t ri m2 be observed that the decision in Beg. v. Geering, (18491 18 
M.O. 215 ?> was established as an unquestionable authority by the 
decision m Makm v. Attorney-General for New South 'Wales, 10 T L B 155- 
390 * ’ * ’ 



Appendix A. 


[1894] A.C. 57. The only difference between G-eerinf^ case and the present 
case is that, while in Geer mg's case there was evidence cf the actual 
administration of food which might have contained arsenic; in the pressn; 
case there was evidence of the opportunity. fcr such adrnimstr-t: u, 
strengthened by evidence of possession of arsenic by the appchant it. the 
material times, a fact which does not appear in the report in G:* ':n$ t 
case. 

In the opinion of this Court, it would ^ suffi.ce to say that _cn tus 
authority of Geering’s case the evidence which is here complained c: 
was admissible. But it is suggested that, in the absence zi direct 
evidence of some act done by the appellant towards the commission r; th? 
crime with which he was charged, evidence as to the subsequent attempt 
on the life of Martin in October, 1921, was inadmissible, because^ at an 
early stage of the trial counsel for the appellant _ intimated that the uetence 
would be that Mrs. Armstrong committed suicide by taking arserki. ant 
that no defence, of accidental poisoning would be raised. Clause* f r t't 
appellant, it may be added, in his argument beicre this Ccurt. a era- rrwei y 
stated that he sought to make no point of the fad that the events remung 
to Martin were subsequent to the death of the appellant’s wife; and. mcr “ "p j r, 
that the lapse of time, between February and October, 1921, was irrmrcrn.. 

Now, in the opinion of the Court, an intimation given by cctinsel at an 
early stage of the case as to the defence upon which he pr~p:se^ to rey 
cannot preclude the prosecution from offering any necessary evueuce 
show that the accused committed the crime. It was an essential part r 
the case for the prosecution here to prove that arsenic wr.- ytesigiictiv 
administered by the appellant to his wife, and any evidence taut tenieu 
to prove design must of necessity tend to negative ^accident . an . le 
A few days before her last illness began me appelant s ue n. X been 
brought home from the asylum at the request, and m consequence 
diligent negotiations, of the appellant himself. The^ evidence sn wed t^at 
those negotiations and requests began on or about 10:h January, -^1, ann 
that on 11th January, the appellant purchased a quarter t* a pound or 
white arsenic and took it home. , . . . 

With what design did he make that purchase, and jrcvide hxmseif 
at that particular time with that poison? V* as it for tne > amocent.purfcSis 
of destroying weeds, or for the felonious purpose ot poisoning ms 
The fact that he was subsequently found, not ryrew :r^ possession ; 
but actually using for a similar deadly purpose, trie very rnru^ot prnsoin 
that caused the death of his wife was eviderce fr m wwcb t,e ;ury mirm 
infer that that poison was not in ins possession ^ at toe earner da.,.- mi 
an innocent purpose, and such use of the same p;iscn := mcie^ ccgent -imu 
the mere fact of death from the same poison, ns m wri? - erne, fat* 
B. v. Thompson, 34 T.L.B. 204; [1918] AX. 221. and tiie illustrations 

there given.. „ , x . 

Reference was made in the argument in tne present case to -_ie cm 
of Perkins v. Jeffery, [1915] 31 T.L.P.. «4; 2 K,B. T-,2. But tte eecir-or 
in that case was not inconsistent wish toe decision in e. ao^>■ u.td 
Merchant, [1914] 30 T.L.R. 521; 3 K.B. 339. Lord Reading was * par-,.tj 
both decisions, and the decision in B. r.Boylc and Mercian. w 

cited in support of the later decision. The distinction is t-at in P*f -y 
v Jeffery (supra) identity was in dispute, and, urn:, .sat was es,ai.l-. . • 

Avidemce of design or intention was not relevant. In the opinion ot tne 
M GeGng'sfJe (supra) and B. v. <Wr. [1364] 4 F. and F. 34c. are 
not so strong as the present case, and the facts cf the present case are 
stronger in favour of the admission of the evidence complained of. 

There was the clearest possible evidence that the appellant, cn 11th 
January, 1921, purchased a quarter of a pound f. m whl } e 
tbat wheu he was arrested on 31st December 1921, he had m bx 
pocket .a packet containing a fata! dose of white arsenic. In^these 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 


circumstances, so soon as he stated the defence, as he did at once ft 
he bought and was keeping the poison for the innocent purpose of desWft 
weeds, it was open to the prosecution to show by means of the imA* ® 
relating to Martin that the appellant neither bought nor kept the 
for that pretended innocent purpose. The question which is involved W 
as Lord Sumner said m Thompson’s case, 34 T.L.B. 204- [19181 AO t 
236, “ raises no new principle of law; it elucidates no’ new aspect of 
familiar principles. It is a mere question of the application of the Vnl« 
of evidence to this particular case.” ies 

the pass^age^ 6 summ * n S U P o: ^ ^ ie Earned judge, exception was taken to 

tsti, 4 . ^ G f me ^ 10 conclusion that Martin’s case has a bearing upon this 
the hearing? The bearing is this : that it is of value* 5 as showing 
that the defendant had arsenic m his possession, and that he would mp 
it to poison a human being. Let me say at once, if he is not proved in 
have given arsenic to Mr. Martin with intent to injure him and kill him 
if you come to the conclusion that he did not do that, then all the evidence 
m Martin’s case has no bearing whatever upon this case—none at all 
But if you come to the conclusion that he did give it, why, then it has 
a hearing, as showing what he had got in the way of poison and what he 
was prepared to do with it; as showing that he was prepared, not merely 
to us© it on dandelions and things of that kind, but that he was prepared 
to use it on a human being if he had what to him appeared sufficient reason 
to do so. 


If that passage meant, or, in the circumstances, was likely to be under¬ 
stood to mean, that the appellant was a, man who was in the habit of 
committing, and might be expected to commit, this particular crime then 
it would obviously be a misdirection, and the proviso to section 4 of the 
Criminal Appeal Act would have to be considered. But it is difficult 
to imagine that the learned judge, with or without the authorities before 
him, intended to convey any such thing. To any intelligent person who 
was present at the trial, or who lias road the transcript of the evidence 
the speeches of counsel, and the summing up, it must be obvious that the 
particular passage was directed to the plain question that had emerged, namely 
did the applicant buy and keep this poison, as ho alleged, for the innocent 
purpose of destroying weeds, or did be buy and. keep it, as the prosecution 
alleged, for a felonious purpose? Nothing is less useful in such a con¬ 
troversy than to take a particular sentence from the whole of a voluminous 
context, and to approach its examination for the purpose of establishing a 
certain criticism. The proviso to section 4 of the Criminal Appeal Act 
does not, m the opinion of the Court, arise. But in any event it was the 
evidence, and not the reason for its admission, that must have influenced 
the jury; and we are clearly of the opinion that the jury in this case 
would certainly have returned the same verdict, even if the summing up 
had not contained the passage to which reference has been made. 

In these circumstances this appeal is dismissed. 

_ It remains to mention a separate matter. Reference has been made 
m the course of the argument to the fact that, after verdict, there appeared 
in some newspapers an account of what the writer said was said to him 
about the evidence, with a complete lack of reserve, by a member of the 
jury.. Whether what was published was in fact said is not certain. But 
it is at least certain that it was published. In the opinion of this Court, 
nothing could be more improper, deplorable, and dangerous. It may be 
that some jurymen are not aware that the inestimable value of their verdict 
1 Vunanimityand does not depend upon the process by 
W k 1 iA ^ e y Relieve that^ they arrived at it. It follows that every juryman 
ougnt to observe the obligation of secrecy which is comprised in and imposed 
*7 the M° ath of % e : S ra . nd -i uror - one juryman might communicate with 
he public upon the evidence and the verdict, so might his colleagues also; 



Appendix A. 


and, if they all took 

S! h confide“ce e tSTthe ’ public’ri fatly has in tit h \. 

criminal verdicts TOatever ““\ “ ^.;.f e ;tf Reject. 'That 

experience shows that m unannnoi.= ja^rt- th;: ~ n ar ay : ana 

STS 

sa st rsi srss t — -* =*■ 

of this case. 



APPENDIX B. 


Armstrong's Bight for Life. 

By Harold Greenwood. 

(From John Bull, April 22, 1922, by permission.) 

Many brilliant pens have been at work during th* , 

teteterte tetete” in fc aod = 

But when I read these brilliant descriptions of the fviil T -p^i +i, ± • 
one sense they fall short of the reality. “ey L ofneceLt 

‘‘Te ma 6 n Tit d3* Zi^TT 

&;ooS: d tort^ — ssa 

. ./* stuffy and inconvenient Court House at HarA-Fnrrl_ t t. 

visited, professionally on several occasions—be substituted for the still mm- 6 

™^ y .T tl - ated p0k ? Assize Co ’ lrt ® CWSL To^^SSd 

M ,y wed ™ a S me ^at the dreadful experience I passed through some 

“”s JSfSL® sinters s/tef, e hsteri 

iszt sstetete -»“tea? 

ic ■^? n A read ^at .^ le prisoner in the dock appeared “ calm " “ stolid ” 
aeemThm’real afte?thf’EdL??Ave° W i"w Tbundle^r 011 phraS ’ 6S 

lesson k For° U f^ a" 1 !* 116 day T f , ollowi ?8 m y acquittal—and they taught”™ 

lesson. 1 oi as a lawyer I have frequently defended men wtn rlnitr,^ 

Url W6 f f" 006 ^- Mostl y I had been led to form my own Tpfnioli tTa 

large extent by the appearance of the accused in the dock Jjlcial calm 
• es ® a g lta ^on 5 and the composed or distressed attitude of the prisoner— 
mdex ^ f the - «? at or ^herwise of any person P 1 

t6rr WMa e thte S : t “ a y/^^ * 

te a W: 

to ^f^rwrthlheVBt ‘f f,:0m W0J ' I t 0f h0me and trionds/Ji 

man-lthat of,teu “ ost , atrocious charge that can be laid against any 

Agonising- f M ’ secretlve Pwsonmg of a wife; that is Efficiently 
S ut - *+?f e U S . an °ther aspect, perhaps more dreadful. 

decided nimn tourer Vh th ® Cr ?,Y n >. when once a prosecution has been 
toe Crown does not ston °fm m h *he utmost industry. And remember, 

s* 

*“"“ a i, boilt op wi ,b 0 „t Ltete tei Sn.“J“ * 8 ““* 



Appendix B. 

But the position of the defendant is quite different. He is, literally, 
fighting for his life. " Skin for skin, all that a man hath will he give 
for his life,” said patient Job. And when a man finds himself faced with 
a murder charge, not the least part of his torment is one of ways and 

means. 

Owing to our antiquated assize system there is a possibility that tne 
accused may spend several months in gaol. There is no hope of bail. 
Week after week he waits and waits for the ordeal, knowing that by^ seme 
means, even if it ruin him, he must raise sums of money for the building 
up of the defence, the briefing of counsel, the maintaining of witnesses 
during the trial, and the costly evidence of experts to rebut the evidence 
given by the Crown’s “ star ” medical and scientific men. 

I spent several months in Carmarthen Gaol. I was racked with anxiety 
as to how the ways and means of my trial could be found. And then when 
the day came that I took my place in. the dock before a battery of ^ curious 
eyes, my “careworn appearance ” was adversely commented upon in ^ some 
quarters. I dwell upon this to let the unthinking realise what the prisoner 
has been passing through before he stands up to plead. 

Then, should he falter, he is exposed to the fear that this may he 
written down as a consciousness of guilt; or should he by an iroa^ effort 
face his judge and jury with a show of calmness, he is “jaunty and 
<i coolly composed.” Well indeed have I learned the lesson that the de¬ 
meanour of a prisoner is but little to go ^ upon. 

Only those who have been the man in the dock, too^ can remise tne 
awful sensation of listening to leading counsel for the Crown ‘‘opening 
the case.” A helpless, suffocating sense of impotency. and donohr so 
when the prisoner is a lawyer. . 

It sounds black—black to the point of certainty. The iigntest action 
assumes a sinister appearance; a chance word becomes ominous; letters 
are found to foreshadow violence; motive is harped upon. Tins is *" 
mate, of course, from a forensic point of view. Oar Lrown lawyers are 
scrupulously fair, but their business is to prosecute, and with the utmost 

When ^tbe^Attomey-Greneral in Hereford Court S2 Sf5 

tones constructing the case against Major Armstrong he did it witn a^ fat¬ 
ness that' was beyond reproach—but with a icrensic s*iil that w<* a un- 

" Utte Anlf ^know what the prisoner felt! Helpless, trapped, overberne. 
He Seals a glance at the jury and sees that every word is teluv That 

“ knowledge ox the sanpnlons i»- 

, . ,Y, * *?■» Tnrlcrp 4ud at Hereford I was struck, with the ski*! and 

^fdom with which Mr. Justice Darling held the balance between the great 

advogtes neither side ^ s ed backwards and forwards by the 
skill of contending counsel. I remember that when a telling point was 
made by the Crown against me I simply dared not loos at the jary. 

Then too there isthe hd“ ve 

I have changed my views 

upon that point now^ neTer be rea li se d except by those who have 

It is an °F aeal ,| fce b j worn ont with some days of unparalleled 
been through it. Alter nen^ wor prisoner “ goes into the box.” 

strain in the twitch of his face, .and 

The eyes of tk c crowd bnOTrs that he will he exposed to a pitiless 

tlof“lorn from^an expert mOmart 

a°rai^d or ttotafeStat of a voice, the darting of a meaning look 

ty r coW at tIe iary«nay influence their minds. m 



Herbert Rowse Armstrong. 

O 

For my part I was told afterwards that I seemed perfectly “ cool and 
composed.” In fact I was on the verge of a, breakdown, only sustained 
by the knowledge that if I did not keep my head I was lost. For weeks 
afterwards I felt the strain of that ordeal. It was, of course, a perfectly 
fair cross-examination. But those who talk lightly of the prisoner’s atti¬ 
tude under examination should,, bear in mind facts such as I have been 
describing. 

And then comes the suspense of waiting for the verdict. 

The Judge’s summing up has preceded this, of course, and I suppose 
to a lawyer this is more painful than can be d('.scribed. For a trained legal 
mind can appreciate exactly the effect upon the jury. As minute by minute 
the cultured, measured voice Hows on, ho pi', seems to evaporate. * And so 
at last the jury are dismissed to deliberate, the Judge seeks his private 
room, and the court buzzes with expectation. 

The prisoner is taken below to wait. Ah! that waiting. Never can 
I forget those moments like eternity while the jury deliberated upon my 
Fate. The attendant policemen were kind and considerate, but they were 
only policemen. After "all the months of racking anxiety I really felt that 
those minutes of suspense were more than I could hear. Then suddenly 
there was a fresh bustle of excitement and .1. found myself being ushered 
up the dock stairs again. 

It seemed an eternity while the Olerk of Arraigns was interrogating 
the middle-aged foreman of the jury. How slow, how impossibly deliberate 
he seemed! Until amid a deathly hush I lm;ml him murmur: “Not 
Guilty!” Then the dock doors were open and 1 was free again. But I 
draw a veil over that. 

I have followed very care fully the Armstrong drama, and naturally I 
can write about it from a feeling heart. Jh does seem to me an injustice 
that the accused’s counsel does not have the last word with the jury. 
Of course, if the accused does nob go into the box, calls no witnesses, and 
puts in no documents, lie lias this advantage; Hub on the other hand an 
adverse opinion must be formed by the jury if a prisoner does not give 
evidence upon his own behalf. 

It is a, fearful, unbelievable thing to be tried for your life. But terrible 
though the ordeal was, I am perfectly certain that British justice is scrupu¬ 
lously fair to the accused. Nevertheless, only those who have been charged 
with murder can realise the exact nature of the ordeal. 






